MISSOURI CIRCUIT COURT TWENTY-SECOND JUDICIAL CIRCUIT (City of St. Louis)
DAYNA CRAFT, JASON STONE,	Case No.
DEBORAH LARSEN, WENDI
ALPER-PRESSMEAN, individually 002-00406-02 and on behalf of all others similarly situated,
Plaintiff(s),
v.
PHILIP MORRIS COMPANIES, INC., a corporation and PHILIP MORRIS, INCORPORATED, a corporation,
Defendant(s).
VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION OF PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D.
Washington, D.C.
Thursday, April 29, 2010 9:00 a.m.
Job No. 3202 Volume I Pages 1-274
Reported by: Linda S. Kinkade, CSR, RMR, CRR, RDR Videographer: Conway Barker
Videotaped Deposition of PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D. held at the law offices of:
Arnold & Porter LLP
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C.
Pursuant to applicable Rules of Civil Procedure, before Linda S. Kinkade, Certified Shorthand Reporter, Registered Professional Reporter, Registered Merit Reporter, Certified Realtime Reporter, Registered Diplomate Reporter, and Notary Public, in and for the District of Columbia.
On Behalf of Plaintiff DAYNA CRAFT, JASON STONE, DEBORAH LARSEN, WENDI ALPER-PRESSMEAN, individually and on behalf of all others similarly situated:
DOMINIC SURPRENANT, ESQUIRE
Quinn Emanuel Urquhart Oliver & Hedges, LLP 865 South Figueroa Street Tenth Floor
Los Angeles, California 90017 Telephone: 213.443.3000
On Behalf of Defendant PHILIP MORRIS USA:
JAMES M. ROSENTHAL, ESQUIRE Arnold & Porter, LLP 555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20004 Telephone: 202.942.5491
EXAMINATION OF PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D.	PAGE
BY MR. SURPRENANT	7
EXHIBITS (Attached to transcript)
NO.	DESCRIPTION	PAGE
Exhibit 1 Deposition Excerpt 10-21-02	19
Exhibit 2 Article by J. Wiener	22
Exhibit 3 Joint Defendants' Expert	34 Di sclosure
Exhibit 4 Series of photographs	61
Exhibit 5 Writing on flip chart	118
Exhibit 6 Writing on flip chart	121
Exhibit 7 Findings of Fact	123
Exhibit 8 Expert Report	146
Exhibit 9 Writing on flip chart	167
NO.	DESCRIPTION	PAGE
Exhibit 10 Writing on flip chart	168
Exhibit 11 Writing on flip chart	200
Exhibit 12 Writing on flip chart	262
PROCEEDINGS
VIDEOGRAPHER: Here begins deposition of Dr. Peter English, Tape 1, Volume I, in the matter of Dayna Craft, et al. v. Philip Morris, Incorporated, et al., in the Missouri Circuit Court for the 22nd Judicial Circuit, City of St. Louis, case number 002-00406-02.
Today's date is April 29th, 2010 and the time is approximately 9:03. My name is Conway Barker. The court reporter is Linda Kinkade, both from Thomas -- sorry — Thompson Court Reporting.
Will counsel please identify yourselves and state whom you represent.
MR. SURPRENANT: Dominic Surprenant representing the plaintiffs.
MR. ROSENTHAL: James Rosenthal representing Philip Morris USA.
VIDEOGRAPHER: This deposition takes place in Arnold & Porter, 555 12th Street, northwest, Washington, D.C.
Would the court reporter please swear in the
witnes s.
PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D.,
Being first duly sworn, testified as
follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Thank you. Thank you, everyone, for being on time. I think I was the last one here.
Good morning, Dr. English.
A. Good morning, Mr. Surprenant.
Q. Philip Morris has retained you as an expert medical historian in this case; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. And as -- I noticed in your report -strike that.
Now, you know, as a medical historian, that smoking is the leading cause of illness, disease and death in the United States, correct?
A. As a physician I know that as well as a historian of medicine, it's a leading cause of death, yes .
Q. And as a medical historian I notice -well, strike that.
I notice in your report you cite a number of times to statistics and conclusions from the American Cancer Society; is that correct?
A. I do, yes.
Q. And what is the American Cancer Society?
A. It's a voluntary public group that is interested in promoting research, public education, and lobbying for cancer in this country.
Q. Okay. And, as a medical historian, do you regard the American Cancer Society as a reliable source of information?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Reliable in what sense?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, do you regard, as a medical historian, their conclusions about the link between cigarette smoking and illness as reliable?
A. Well, you know, as a medical historian, I've actually gone through the American Cancer Society's annual reports for, oh, for 60, 70 years, and so they have had a lot of conclusions about the risks of smoking, especially for cancer.
So I would have to know the date, but I do -- I think the American Cancer Society is a very, you know, respectable organization. It's always had, you know, there are three missions of education, research, and lobbying, you know, forefront.
Q. Okay. Now, on its current website that you
could go on and look at today the American Cancer Society reports that, on an annual basis, approximately 443,600 people in the United States died from illnesses relating to cigarette smoking. Do you agree or disagree?
A. I have no way of independently verifying that one way or the other, but, you know, I'll take what the American Cancer Society says.
Q. And it says that smoking kills more Americans than alcohol, car accidents, suicide, AIDS, homicides and illegal drugs combined. Does that sound approximately correct to you as a medical historian?
A. Well, of course, you're talking about 2010, so that really wouldn't be my role as a historian, but in 2010, I think that those numbers would be, you know, in the ballpark.
Q. Now, before smoking, I mean — strike that.
This is my first deposition in this case, Dr. English, and this case has been going on a number of years. And when I, as a lawyer, kind of parachute in late in a case, I always feel as if I'm speaking a foreign language that I haven't quite mastered.
A. Well, this is my first deposition in this case as well.
Q. Yes, but you have had similar depositions before. So I will try to make my questions as coherent as possible.
The American Cancer Society points out that, not only does smoking cause death, but it also can significantly harm a smoker's quality of life while the smoker is alive. Do you agree with that?
A. Again, we're talking about do I personally agree with that or are we talking --
Q. As a medical historian do you have a view on that?
A. Well, again, you know, a historian looks at things over time and you're asking a question about a 2010 website. So I think the way I would answer that is that I would tend to agree with the American Cancer Society's view on that in 2010, yes.
Q. Now, there is something that I didn't understand until I got on this case, which was -other than in a very general way — but what is secondhand smoke?
A. Secondhand smoke, it's the — firsthand smoke is what a smoker gets through the cigarette itself. And then when the smoker exhales, that is part of secondhand smoke. And then there is also a
component of secondhand smoke that is being burned at the cigarette that doesn't actually get inhaled in the smoker in the first place. So there are two components of it.
Q. Out of either end, as it were.
A. Well, one -- yeah, but one end also goes through the smoker first.
Q. Okay. Now, the American Cancer Society reports that on an annual basis 4,600 — 46,000 — nonsmokers died from heart disease due to secondhand smoke. Does that — does that sound approximately correct to you?
A. Well, I'm not sure about that. I think that there has been a long sort of historical controversy about how those numbers -- that particular -- those particular numbers are calculated. So I'm not sure I have an opinion about that. I mean, I'll take your representation that that's what the website says, but I'm not sure that I'm as comfortable with that number as maybe some others.
Q. Okay. I understand that, Dr. English.
Let's see what we can agree on. Without tying you to a specific number, even a general number, it is the case -- is it the case -- that secondhand smoke kills
thousands, if not tens of thousands, of Americans a year who themselves are not smokers?
A. I'm not sure I have an opinion on that.
Q. Okay. Would you agree with the American Cancer Society that children are especially sensitive to secondhand smoke?
A. I would — I'm not exactly sure where the Cancer Society is getting that, but I would say, as a pediatrician, that I would agree with that.
Q. Okay. And you no longer are an active practicing physician; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You retired from that in 2005?
A. That's correct.
Q. But for a number of years you had an active, how do you say it, pediatric practice?
A. Yes, about 30 years.
Q. And you treated children to young teenagers ?
A. Well, actually I began in the prenatal visit and then I would pass my patient on to another physician when they graduated from college.
Q. Okay. And smoking is a problem in youths; underaged smoking is a problem, correct?
A. It is .
Q. And approximately 1 in 5 smokers begin smoking in high school?
A. I'm not sure what the current number is, but that would -- that sounds about right.
Q. And would you agree that, as a general matter -- well, strike that.
Do you agree that nicotine and cigarette smoking are addictive?
A. Well, are you asking me as a physician?
Q. Sure.
A. Yes. I mean, and the reason I make a distinction is that there is actually a long history of how the public health community has viewed nicotine and the addicting qualities of it, but — so my answer there is a little different because in one I have a historical perspective, but if you're asking me in 2010, as a pediatrician, do I think nicotine is addicting, yes, I do.
Q. Okay. And let me follow, kind of take a segue from where I was going and try to understand the distinction you were just making, Dr. English. What is your view as a medical historian as to whether or not cigarette smoking and nicotine are addictive? If
that is different from your views as a pediatrician.
A. Yeah. I mean, I think that physicians and the public health authorities always understood that cigarette smoking was hard to quit. And I think for a very long time they have thought that nicotine was the substance within cigarettes that was — was largely responsible. But when it came down to actually how do you -- how do you define this, whether it's dependency or -- how do you define this relationship between nicotine and humans smoking, there the public health community has had sort of a long history on how they describe it.
So, for example, in the first Surgeon General's Report there is a whole chapter that addresses the question of whether this particular group of experts in 196 4 thought that cigarette smoking was addictive. They -- what they did was they looked up definitions of addiction, which were based on the World Health Organization, and they said they didn't think so. I mean, it wasn't that they denied that cigarette smoking was hard to quit. They didn't deny that nicotine was the chemical that was important, but when it came -- when push came to shove their definition did not include the word "addiction."
They used the word "habituation."
Well, since then, the World Health Organization has moved in its definitions of addictions and the Surgeon General has moved in its -I'm using "its" even because it's really a consortium of people -- but in its definition, they reviewed addiction in 1979, and it's really sort of a divided opinion that some people think it was more of a social habit, more people thought it was a straight-up nicotine addiction. There is back and forth on that. They reviewed it again in 1988, and then they emphatically said that they thought that nicotine was an addiction.
Q. And when would you say there was a medical consensus that nicotine was an addiction, it was an addictive drug?
A. It's hard actually to put a date, I think, precisely on that. I mean, certainly by — I think most people would have said by 1988 there certainly were people who were doing research in, you know, especially in compensation about when, you know, when a smoker moves from a higher to a lower nicotine cigarette. People like Michael Russell, who, I think, thought in the '70s that nicotine was an addictive
substance.
So I think it's hard to actually pin down a precise moment when -- but that's how public health consensuses are. Often it is not a precise moment when that happens. But I think there was a spectrum of that.
Q. Would you agree that the younger a smoker starts as a general matter, the more that -- the more addictive — strike that.
Would you agree as a general matter that the younger the smoker starts smoking the harder it will be for that smoker to quit because of his or her addiction to nicotine?
A. I really don't have a professional opinion on that, I mean, and either as a historian or as a pediatrician. I do know in my practice that some of my patients who were smokers stopped and in fact probably most of them stopped at some point. So -but I don't have -- I don't have an opinion about whether a younger smoker has a more difficult time with that or not.
Q. Okay. Now, are you aware of survey data that indicate that — you know, think back when we were in high school we all thought we were
invulnerable and did some really stupid things.
A. I'm not sure I ever thought that, but I know people use that expression, but at least my dealing with teenagers they are beset with vulnerabilities, maybe unrealistic ones --
Q. Well, they are. They are. But the point is, is that, are you aware of a survey that a large number of smokers in high school, underaged smokers, believed that in five years they will be able to quit smoking, and, in fact, the vast majority are addicted smokers seven to nine years later?
A. I don't have an opinion on that. I'm not aware of those numbers.
Q. Now, you're teaching a class this spring called "Chubby History"?
A. I am.
Q. And I looked at the synopsis, and I think you said that many public health officials believe that obesity is the second most important public health problem after smoking.
A. I do say that.
Q. And so do I -- I think I correctly inferred that it is your belief, as a historian, that today cigarette smoking is the most important public health
problem.
A. It's certainly right up there as an important public health problem.
Q. And Philip Morris, am I correct, that it is far and away the leading cigarette manufacturer by market share in the United States?
A. I don't know what Philip Morris's market share is.
Q. Okay. But despite the health issues that are caused by smoking that we've reviewed, it is your view that Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies are admirable companies, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think you're referring to a comment I made in another deposition. Is that -- am I correct in that assumption?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yes. It was, I believe, your deposition in the Miles case.
A. Yes. I did say that in the Miles case.
Q. And you said that under oath.
A. I did. But I think, as I remember, that -with that line of questioning, of course, the deposition was on low-tar cigarettes, and I think, as
I recall, I took what I was trying to respond to was in the sense that did cigarette companies respond to public health concerns for them to produce low-tar cigarettes. And I think the "admirable" was in that respect. But certainly, you know, I've never studied Philip Morris as a corporation. ITm not really qualified to do that. And I don't know what Philip Morris does on a day-to-day basis or year to year because that's simply something I've never studied.
So I really am not in the position to say overall whether Philip Morris or any cigarette company is admirable or not. It simply is not something I have studied, but my -- the way I was responding to that was on the issue of whether their production of low-tar cigarettes was viewed by the public health community as admirable.
Q. Okay. Dr. English, let me mark as Exhibit 1 an excerpt from your deposition taken on October 21st, 2002, which is almost somehow eight years ago already. And I believe Mr. Rosenthal was there.
MR. ROSENTHAL: That's correct.
(Exhibit No. 1 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And I believe the excerpt that I'm going to direct your attention to is complete. I don't have the whole deposition because, as you might remember, it was somewhat lengthy.
The first page is simply the beginning of your testimony where you state your name and your Social Security number. And then the examination that I had in mind, I believe, starts at page 220 at the bottom of what's also marked as page 159, quote:
Question. Do you consider the tobacco companies admirable companies?
Mr. Rosenthal: Objection to form.
The Witness: Admirable companies?
Question. Yes.
Answer. They make legal products.
Question. Does that make them admirable?
Answer. Yes.
Does that refresh your recollection that at that time at least your line of reasoning was that tobacco companies were admirable companies because they make a legal product?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I see the words on the page, and I said it, but, on reflection, I think, I tried to
explain to you what I meant to that. I do see that that's what I've said, but an answer, I think, that reflected both my opinion then as well as my opinions now is the one I responded to a moment ago.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And that opinion with respect to whether or not tobacco companies are admirable is — what is that opinion?
A. Well, my opinion, first of all, is I'm not in a position to make a global statement because I haven't studied any corporate -- I'm not a corporate historian or business historian. So I'm not able to analyze a corporate structure in any way.
Back in this particular deposition I was, you know, I was there to talk about the development of low-tar cigarettes and how the public health community viewed them, and I took that as the thrust of the question, but I certainly see the words on the page.
Q. Okay. Are you aware of any historian who has published an article, the essential thrust of which is that Big Tobacco companies harass historians who testify against them?
A. I mean, there was an article in "The Nation" about a month or so back that I've read. I can't
remember all of the details. Is that the one you're referring to?
Q. Yeah. It was written by Professor Wiener of the University of California at Irvine.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And it addressed specifically what Professor Wiener viewed as harassment of Professor Proctor and Professor -- I will mispronounce his name.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Kyriakoudes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. -- Kyriakoudes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: You have to practice that one several times.
MR. SURPRENANT: Kyriakoudes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yes. So that's the article. Have you read
that?
A. ''The Nation" article?
Q. Yeah.
A. Yes, I have read it.
Q. And what was your view as a medical historian about the reliability of Professor Wiener's article?
(Exhibit No. 2 marked for identification and
attached hereto.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Reliability -- reliability in
what sense?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, did you agree with his conclusions that lawyers for Big Tobacco companies had harassed the tobacco -- the historians who had testified against them in litigation?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I have no opinion on that. I don't know one way or the other.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. But is what I marked as Exhibit 2, "Big Tobacco and the Historians," by Jon Wiener, is that the article that you read?
A. I didn't see it in this format. I mean, I read it in, you know, "The Nation" magazine itself, so --
Q. It didn't look like this.
A. It didn't look like that, so I'm not — I'll take your representation that this is the same one that appeared in "The Nation," but I can't go beyond that.
Q. I direct your attention to the last sentence in the italicized kind of preface.
"This article originally appeared in the March 15, 2010 edition of 'The Nation.TM
Is that where you read it?
A. I think it was then. I would have thought it was a little earlier than that, but I'll take that.
Q. If I could direct your attention to the last full paragraph on page 2 -- and please read whatever else you need for context -- quote -- this is Professor Wiener.
"In these cases, history has become a key component in the tobacco attorneys' defense strategy. In the past, when smokers with cancer sued for damages, the company said they shouldn't have to pay because there was a, quote, scientific controversy, closed quote, about whether smoking causes cancer.
But in recent years they have given up that argument and now argue something like the opposite. Quote, everybody knew, closed quote, smoking causes cancer, so if you got cancer from smoking, it's your own fault."
Do you have a view having studied and researched around issues of smoking and the public
health community if Professor Wiener's summary that I just read is accurate or reasonably accurate?
A. Well, I don't know what he's basing this on. And I haven't been involved in all the cases, but I think that -- and I can't really talk about tobacco attorneys' defense strategies because that's — that's a legal opinion and strategy. I can talk about how I, as a historian of medicine, view some of these issues, if that's what you want me to do, but I can't really talk about legal strategies.
Q. Are you aware of something called the open question policy or strategy of large tobacco companies ?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Can you be more specific as the date and —
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, would you agree that big tobacco companies, including Philip Morris, along with their lawyers and publicists, had an open strategy campaign from 1954 through 1999?
A. Open question strategy?
Q. Open question strategy.
A. From what dates?
Q. Approximately 1954 with the advertisement of a Frank Message to Smokers.
A. Frank Statement, yeah.
Q. Frank Statement, through 1999 that they followed an open question strategy?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm certainly aware of the Frank Statement. I think I am aware -- this is getting somewhat distant, not things that I reviewed for this particular deposition, but I believe that there were some newspaper advertisements at a later date about open question, but I'd have to actually see one to recall it more fully.
So -- but I don't know anything -- I can't really comment on a strategy because that's something that I've not studied, so I don't know whether tobacco companies or Philip Morris had a strategy as such about that.
MR. SURPRENANT: I need to call my wife. If we could take a short break.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 9:29.
(Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 9:32.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Dr. English, I will get back to what you're an expert in, the scope of your expertise, what you know about Philip Morris specifically, but let's go back to 1988.
In 1988 you were a professor and a practicing pediatrician at Duke?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And you were approached by a lawyer named Murray Granick [sic] of this firm, correct?
A. Garnick, G-A-R-N-I-C-K.
Q. And Mr. Garnick at that time was involved in defending Philip Morris in litigation, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And he was also involved in defending the lead industry against cases of claims of lead poisoning, correct?
A. He was in the same firm with lawyers who defended lead. I'm not sure whether he did a lot of work in lead, but, anyway, he was knowledgeable.
Q. And you ended up being retained as a medical historian expert by the lead industry, correct?
A. Yes, somewhat later in the mid '90s.
Q. And the substance of your testimony in the
lead poisoning cases was that the things that plaintiffs were complaining about were publicly known; is that correct?
A. Well, weTd have to go — I mean, that's a very complicated set of cases, and they are all different. So do you have a particular case in mind?
I mean, my general task in that was that the history of the evolution of knowledge about the dangers of lead poisoning, and then the public health communities' responses about what the — what Americans should do to lessen that. But that's, in general, and that's really the same general task that I've taken in the case like this one today dealing with low-tar cigarettes is generally the accumulation of knowledge about the risks of smoking and what the public health community has recommended to do about that.
Q. Okay. And so you were retained in 1988 by Mr. Garnick.
A. Garnick.
Q. -- Garnick -- to do research into tobacco
issues?
A. That, including smoking issues. In other words, my assignment was to look about the evolution
of knowledge about the dangers of smoking and what the public health community advised it to do about that up through the publication of the first Surgeon General's Report in 1964.
Q. So your research from — and you worked on it for about two years, correct?
A. About that, yes.
Q. And you never prepared a report.
A. I don't think there was ever a report prepared. I know I didn't prepare a report, no.
Q. And am I correct in understanding your previous deposition testimony that you weren't retained for a specific case or at least it never evolved into that?
A. Well, I think there was a case, the Haines case, which was ongoing, and I hear that it may still be ongoing, you know, decades later, but I think it was in the — the possibility that that case might go forward was why I was retained, but, more generally, it was a more open-ended type of assignment.
Q. And so you were studying the public health community's positions on smoking and the dangers of smoking from when through 1964?
A. Roughly 20th century.
Q. Okay. And one thing I hadn't learned, I hadn't understood until this case, am I correct that cigarette smoking is really a phenomenon of the last century, in other words, there's very little cigarette smoking before the 21st century?
A. Machine-rolled cigarettes, yes. It's mostly 1880 ' s onward.
Q. And prior to that time obviously tobacco as a product of the New World and Europeans used tobacco then from the 1500's was principally cigars and pipes?
A. Or they — yeah. In categories that -- or chewing -- that we would probably list as cigars, sometimes they were wrapped in paper, but mostly what we would call cigars, pipes and chewing.
Q. A cigar is tobacco wrapped in tobacco
leaves?
A. That's my understanding.
Q. Okay. And then you worked for about two years, and then what happened, did Mr. Garnick just tell you to stop or what happened?
A. Yeah, that's about — I mean, between then and the late '90s occasionally we would have a conversation, but I don't think I did any substantive research between that time.
Q. Okay. And then in 2001, approximately nine years after you stopped working, you talked to Mr. Garnick again, correct?
A. In —
Q. He retained you as an expert in 2001.
A. I think it was actually earlier than that. It was in preparation for the Blue Cross and Blue Shield case of New York and New Jersey, and I think that case was in 2001. I may be wrong. I may have been retained, let's say, 1999 or something like that.
Q. Okay. Now, you've been retained by either Philip Morris or Philip Morris and other tobacco companies or other tobacco companies on a number of occasions, correct?
A. I have.
Q. How many?
A. You know, I don't have a number of cases where I've been retained. Twenty? Twenty-five? I'm sorry. I don't have a number.
Q. Okay. Well, let's try to help me -- I don't really need reading glasses, but I wear them to look smart.
A. I do need reading glasses.
Q. What happens at about age 43 a tiny muscle
in your eye that is used for fine focusing begins to deteriorate.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm blind as a bat and wear reading glasses now.
MR. SURPRENANT: Oh, you wear reading glasses already?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Uh-huh.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. You were retained by the joint defendants in United States v. Philip Morris; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And the joint defendants were R.J.
Reynolds, Philip Morris, Brown & Williamson, Lorillard Tobacco?
A. Lorillard.
Q. Lorillard Tobacco Company, British American Tobacco, the Council for Tobacco Research, and the Tobacco Institute; is that correct?
A. I believe that's correct.
Q. Okay. And you prepared a report in United States v. Philip Morris?
A. I did.
Q. You were deposed?
A. Yes.
Q. But you did not testify at the trial; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you know why you didn't testify at the
trial?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Do you know the outcome of that
trial?
A. Judge Kessler sided with the Department of Justice.
Q. And she — and do you know that, among other things, she concluded that the defendants had designed and marketed Light cigarettes in a deceptive fashion?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I haven't read the entire opinion.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. It's very long.
A. I have read the two to 30 0 pages that deal roughly with issues of low-tar cigarettes. So I recall that she did make those conclusions.
Q. And you also were retained as an expert in
Miles versus Philip Morris?
A. Yes.
Q. And you were retained there by Philip
Morris?
A. Yes.
Q. And that was in Madison County, Illinois?
A. It was.
Q. And you testified at trial there?
A. I did.
Q. And you also were retained as an expert in a case called Turner versus R.J. Reynolds?
A. Yes.
Q. And who was your client in that case?
A. I assume it was R.J. Reynolds.
Q. Okay.
MR. SURPRENANT: Now, let me mark as Exhibit 3 Joint Defendants' Expert Disclosure for Dr. Peter English in United States of America v. Philip Morris, which I will mark for identification as Exhibit 3.
(Exhibit No. 3 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Thank you.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And the first few pages are the disclosure
and then attached to it is a certificate of service and then a document called, "Rule 26 Expert Report, United States v. Philip Morris, Inc., Peter C.
English, MD, Ph.D."
Did you draft the Rule 26 expert report?
A. I probably drafted all of it except putting on the term "Rule 26 Expert Report" because I don't know what that -- what rule that is.
Q. Dr. English, when I was in law school -- I just went back for my 25th law school reunion -- I was the articles editor of a student publication, and I got a submission from a doctor in Germany, and he had an MD and a Ph.D. and his letterhead said "Doctor Doctor."
A. Sometimes it would say, "Er Herr Er, Doctor Doctor."
Q. That's not your usage, I take it.
A. No.
Q. Now, I'd like to call out to you some language that is in this report. It is in some of your other reports, but then at a certain time you stopped using the language. And that is at the first page of your report, "II. Opinions and Bases Therefor," and it's in the second -- the second
paragraph, in part it reads:
Quote: I will underscore the necessity of being comprehensive; of interpreting specific statements, studies and documents in the context of the time; and avoiding hindsight when conducting historic research.
MR. ROSENTHAL: You actually technically read that incorrectly. It's "scientific statements" not "specific statements" —
MR. SURPRENANT: Thank you.
MR. ROSENTHAL: -- for the record.
MR. SURPRENANT: When you get older, you start typing different words than you think. I read emails and they are -BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Am I correct, Dr. English, that you burn whatever neurons you have and it's downhill from there?
A. I think that's actually something people are debating still. There is some evidence that you can actually generate a neuron or two at an advanced age.
Q. Okay.
A. And that, of course, is the hope for stroke victims or motorcycle accidents.
Q. Well, my sister was telling me there are different kinds of neurons. There are different kinds of neurons and that neurons in your head are the same as the neurons in your stomach. And she thinks in the future they will be able to scoop up some neurons from your stomach, put it through a centrifuge, and then put it in your head, and you will suddenly probably be hungry all the time.
A. I'm not aware of that. I'll take your representation.
Q. Okay. So that language that I just read was in your report for the United States v. Philip Morris report, which we have in front of us.
Do you recall that you had identical language in your expert report for Miles versus Philip Morris?
A. I don't remember that, but I'll take your representation.
Q. And then -- and then at some point you stop putting that paragraph, specifically the necessity of being comprehensive, you stopped putting that in your expert report. It's not in your expert report in this case.
Is that still -- but I take it that the
statement that, when you're a medical historian, there is a necessity to be comprehensive, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And what does that mean?
A. It means that I try to read as broadly as I can. I use the tools of medical history in attempting to identify the scientific studies and public health organizations that are involved in this, but -- so a sense of trying to understand the nature of how public health decisions are made and the background, so -but that's in general what I'm referring to there. In other words, not relying on a too narrow a base of information.
Q. As a historian, what is the danger of relying on too narrow a basis of information?
A. It would be that there would be some slant to the interpretations drawn from that.
Q. You also have been retained by Philip Morris in Schwab versus Philip Morris?
A. Yes.
Q. You filed an expert report?
A. Yes.
Q. You were deposed?
A. No, I don't -- I can't remember. I don't
think so.
Q. Okay.
A. Mr. Rosenthal would know, but I don't believe -- I wasn't.
Q. You were retained as an expert in a case called Pasetta versus Philip Morris?
A. I believe so.
Q. And you had prepared an expert report in that case.
A. I believe so.
Q. And you were retained as an expert in this case, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you filed an expert report?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And you were an expert in Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey versus American Tobacco?
A. Et al.
Q. Yeah, et al.
A. Yes.
Q. And who was your client in that case?
A. I worked primarily with attorneys representing Philip Morris.
Q. Okay. And you were retained as an expert
by Philip Morris in Price versus Philip Morris?
A. That's Miles, yes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same case.
MR. SURPRENANT: Oh, that's Miles. I see.
I got it.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. The judgment in the Miles case was a $10 billion judgment, correct? It was reversed by the Illinois Supreme Court.
A. Yeah. It was reversed, I think, somewhat emphatically, yeah.
Q. Yeah. And it included an award of two and a half billion dollars in attorney's fees? Those poor attorneys.
MR. ROSENTHAL: They are still appealing it. BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. You were retained as an expert in a case called In Re Tobacco Litigation in West Virginia?
A. I think so, yes.
Q. Do you recall who your client was?
A. I don't remember.
Q. You have been retained as an expert in a case called City of St. Louis versus The American Tobacco Company?
A. Et al.
Q. Et al.
A. Yes.
Q. And what is the nature of that case?
A. That's a case where hospitals in the state of Missouri are suing tobacco companies.
Q. For what? Do you know what?
A. I'm not sure of all the legal details, but I think it is to recover monies that the hospitals spent taking care of patients with smoking-related diseases.
Q. And I haven't yet read your report -- did you prepare a report in the City of St. Louis?
A. Yes.
Q. And I haven't looked at it yet. What, in substance, does your report address in the City of St. Louis case?
A. It, in general — I mean, it's a very detailed report — it dealt with primarily with the public health community and scientific communities within the state of Missouri and their knowledge about the dangers of smoking and the various programs that they had in the state to lessen those risks. There is also a section there both on sort of the understanding that hospitals, both nationally and in the state of
Missouri, had about the problems with smoking.
Q. So I take it -- I've gone over the cases that I know about that you've been retained as an expert and I'm not near 20, so I take it there is a number of other cases?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you identify those other cases that come to mind?
A. There are a series of cases in New York City that are ongoing. And I don't know if I know all the names of them, but they are individual smoker cases.
Q. Are you involved at all in the Florida tobacco litigations?
A. No.
Q. So, in addition to the cases that I mentioned, there is a series of cases in New York that relate to individual smokers suing tobacco companies?
A. Yes.
Q. And who retained you in that case?
A. Lawyers representing Lorillard.
Q. Okay. Now, I understand there is agreement in this case that I don't want to obviously breach that experts are not to be examined with respect to their communications with the lawyers unless they
relied on that.
And so, Mr. Rosenthal, please object and tell me whenever I'm stepping over the bounds, but I was just going to ask a series of questions about who retained you, what did they tell you the assignment was, just that kind of information.
MR. ROSENTHAL: And we will go on a question-by-question basis. Give me, before you answer, because you have a tendency to respond quickly, give me a second to evaluate.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah, because I don't want to step on whatever has been the practice.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Understood.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Who retained you in this case?
A. James Rosenthal and George Lombardi.
Q. And when did that retention occur?
A. I think the first communication was in the fall of 2009.
Q. And you talked to Mr. Rosenthal and Mr. Lombardi, correct?
A. I talked with Mr. Rosenthal primarily.
There were one or two times when I've spoken with
George Lombardi.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Dr. English, I would advise you not to disclose the substance of any communications —
MR. SURPRENANT: That's fine.
MR. ROSENTHAL: -- as opposed to the existence of the communications.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. Now let me try to get at it this way. After talking with Mr. Lombardi and Mr. Rosenthal, what was your understanding of your assignment?
A. That it would be similar to what I had done in Miles-Price in that I would be looking at particularly how the public health community viewed and supported the development of low-tar cigarettes from, you know, roughly the middle of the 20th century and to the end.
So in that case it would be really no different from Miles-Price, but there have been eight years or so since then and there have been some developments and that I would in some measure extend chronologically the scope of the report.
Q. Do you know what the class in this case is,
how the class is defined?
A. I believe the class is defined as all citizens of the state of Missouri who purchased and smoked Marlboro Light cigarettes for a period of five years, and I think the dates are roughly 1995 to 2000, but I could be off by a year or so.
MR. SURPRENANT: I think Mr. Rosenthal and I can stipulate the period goes to about 2003.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Yes.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay.
THE WITNESS: And then when does it begin?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I believe 1995.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Although your collateral estoppel case says '98, which confused me, but my understanding was it was '95.
MR. SURPRENANT: You know, when we wrote that brief, we were just new kids on the block.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I understand.
MR. SURPRENANT: I have to mention that to
MR. ROSENTHAL: I mean, my understanding was '95 to 2003, which is the same as yours, so -MR. SURPRENANT: Okay.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And so what you did -- let me see if I can summarize. You took a report that had been filed -prepared by you — and filed in a number of cases, largely duped and revised it, and then added discussion to bring it up to the present; is that correct?
A. I'm not sure what you mean by the word "duped."
MR. ROSENTHAL: I was going to object to
form too.
THE WITNESS: By that, but, yes, I took that form of that report as a base and then I made some modifications to it, yes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I didn't realize "duped" can have very different meanings. Duped can mean to trick someone.
I was using it in the shorthand phrase of duplicate and revise.
So it's largely -- your present report is largely a report that you prepared in other cases that largely is repeated here and then you've brought it up to the present; is that correct?
A. More or less, yes. I mean, there are some
things in the report that are different that don't relate specifically to the period 2002 to 2010.
Q. Okay. Let me try to now move to a question to asking you about how you, as a medical historian, go about practicing your expertise. And I'll tell you -- have you read Professor Greenwood's report in this case?
A. No.
Q. She is also a historian. The scope of her report is more aimed at information that was addressed to the public as opposed to the public health community, but she had a section which I noticed yours didn't that talks about what the historical method is. And I was going to ask you if you proceed as does Professor Greenwood.
She said the historical method -- let me just ask without reference to Professor Greenwood. Do you agree that the historical method generally follows the mode of the scientific method?
A. I'm not sure what she means by that.
Q. Okay.
A. Maybe she defines it in the next sentence.
Q. Okay. Let me go on. This is going to be a long question and then I'll break it down.
Do you agree there are four steps to the historical method? One, the formulation of a research question; two, searching out a wide variety of sources that provide evidence to help answer the research question; the review and analysis of the sources and the development of a working hypothesis; and then, finally, reaching conclusions based on sources. Do you generally agree?
A. In general, yes.
Q. Your expert report contains a number of conclusions, but it doesn't identify what the research question or questions were that you were addressing. What were they?
A. They were how the public health community evaluated low-tar cigarettes as a public health response to the knowledge that smoking cigarettes causes diseases and kills. A subset of that is what did they base their judgments that low-tar cigarettes provided a reduced risk. Another question was how did they go about informing the public about their conclusions about low-tar cigarettes.
Q. Okay.
A. I may have forgot one in there, but that's the, in general, the substance there.
Q. Have you ever published on the history of tobacco?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever published on lung cancer?
A. No.
Q. You've published on -- you have a book on "rheumantic" [sic] fever?
A. Rheumatic.
Q. Rheumatic fever. My oldest brother -- I have seven. My oldest brother, Leo, had rheumatic fever.
A. Really. What year?
Q. In -- it would have been -- he would have been -- oh, 1960.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Very long time ago. And I always thought it was "romantic fever."
A. Yeah.
Q. And I still continue to somewhat mispronounce it.
A. It is —
Q. What is that? Is that a heart condition?
A. Well, actually it's a multisystem disease. It follows infections -- infection with the beta
strep, the common form of strep throat, and it's a — the body has an overreaction of its sort of immune system and it attacks a variety of different organs in the body, the heart being one of the more important ones .
And what makes it a fascinating disease for a historian is which -- which target organs the body chooses actually changes historically. It moves around. And that's because it's responding to changes within the strep bacteria itself —
Q. Oh, that's fascinating.
A. -- but it's interesting, when someone asks me about rheumatic fever, they almost say exactly what you do. I had a father. I had an aunt. I had a brother or sister. I mean, because it was a very, very common, major illness in that period of time. In the 1960's it was beginning to sort of go away, and so he was really in the tail end of it.
Q. Yeah. And you've published a book on that.
A. Rheumatic fever, yes.
Q. And what other fields or areas have you published in?
A. Well, all of my publications are in the history of medicine generally. I have a book on the
history of surgery and I have a book on the history of lead paint poisoning. I've also written articles on diphtheria and child abuse and some on the history of pediatrics. Currently working on a book on history of obesity, epidemic, focusing on children.
Q. The history of surgery, I take it, was quite gruesome in parts?
A. My book?
MR. ROSENTHAL: On the reader or the -THE WITNESS: I don't know how gruesome it
was .
MR. SURPRENANT: Off the record.
(Discussion was had off the record.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Have you ever published -- I take it you've never published on the impact of tobacco on health.
A. No. I mean, I have a section in my 20th century medicine course on that, but I've never published it.
Q. And you've never published on the tobacco industry's claims about smoking and health.
A. No.
Q. Would you agree that, in order to reach sound historical conclusions, the historian has to
make a systematic study of the issue under review?
A. Sure.
Q. Now, would you agree, with respect to -that the historical inquiry has to appropriately frame the -- the research question, correct?
A. Yes. I mean, we might have a discussion on -- given the topic -- what the appropriate question is, what the word "appropriate" meant, but, yes, I think so, yes.
Q. Okay. Let me try. I was trying to come up with a couple of examples what I, as a lawyer, perhaps using lawyer terminology, would say -- well, let me just ask the question.
In the following hypothetical example, in your view would the historian have committed a mistake, and, if so, what kind of mistake? Let's say a historian, a graduate student, Ph.D. candidate, said that he wanted to study whether American slaves were happy with their status as slaves or detested their status as slaves, but he was only going to look at slave owners' accounts of that issue and no other data. Okay? So he was going to read what slave owners said about whether they viewed their slaves as being happy or not.
Would that be a mistake in the historical
method?
A. Well, I think this is where we get to the idea of what is the appropriate question. If the question is what were the perceptions of slave owners about their slaves' happiness or not, then the source material would appropriately look at slave owners.
Q. Okay.
A. If the question was, irrespective of what slave owners said, what did slaves think about this institution, then the appropriate sources would be different.
Q. And so the way you would -- and let’s say it was the second, that the candidate said, I really want to find out whether American slaves prior to the abolition of slavery were happy with their status, and I think the only source that I'm going to look at is what slave owners said. I take it that that, the mistake that that hypothetical historian would have made, how would you describe it?
A. Well, I mean, it depends. And, again, you have to get into the actual research because I would imagine that some slave owners might actually be more sensitive to what their slaves felt. So you'd have to
look at the source to see whether it was an appropriate one or not.
This, of course, gets me very far afield from medical history, so I'm not exactly sure what all the available sources would be for slave narratives.
I know people spend their whole lives on slave narratives, but I think there is a body of primary sources of slaves and their recollections of slavery that they probably would draw on.
Q. So would it be fair to say that in my hypothetical the historian erred at least in part by only reviewing a narrow and likely suspect body of evidence?
A. Again, you know, I don't want — you chose a specific example there, and I don't necessarily know if I can answer because I don't know that particular field. I think it would be important that the historian, you know, understand the sources that he or she is dealing with and make the best out of the materials that are available.
Q. Okay. Let me ask another hypothetical.
And, again, it's going to be as a non-historian, I believe this hypothetical historian would be making a mistake in the practice of history, and ask you about
it.
In my hypothetical, the Ph.D. candidate says, I have a remarkable thesis that anti-Semitism in Poland between 1939 and 1945 under the Nazi regime was almost completely wiped out. There was almost no anti-Semitism in Poland in 1945. There was a lot of anti-Semitism, active anti-Semitism, in Poland in 1939. So that means that the Nazis almost eradicated anti-Semitism in Poland.
What mistake has that hypothetical historian
made?
A. Well, one of the things would be is that there has been a body of historical analysis that has a different point of view. There is also -- I don't know what source materials. We'd have to question how the Ph.D. student actually got to that conclusion.
Were there problems in that, you know.
Just looking at this on the surface of it, you know, it seems like a very controversial conclusion to reach. And so I think my antennae would go up and want to know exactly how they reached that conclusion.
Q. Right. Because what we all know is what's missing is what happened is the Nazis eradicated most
of the Polish Jews and so there was no more target for anti-Semitism.
A. Well, I don't know -- I think it's probably more complicated than that, but —
Q. All right.
A. You could be an anti-Semite without necessarily having Jewish people right around.
Q. You have not made a systematic study sufficient to form expert opinion as a medical historian on what Philip Morris knew about the delivery and health risks of Light cigarettes, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You have not made a sufficient study, sufficient to form expert opinions, on what the public understood about the delivery and health risks of Light cigarettes, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You have not made a systematic study sufficient to form expert opinions on what Philip Morris told the public health community.
A. No, I have not done that.
Q. You have made, I take it -A. I take it back. There are a few instances.
For example, in the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee in 1964, Philip Morris submitted a report to the Advisory Committee in advance of the Surgeon General's Report. So I do -- but I have not made -ever made a systematic, but I am aware of some communications.
Q. Yeah. And I'm sure you have a lot of opinions, just as I do, that aren't expert opinions.
In other words, you might even have opinions in your field, but they are not expert opinions because you haven't made — you haven't followed a historical method to reach those. So that's what I'm really focused on.
In other words, you may be aware of certain communications Philip Morris made to the public health community, but my question was, to be more precise, and I think I understand your answer, but let me re-ask it.
While you may be aware of some communications that Philip Morris made to the public health community on the topic of Light cigarettes, you have not done a systematic study sufficient to form expert opinions on that topic, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You also have no expert opinion on what Philip Morris communicated to the American public on the delivery and health risk of Light cigarettes, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And same question for the Tobacco Institute. You don't have an expert opinion on what the Tobacco Institute communicated to the American public on the delivery and health risks of Light cigarettes; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. What is the Tobacco Institute? What was
it -A. What was it?
Q. -- during its -A. It was an organization that attempted to communicate with the public.
Q. And do you have an understanding of its basic mission?
A. I don't.
Q. Okay. And I take it you have no expert opinion about the effect on the public perception of the delivery and health risks of Light cigarettes that resulted from the Tobacco Institute's communications
to the public on that topic.
A. That is correct.
Q. I thought for sure, Dr. English, you were going to say that is a long question.
You have no expert opinion on how Marlboro Light smokers understood "Light" in Marlboro Light, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you have no expert opinion on how Marlboro Light smokers understood the legend "lowered tar & nicotine" on the pack, correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Now, let me try to get my arms around -- I love this case because I'm actually learning things, which, as you get older, happens less and less.
Would you agree that a medical historian who makes an appropriate study can reach expert opinions on what information was available to the public health community?
A. Yes, I think so.
Q. Would you agree with me that there is an important difference between reaching an expert opinion about what information was communicated to the public health community and reaching an expert
opinion -- strike that. Let me strike that.
That was just about ready to go into the ditch, if it in fact is not already there.
Would you agree with me that a medical historian cannot opine on what any individual member of the public health community thought unless that expert talked to that individual, correct?
A. This gets complicated because a member of the public health community could be a person. A member could be an organization. And so we would need more specificity. Generally historians have trouble getting into intent. They can look at the communication, but, you know the intent is hard -- is very hard to get at.
Q. Well, let me try to get at it this way. As a medical historian, you can identify what the public health community -- what information it had available to it, but neither as to any individual member of that community or as to the community as a whole can you opine on how they understood the information that was available.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: And what do you mean by "understood"? I mean, many times, for example, the
public health community -- let's turn it back to the case that we were talking about this morning -actually explained what -- why they reached a certain conclusion.
So, in that sense, I think I would be able to say I know, you know, how they understood this particular topic.
If you take, go back to the psychological notion, you know, what's going on in their heads, I can’t do that, but I think many of the public health organizations, they just don't say, we support Light cigarettes. They actually go and say — or they don’t say "light," they say low-tar cigarettes — but they give a reason for that. And I think the reasons that they provide does give insight as to how they process that information.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. This is — we will return to that, to this topic, I think, in a number of different ways.
But why don't we do a little show-and-tell and then perhaps take our first break.
(Exhibit No. 4 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I am marking as Exhibit 4 a series of photographs. The first photograph is of a Marlboro Light box. The second one is a Marlboro Light -- the shot is taken from the front. The second photograph is a Marlboro Light box on top of a Marlboro Red box and the bottom of the cigarette boxes. Then there is a side view of the Light cigarette on the warning side, above the warning side of a Marlboro Red. And then there is front views and partially — basically front views -- of the Marlboro Light box compared next to a Red, Marlboro Red, and then there is a close-up of the Marlboro Lights, lowered tar and nicotine.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Just as a preliminary matter, I have a foundational objection, I think, to any questioning based on this because it does not provide sufficient information, such as the year in which this supposed pack that is photographed here was manufactured, and things of that nature.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. Well, let me press
on.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Sure.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Did you ever in your research try to obtain the Marlboro Light box and try to determine if the
shape, the look or the language on the box ever changed?
A. I didn't.
Q. Okay. So the reason — really the reason that I -- to go to a question I asked a little while ago, and to continue to try to kind of research, I mean, refine this issue of the difference between available -- information that was available and how that information was understood from a historical point of view, you have no expert opinion on how a Marlboro Light cigarette smoker looking at this box would have understood "Lights" to mean.
A. I don't.
Q. And you have no expert opinion on how they would have understood "lowered tar and nicotine," correct?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Now, same question with respect to the public health community. Do you have an expert opinion on how the public health community understood "Lights" on the Marlboro Lights box?
A. As far as I can recall, sitting here today, I don't recall a discussion in the public health community about the front of a cigarette box. The
public health community was very concerned about the warning labels that occurred on the side of the boxes. I can't -- I don't recall a discussion talking about sort of the front of the box or the side of the box or --
Q. Well, let me re-ask the question. Do you have an expert opinion on what the public health community understood the term "light" to mean in the phrase "Marlboro Lights"?
A. In the phrase "Marlboro Light," no.
Q. Okay. Do you have an expert opinion on what the public health community understood the legend on the box "lowered tar & nicotine" to mean?
A. No.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. I promised we would take a morning break.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 10:21.
(Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Going on the record, this is the beginning of Tape 2, Volume I, in the deposition of Dr. England — English. On the record at 10:30.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Dr. English, you're a very experienced deposition witness, so let me call out something that
I'm absolutely sure you already know. If at any point in a deposition it occurs to you that you need to modify, you have something to add or you'd like to modify previous testimony, just call that out to me.
So you always have the option of amending or correcting any previous testimony, if it occurs to you that it needs to be done.
Okay. You are not an expert in surveys.
A. I don't take surveys. I mean, I certainly have -- I read a lot of the surveys, and I think I know how to interpret them, depends on the survey, I guess, but I don't take surveys, no.
Q. And you would not -- if you read a survey, you wouldn't have expertise to determine independently whether that survey was reliable or unreliable, correct?
A. What I would probably do, because certainly that would cross my mind would be, if I knew something about the organization taking the survey. I mean, if it was a Gallup organization survey, for example, I would probably think that that would be — would likely be more reliable than an organization I didn't know.
Q. Right. And I understand that, and I would
make a similar -- a similar distinction, but I'm asking -- I take it, as an expert medical historian, you do not have the training or experience to independently reach an expert conclusion as to whether any particular survey is reliable or unreliable.
A. I think that's fair.
Q. Okay. Same question with respect to polling.
A. Again, I read polls and I would, you know, defer to the organization producing the poll, but I don't take — I mean, I don't actually conduct polls.
Q. And you, as an expert medical historian, do not have the training or background necessary to reach an expert conclusion as to whether any particular poll is reliable or not, correct?
A. I think that's fair, yes.
Q. You are not an expert on consumer behavior.
A. That is correct.
Q. You are not an expert on marketing.
A. That's correct.
Q. You're not an expert on advertising.
A. That is correct.
Q. This one I don't know. Are you an expert on how people who are addicted to harmful substances
filter information so as to avoid cognitive dis sonance?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any views on how smokers filter information about -- to avoid cognitive dissonance on the notion that I know tobacco smoking could kill me and yet I smoke cigarettes?
A. No. I mean, I think the question is complex, like what do I -- you know, who are the smokers in question, but I think my answer would be -would be no.
Q. Let me kind of take a detour here from medical historian expertise. When you were active in your pediatric practice, did you ever have discussions with your patients about, doctor, I know I smoke cigarettes and I know cigarettes can kill me, but I smoke them anyway, where you just anecdotally learned information about how smokers deal with that cognitive dis sonance?
A. Well, as a general rule, I talk to my patients about smoking beginning with a prenatal visit and then with the actual patient every year at their annual physical from prekindergarten up until the last time I saw them. It was a standard part of my -- of
my primary care, health maintenance visit. And, as part of that, to get more directly to your question, as part of that occasionally there would be an adolescent who smoked. So I have a little sense of that, but it would be anecdotal in the sense that it would be based on relatively few visits.
Q. Okay. Prenatal, you mean you began -- what does "prenatal" mean?
A. It means that the pregnant woman and her partner come in and talk about whether I'm going to be their pediatrician afterward, any particular advice I would have about especially the parents' behavior before the baby is born.
Q. And you tell them -- you tell the mother it's important not to smoke cigarettes.
A. Yes.
Q. And try to avoid secondhand smoke.
A. Yes, I mean -- right.
Q. Having three children, we always thought it was okay to have maybe one glass of wine late in the pregnancy. Were we right?
A. You know, the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome is, you know, I think it's controversial.
The public health community has been, at least as far
as obstetricians, that they are -- they have come down very hard about drinking during pregnancy. I'm not sure that the epidemiology supports that hard of view. I can tell you that we have one child and he was born in 1977, and my wife's obstetrician gave the advice, "lead a normal life," which is different from "you may not drink."
Q. I see. I see. You have no expert opinion on what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when they knew it, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You do not have an expert opinion on why Philip Morris developed Light cigarettes, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You do not have an expert opinion on whether the understanding of the public health community about delivery and the risk of Light cigarettes had any role, played any role, in Philip Morris's decision to develop and market Light cigarettes, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you studied whether or not Philip Morris developed Light cigarettes as a health assurance product in an attempt to prevent smokers who
were concerned about the health effects of smoking from trying to quit?
A. I didn't catch the question about -- I got the predicate there.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Why don't we just read it
back.
MR. SURPRENANT: Why don't you read it back. You know, there is no young associates here, so I can't tell them. It's always a good idea to test how good you are.
(Record read.)
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. ROSENTHAL: A+ for the court reporter,
by the way.
MR. SURPRENANT: Very good. Off the record. (Discussion was had off the record.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. So you can't comment one way or the other on the assertion that the reason Philip Morris marketed -- developed and marketed Light cigarettes -was as a health assurance product, i.e., to create the impression that there were fewer health risks with Light cigarettes than regular cigarettes, correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. You would agree with me that, just because one public health person knows a fact, that it doesn't mean that all other public health officials know the same fact, correct?
A. In general, I think that -- if I'm understanding the question, the sun is hot, one person has, I suspect everyone would have it because it's so universally known, but, are you talking — can you give me a specific that you're thinking about?
Q. Sure. That's an excellent — an excellent question, Dr. English. Just because one public health community member knew a certain fact about compensation, it doesn't mean that everybody knew that fact about compensation, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Everybody in the public health community.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think it — we would have to talk about who -- which member you're talking about. In other words, the Surgeon General in his report, that's, you know, that's a member -- he's a member of the public health community. "He," I'm using the single again for the large. And if they
talk about compensation there, that represents, I would imagine, a broader view than just -- just one person, you know. So I think it depends on the -- who you're — who your individual member is.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Do you know how many Marlboro Light smokers in Missouri between 1995 and 2003 knew anything at all about compensation?
A. Don't know.
Q. Do you know how many Marlboro Light smokers in Missouri between 1995 and 2003 knew anything about the FTC testing method?
A. I don't know.
Q. You had a younger -- you have a younger sister who used to smoke?
A. I have two younger sisters who used to
smoke.
Q. And do you believe that your sisters underestimated when they smoked how much they smoked based on your observations?
A. I have no -MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I have no idea.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Did your patients typically underestimate how much they smoked?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: When they did — the answer to that is, I don't know, because our discussions were usually on whether they did or did not rather than how much or what their perception was on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Do you have an opinion as to whether smokers typically underestimate how much they smoke?
A. No.
Q. I don't have the deposition here,
Dr. English, but you don't recall testifying at a previous deposition that one of your younger smokers, you believe she underestimated how much she smoked based on your observations of her smoking behavior when you were at family gatherings?
A. You mean my sister?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. I really don't remember that.
Q. Okay. I think you've already answered this question in part, Dr. English, but could you specifically tell me what additional work you did on the latest version of your expert report filed in this
case?
A. Well, because this case is occurring in the state of Missouri, I did put some Missouri-specific materials in there, not many, but there are some Missouri-specific materials. I also added a few materials in the 1970's dealing with public health community and their understanding of compensation. There is also, I think, one of those from the 1980's as well.
I did make some changes in language in response to the Supreme Court's decision in the Good case.
Q. That's G-O-O-D?
A. Yes. And I believe -- I believe those are most of them. Some more may come to mind.
Q. Didn't you also kind of bring it up to date or had that been done in a previous report?
A. Well, you're right. I already mentioned that. Yes, I did bring it up a little bit up to date. I have a section on -- a couple of sentences -- on what the European Union is doing, and I have a statement about the law passed on Congress in 2009 of transferring some of the authority to the Food and Drug Administration.
Q. Now, in Europe, in UK, I know, for -- am I correct that in the UK, for some period of time, the designator "Light" has been prohibited?
A. In the EU generally. And I think it's somewhere in the '90s, but it could be later than that, they have not permitted those kinds of descriptors.
Q. And do you have an opinion as a medical historian what caused the EU to prohibit the "Light" designation on Light cigarettes such as Marlboro Light ?
A. I don't. I haven't done enough research in there to know. I mean, I am sure they probably had conferences on it, but I haven't read that.
Q. Am I correct that shortly in the United States the "Light" term will be prohibited?
A. My understanding of the law by the FDA is that those terms cannot be used until the FDA gives approval of them.
Q. And do you have a view whether the designation "Light" cigarettes has an inherent tendency to communicate to potential or actual smokers that there are less health risks than with a regular cigarette?
A. I don't have an opinion on that.
Q. Do you have an opinion whether the legend "lowered-tar and nicotine" inherently communicates to a potential or actual smoker that the Light cigarette -- the cigarette that has lowered tar and nicotine -- is — inherently communicates that it has less health risks than regular cigarettes?
A. I don't have an opinion.
Q. How did you go about finding and identifying the Missouri-specific information contained in your report in this case?
A. Well, specifically I took them from my report in the City of St. Louis case. Did you want me to talk about how I generated the materials in the City of St. Louis case?
Q. Thank you, Doctor. Yes.
A. This was a fairly big undertaking mainly because many of the indexes which tell — have access -- provides access to materials for the medical historian on a more general, larger scope, nature, simply don't catalog all of the scientific, medical, nursing, public health journals in Missouri.
And so I went about trying to recreate the public health community in the state of Missouri,
so -- I was interested in what the -- what the state government was doing, what the City of St. Louis government was doing in their departments of public health. All of the voluntary health organizations that we talked -- we talked a little bit about the American Cancer Society. All of them, whether it was the Heart Association, Lung Association, Public Health Association, all of those have local state chapters.
So I was interested in what the Missouri chapter -and it turns out, not only did they have national materials that they distributed, they have their own journal, they had their own educational materials that they distribute. So it was a big undertaking.
Plus, just the state of Missouri has, I don't know, six or eight medical journals. They have a number of nursing journals. They have hospital journals. They have hospital administrator journals. The City of St. Louis has its own journals. So it was a big undertaking that I tried to capture what their understanding about the nature of the health hazards of smoking.
Q. And did you receive assistance from anyone in that big undertaking?
A. I did. I had a number of paralegals who
came from one of the law firms and they worked under my direction. I also made visits to a number of the archives myself.
Q. Okay. And what firm did the paralegals come from?
A. I don't remember now. As I sit here today I don't know them. I don't know them.
Q. So let me see if I understand it.
MR. SURPRENANT: And, again, Mr. Rosenthal, if you think I'm ever trenching on the agreement, let me know.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Understood.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I take it, to the extent the paralegals identified materials that you believed was relevant, you relied on those materials and included them in your report.
A. My technique was, I mean, I wanted them to -- this is a very -- very voluminous. And so I gave them things like, if the word "smoking" appeared,
I wanted the full text, even if it had no bearing at all.
And so probably the vast majority of the materials they uncovered were not particularly helpful
in my enterprise. And then of those materials, you know, I wrote the report, and if I'm understanding your question, you're talking about the reliance -are you talking about the reliance in this case or in the City of -- we were in the City of St. Louis case we were talking about. I'm not sure how —
Q. Well, let's start with the City of St. Louis.
A. Yes.
Q. And I understand that you had some communication with the paralegals and then they went out and presumably went to archives and libraries and stuff.
A. Right. Yes.
Q. And then they brought you back what you viewed as a purposefully overbroad selection of materials -A. Right.
Q. -- which you then winnowed down to what you thought was relevant and responsive to your historical inquiry. And to that extent, to the extent you thought it was relevant and responsive, and you included it in your report in the City of Los Angeles --
A. City of St. Louis.
Q. -- City of St. Louis, I take it you relied on the work the paralegals did under your supervision.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I relied on the documents as I finally sort of culled them, yeah.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Uh-huh. And what is it you told the paralegals they should be looking for?
A. I gave them just a broad, general list of words, things like smoking, tobacco, the diseases that were associated with smoking, things like, you know, educational programs. There was a long list. I don't -- I don't have it in front of me. But what I wanted them to do was to be very inclusive and knowing that I would probably not use most of what they found.
And how did I come up with the list? Well, one of the things I did was, as I identified a particular journal, I would ask them for them to copy the entire journal — that issue — for a number of issues. So I would get a sense of the kind of ways that this particular journal or organization, the kinds of things that they were concerned about so I could then have them focus more particularly sort of
tailored for that particular source.
To give you another example, health departments are interested in smoking, but where in their annual reports the smoking section occurs can actually differ. You would think there would just be a smoking section, but oftentimes there is not. So I'd have to actually go through a number of years and say, well, what you really need to look -- this is under "addictions" or something, and that's what you need to do, or it's under "alcohol and smoking" and some other substance.
Q. Do you know if — well, strike that. Are you aware of an archive called tobaccodocuments.org?
A. I am — I'm aware of that, yes.
Q. And what is your understanding of what that archive is?
A. I don't usually go to that for -- because I believe those are — mostly deals with documents that come from the -- from litigation and deal with tobacco companies, and so I normally don't consult that.
Q. Did you consult tobaccodocuments.org for your work in this case?
A. I'm hesitating here. I personally did not. I have a research assistant who dealt with me, and
there were a couple of articles that Dr. Burns cited in his report that I did not have. And because he had mentioned the report, I wanted to read them or at least look at them. And I'm not sure whether she got them from that particular website.
Q. Okay. Who is that research assistant?
A. Her name?
Q. Yeah.
A. Betsy Adams.
Q. And where does she work?
A. She's a retired medical reference librarian.
Q. I see. Why do you not rely or why have you not used tobaccodocuments.org in your expert work on your cases dealing with tobacco issues?
A. Well, my task has been to look at what the scientific and public health communities knew and understood about the value of low-tar cigarettes. And so I have focused primarily on the published scientific literature or educational materials from the Cancer Society, materials that the Surgeon General has put out. I have not focused on any kind of internal documents of Philip Morris or any other company.
Q. But it is not the case, is it, that
tobaccodocuments.org only contained private internal documents from the tobacco companies, correct?
A. I have not searched that, so I can't tell you all the things that are in there, but I can tell you that most of the -- I think virtually all of the documents that I have used have come through other databases.
Q. Is one of the reasons that you have not relied or not examined the documents in
tobaccodocuments.org is because one of the lawyers for Philip Morris told you strategically you should not do that?
A. No one's ever told me that.
Q. I take it you yourself have never gone -- I take it you could get on tobaccodocuments.org just by putting that in the Internet search site and it would come up.
A. I assume.
Q. Okay. How do you know what's in -- how do you know what's in tobaccodocuments.org if you've never done that?
A. I haven't done it. I've just heard that they have a lot of company material, but I haven't gone to the website so I don't -- I don't know what's
in it.
Q. Am I correct that archives are typically a primary and valuable resource that historians consult?
A. Of course.
Q. And you have consulted either directly or through your research assistants archives for your work in the tobacco cases, correct?
A. The archive that I dealt with in detail was the one -- the Lewis Robbins archive at Johns Hopkins.
Q. The Lewis -A. Robbins. He was the head of the cancer control program of the National Cancer Institute and the U.S. Public Health Service from sort of 1957 through '65, I believe.
Q. I've always wondered why there is an S after John in Johns Hopkins.
A. In Hopkins? Because that's his name. There is a Quaker version of John that has a plural -- has an S at the end. It is not a plural. It's an S. So there are not two John Hopkins.
Q. How many paralegals assisted you in the City of St. Louis on the Missouri specific?
A. I'm going to say two or three.
Q. And how long duration was that work?
months.
Q. And do you know who was paying them? I take it you weren't.
A. I wasn't.
Q. And then what you did in this case is you looked -- you got your report -- when did you prepare the report for the City of St. Louis case?
A. Well, I was deposed a year or a year and a half ago, so it would have been before that, so I'm going to say somewhere around maybe 2005 or six.
Q. And then when you were retained in this case you then looked to your report in the City of St. Louis case and adapted some of the Missouri-specific discussion?
A. I did.
Q. Did you do any additional Missouri-specific
work?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Now, you said you added an incident in the '70s and another one in the '80s on the public health community's understanding of compensation. How did you identify those sources?
A. Those were already in my -- in my file in
the office, and I was just pulling them out because I knew that what the public health community knew about compensation in the '70s might be of an issue in this case.
Q. So those -- those files, those documents, were pre-existing in files that you had been accumulating over the years in your office as part of your retention by the tobacco companies?
A. Yes. I have a chronology file in my office.
Q. Now, what was the selection process that led to those documents going to your chronology file?
A. I added a couple of documents. I mean, there is some that were from the federal government and there were pamphlets. I think in the original report I had mentioned just one pamphlet and I think now I have mentioned three or four different pamphlets from the same area in the first -- in 1970's, '71,
'72, '73, in there.
I have a copy of the second World Conference on smoking and health, and I added something, a quotation, from Michael Russell from that regard. I had some National Institute of Drug Addiction documents, and, again, those -- I added a couple quotes from there as well.
Q. But how did you first come into -- how did you first identify those sources to get them into your chronology file?
A. Well, probably for each one there would be a different way. I think the U.S. — the Institute of Drug Addiction, National Institute of Drug Addiction,
I think I acquired those in the DOJ case dealing with the issue of addiction.
The World Health -- I mean the World Conferences, I can't remember whether I -- at what stage I got them. There are several World Conferences that were held in the period of the 1960's and 1970's.
I think they go into the 1980's. And I have parts of those transcripts there. Different ways.
Q. All right. Dr. English, you have never made a systematic analysis of statements of Philip Morris or the Tobacco Institute to the public about smoking, have you.
A. No.
Q. And you have no expert opinion on that
topic.
A. I don't.
Q. In preparing the expert report you prepared in this case, have you performed your analysis at the
same level of objectivity and rigor that you would use in writing a professional article for a peer-reviewed j ournal?
A. I approached this whole process with that in mind, but also really even a step further as a book in the sense that the materials, you know, it's more encompassing than a single article would be.
Q. Now, I'm trying to formulate this question, Dr. English. Virtually everything that you quote that occurred prior to the Tobacco Institute being disbanded that called out the danger of smoking or related topics, I could get a contemporaneous report from the Tobacco Institute trying to undermine that communication or similar communications. And as a matter of historical practice, why did not your analysis include what the Tobacco Institute was doing to try to undermine information suggesting that smoking regular cigarettes or smoking Light cigarettes could kill you or give you disease?
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to the form and lack of foundation, both as to the question and the lengthy preface before it.
You may answer.
THE WITNESS: Well, I have not looked at the
Tobacco Institute documents. My focus has been on the medical community and public health community and what their communications were.
Now, in the course of that many years, I mean, I've read a lot of newspaper accounts and occasionally I would see a Tobacco Institute comment, so I'm not totally unaware of some of the things that they were saying, but I've never done a systematic search in their documents or their communications.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, do you have — do you believe that there is a likelihood that, if you were to analyze in a systematic way, communications of the Tobacco Institute to the public health community, that you would find a decades-long program of what you would consider professionally to be disinformation?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: You know, I — I don't know exactly what you mean by "disinformation," but let me just step back. You know, I've read a lot of public health information, and I don't think I can recall a single time when, let's say, the Surgeon General said, you know, we rely on the Tobacco Institute for A, B or C. I mean, they aren't cited, I mean. So I think
from that point of view they are probably irrelevant.
Now, so in your question -- but part of your question I thought also implied, you know, communications that might be read by the general public, because the second part dealt with the public health community, which I do know something about.
How the public process snippets in the newspaper from the Tobacco Institute, I don't know.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. You have no expert opinion on how communications from the tobacco industry, specifically, the Tobacco Institute specifically or the tobacco industry more generally, affected public perceptions about the health risk of smoking including smoking Light cigarettes, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What the Tobacco Institute said? I haven't studied the Tobacco Institute, so I have no -- no professional opinion on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. And how their communications affected public perceptions about the risks of smoking Light cigarettes, correct?
A. I'm not doing anything here on consumer
perception.
Q. We've talked around this issue,
Dr. English, and so I would make an objection to my own question as asked and answered in part, but let me try to exhaust you on this topic.
Why did you determine that you would not examine in a comprehensive way consistent with the rigor required of a medical historian to determine what the tobacco industry in general and Philip Morris in particular communicated to the public health community about the relative delivery and risk of Light cigarettes versus non-Light cigarettes?
A. The way I define my historical question was what the public health community and what the scientific communities knew about this. I didn't include in my historical question what a manufacturer knew.
Q. You read several hundred pages of Judge Kessler's opinion in United States v. Philip Morris. Did you say that?
A. I did.
Q. Did you read the decision by the Court of Appeal -- of Appeals for the District of Columbia affirming her decision?
A. No .
Q. Okay. But what you read is you focused on her discussion of Light cigarettes, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And that ran into several hundred pages.
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. And one of her conclusions was that the tobacco defendants, including Philip Morris, fraudulently or deceptively marketed their Light cigarettes, correct?
A. I believe that's correct.
Q. And did you agree? Did you find yourself agreeing with her, disagreeing, or not having an expert opinion on that topic?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: That's not an area that I've studied, so I don't have an opinion.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. There is a jurisprudential writer,
Dr. English, called -- oh, that neuron has died -Ronald Dawkin, D-A-w-K-l-N. And before there was Google, he kind of invented, as a heuristic device, as a teaching device, what later effectively became Google and that is a character named Hercules. And
Hercules knows everything that we can know. He is not omniscient, like God, but he knows everything that humans can know.
And so I'm going to use an example, and that's now Google -- that has become Google. So I'm going to give you a hypothetical involving Hercules.
In other words, Hercules is unfailingly accurate about anything humans could know.
So if Hercules was to tell you that Philip Morris fraudulently and deceptively manufactured and marketed Marlboro Lights, would that fact which you have to accept as accurate and well-founded, have any effect on the expert conclusions you have reached in this case?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, I don't know how Hercules reached their conclusion, so whether this is based on an opinion, whether it was -- I don't know what time frame we're talking about here, and I certainly don't think either you or I would put Judge Kessler in the role of Hercules.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. That's why I didn't use Judge Kessler.
Well, let me ask you. Do you have any reason to
question the accuracy and the reliability of the findings that Judge Kessler made about how Philip Morris and the other tobacco defendants developed and marketed Light cigarettes?
A. I have no way of making -- having an opinion on that because that's not something I've studied.
And she obviously was reaching a legal conclusion, and that's another reason -- I'm not a lawyer, so I don't know whether she used the evidence before her and arguments in an appropriate way or not.
Q. Okay. Fair enough. That's why I used Hercules. So forget fraudulent, which carries a legal connotation, but Hercules, who we know is unfailingly accurate, reached the conclusion that Philip Morris marketed Marlboro Lights in a deceptive fashion that actually materially deceived Marlboro Light smokers from the inception of its marketing campaign until approximately 2002. Would that have any impact on any expert opinion you have reached in this case?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, you know, I focused on the medical and public health communities, and they reached their conclusions supporting low-tar cigarettes as a third-tier public health
recommendation irrespective of any marketing decisions that Philip Morris did. They didn't refer to Philip Morris as far as I can tell in any, so I don't believe it would have made — would make any difference on my conclusions.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. You are aware, are you not, that there is an allegation that the tobacco industry, including Philip Morris, manipulated the FTC decision in a way that led them to approve and make decisions about the testing method for tar and nicotine and for what could be communicated to smokers about those results? I'm not saying you agree with that allegation, but have you looked into that allegation?
A. Well, are you referring to the 1966-1967 period? Is that what you're referring to.
Q. Among others -MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm going to object to form, by the way. A little slow.
THE WITNESS: Well, I'm not — actually I don't know whether — were the allegations, so -BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay.
A. But I do know some of the -- the
contributions to the FTC discussion about the adoption of the Cambridge Method. If that's what you are interested in knowing about, it's in my report as well. But I — but maybe a follow-up question would help.
Q. Sure. Sure. And maybe just answer this. You were not aware of the allegation that the tobacco industry manipulated the FTC into adopting what you referred to and what was originally referred to as the Cambridge Method that over time became known as the FTC Method. You're not aware of such an allegation.
A. I'm not aware of the allegation, no.
Q. So you have no way of knowing if what the Federal Trade Commission was communicating to the public health community was deceptive because they themselves had been deceived by the tobacco companies, including Philip Morris.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I certainly haven't seen anything that would indicate that. You need to be more specific. I mean, the Federal Trade Commission was pretty clear about what they thought about this particular system. The Cambridge Method was highly thought of before they adopted it. It remained in
place obviously for decades.
But, again, you know, I'm aware of what Philip Morris and other tobacco companies -- what kinds of arguments that they and submissions to the Federal Trade Commission, I mean, those documents have been part of legal proceedings for really quite some time, but, other than that, I can't -- I can't -MR. SURPRENANT: Miss Reporter, could I have my question and answer reread?
(Record read.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me try to get at the same question. You have no opinion on whether communications of the FTC to the public health community on the delivery and health risks of Light cigarettes was deceptive because the Federal Trade Commission itself had been misled by the tobacco industry, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form, vague.
THE WITNESS: I'm unaware of any communications — that's something I've not studied -between tobacco companies and the FTC other than ones that, you know, are part -- that I cite in my report.
So I don't know anything about those.
So I don't know anything about whether there was any deception because I don't -- I can't get into the mind of a tobacco company to know what their intent is. I can't get into the mind of the FTC to know how they are processing the information so are they indeed deceived.
And so, you know, it just -- and then it's certainly about passing on deceptive materials to the public health community, I have no way to know about the intent of the FTC, whether -- what they were trying to do or the perception of the public health community. So most of the aspects of your question I cannot help you with.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I think sometimes I know in your earlier deposition in particular somebody kept haranguing you to give yes and no answers, and then, if you want to give an explanation, and I think what I just received -- and I say this politely — was the explanation.
I think the answer to my question is, no, you do not have an expert opinion on whether FTC's communication on the relative delivery and risk of Light cigarettes was deceptive because it itself had
been deceived or misled by the tobacco industry, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to the form and characterization.
THE WITNESS: The best way I know how to answer the question is the answer I've already given. But because I haven't studied what the tobacco companies have done, I really sort of have to stop at that particular point. And rather than making a comment on the double deception, because I -- or the potential there, simply because I, you know, at the start of the process there, I'm -- I don't have that information.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Well, let's try to pursue this line of inquiry. You were focused on what information was available to the public health community on the relative delivery and risk of Marlboro Light -- of Light cigarettes -- versus regular cigarettes, correct ?
A. Well, now are we talking about the testing program? That's what I'm —
Q. I'm now making a more general statement. Okay? You were interested in the expert historical
medical -- strike that.
You were interested as an expert medical historian on what information was available to the public health community from the 1950Ts onward on the relative delivery and risks of Light cigarettes versus non-Light cigarettes, correct?
A. Well, it's actually broader. I mean, we talk about the public health communities. They didn't use the term "Light" cigarettes. What they would do is talk about high tar, low tar, filtered versus nonfiltered.
So, I mean, "Light" is a -- is a, my understanding, is an advertising descriptor. It's not a public health term. So they were interested in evaluating the disease risks associated with smokers who smoke one particular type of cigarette and then comparing that to the disease risks of smokers -- of smoking a different type of cigarette, a lower tar cigarette.
And as their reference point what they used was the FTC Method because that's — that was their relative way of comparing what would be a higher tar cigarette versus a lower tar cigarette would be higher in the sense that the cigarette smoking machine, the
Cambridge Method, had determined that one was higher than the other.
Q. Okay. Let me, with your correction of my terminology, try to state again what the scope of your interest was as a medical historian in this case. You were interested in what information was available to public health community from the 1950's onward on the disease risk that a smoker of a regular cigarette would face versus a smoker of a lowered tar and nicotine cigarette, correct?
A. In general, yes.
Q. Okay. And, as a general matter, until the publication, Monograph 13, it is your opinion that there was a broad understanding of the public -- in the public health community that cigarettes with lowered tar and nicotine as measured by the FTC Method posed less health risk than cigarettes with higher tar and nicotine, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And the FTC Method tested cigarettes on a machine, correct?
A. Of course, yes.
Q. And the machine did not compensate for the fact that it was testing a lowered tar and nicotine
cigarette, correct?
A. Right.
Q. But human smokers, we know, do compensate, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Some human smokers compensate. The public health community knew that. They understood that smokers could compensate even up to the point of getting, for some smokers, the same amount of tar and nicotine in a low-tar cigarette than a comparative higher tar -- what they were persuaded by the epidemiological evidence is that the population as a whole didn't.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And did Philip Morris know more about that topic than the FTC or do you not have an opinion because you haven't studied Philip Morris's documents?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I have not studied them in a systematic fashion. I mean, there have been some that have been included in parts of expert reports, including in this case. I have taken a look at those, but I have not made any systematic attempt to understand what Philip Morris knew about compensation.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And you don't know whether or not Philip Morris knew materially more about the FTC about compensation in that it knew the role that addiction played and the FTC did not.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I'm a little confused here. One is that I don't know what Philip Morris knew on that issue. So I'm not in a position to make a comparable statement. I mean, certainly the FTC understood that compensation was possible. I mean, they mention that. They knew that was related to nicotine. But I have no -- I have no opinion about whether Philip Morris knew more or less.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you have an opinion -A. I mean, I certainly haven't seen any document that would indicate, you know, that has been put forward, but I haven't made a systematic attempt.
Q. Okay. Now, you don't know if during periods of time when Philip Morris was advocating to the FTC that it should continue to use the FTC Method, that that method produced results that were inaccurate predictors of health risks because the addiction would
essentially unconsciously cause the smoker to get the same level of tars and nicotine from a lowered tar and nicotine cigarette, that that smoker got from before switching from a higher tar and nicotine cigarette.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Correct?
MR. SURPRENANT: Could you read that back?
I think it was almost precisely — I couldn't do better if I was in my library.
(Record read.)
MR. SURPRENANT: Like Samuel Johnson, I tell you, like Samuel Johnson, you can have complex sentences, but it doesn't mean they are unclear. I think it's perfectly clear.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I don't understand it. I object to form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Doctor -A. Let me tell you, first of all, can you give me a time frame of the advocacy of Philip Morris on the FTC Method?
Q. Well, you've studied the issue. Did Philip Morris advocate to the FTC that it should continue
using the FTC Method at any time?
A. Again, I haven't studied all of the FTC submissions on this, so I'm not sure. I have seen a Philip Morris document dealing with the discussion of whether the FTC should adopt a new method in 199 7 about a high level versus a low level, and Philip Morris, I think, was arguing there -- because I've seen the memo or seen the submission -- that they should keep the old method, but —
So, along the way, I really can't say too -too much about — I mean, I know they had reservations about the method in the beginning because that's what they -- so that was what that discussion was. But the issue, the more fundamental issue here, is what did people know about the quality of the measurements of the machine, and, you know, were they in any way representative of a smoker, an average smoker, a population of smokers. And I think that the FTC knew from the very beginning that, no, of course not. I mean, this is a machine.
The value of the data that the machine identified was that -- that the consumer could compare whether a cigarette had a higher tar and nicotine rating or a lower one, depending on this reference
point. I don't want to sound like the FTC was cruel because they weren't interested in what individual smokers got, but that's not what their machine was measuring, and I think they knew it. I think they repeatedly said that they knew it. It was -- what the purpose of the machine was to give relative values that all the cigarettes be tested in the same way, that no other method could be used, and that was what the purpose was. And they understood, I think, that some smokers would get more or some smokers would get less .
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, let me ask my question again. You've located the correct decade. Do you know in the 1990 ' s whether Philip Morris advocated to the FTC that it should not change the FTC testing method when Philip Morris internally was aware that the FTC Method would mislead consumers into falsely believing Light cigarettes had less health risks than regular cigarettes?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form and lack of foundation.
THE WITNESS: I don't see anything like that in this one document I've read, so I don't know what
Philip Morris -- I mean, my understanding of that particular submission that I read is that they thought that the relative rankings, the one I talked about before, using the old method, would not substantially change by having a two-tier method. And so, I guess, what the — now I'm speculating that they thought that the dual system was -- the proposed dual system was superfluous. But that's what I took away from that document.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. All right. Now, how would a medical historian -- would a medical historian regard factual findings, not conclusions of law, okay, but factual findings by a federal judge after a nine-month trial as something that that medical historian should consider if it was relevant to the historical inquiry the historian was considering?
A. I think they would -- they might note it as an event, but I don't necessarily -- because a judge says -- concludes -- one thing or -- that that necessarily means that the historian is obligated in any way to agree with the judge.
Q. Well, my question wasn't whether the historian would feel bound by it.
A. Oh, I see. Okay.
Q. But would consider, is it relative input, again, with the proviso that it is relevant to the historical inquiry that the medical historian is conducting, you have a substantial trial after years of pretrial litigation, millions of dollars, many millions of dollars are spent on presenting the evidence to the judge, and the judge issues detailed Findings of Fact.
My initial question is, in that scenario, is that information — would a medical historian consider that information worth considering so long as it was relevant to the historical inquiry the historian was pursuing?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The issue about the cost of the trial, I don't know whether the historians would consider that, but I think, you know, the notion of considering it -- I considered it. I mean, so -- I mean, I read it. I mean, it's a body of information that's — that's available.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And so like any other information the historian would consider it and then draw conclusions
about, yes, this is something that is going to influence my thought, or say, no, for a variety of reasons, I either -- for a variety of reasons -- I'm not going to rely on it in reaching my conclusion, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: In general, yes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, did you run across when you were reading Judge Kessler's opinion any factual findings that she made where she determined that the tobacco companies knew more about compensation than the FTC and had misled the FTC on that issue?
A. I think she may have done this, but it was not an area that I focused on because it was not something that I've done any work on.
Q. Okay. Fair enough. This is returning,
Dr. English, to an issue we've discussed before. I'll try to avoid prolonging the examination.
First, as a threshold matter, to kind of reorient us, because you're not an expert in consumer behavior, you don't know what consumers, including Marlboro Lights smokers, thought about the health risks of Light cigarettes, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And you don't have an expert opinion on what the public believed about the safety of lowered tar -- lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And, as a historian, you are not able to ascertain what the relevant subject populations' beliefs were, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. You're able to ascertain what they — what information was available. Well, let me go back. Let me strike that. We have had some examination on this.
MR. SURPRENANT: Why don't we take a break. Why don't we do this. Why don't we take a break, push on to about 12:30, and then break for lunch.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm fine with that.
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the end of Tape 2 in the deposition of Dr. English. Off the record at 11:40.
(Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the beginning of Tape No. 3, Volume I, in the deposition of Dr. English.
Going back on the record -- going on the record at
11:50.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I'm going to return to the things a medical historian can identify and reach expert conclusions about with respect to the public health community, but before we go there, I realized during the break there is another issue I want to discuss with you first, Dr. English.
Assume with me, Dr. English, that the key issue in this case is the extent to which Marlboro Light smokers in Missouri between 1995 and 2003 were either misled or not misled because of the descriptor "Lights" and the legend "lowered-tar and nicotine."
Your expert conclusion does not directly address that topic since you have no expert conclusion on how consumers understood those terms, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: In general, yes. I don't know exactly what all of the claims are or whether every attorney involved would agree with you in your assessment of what the central claims are, that I don't know. But as I've said a couple times is that I'm not here to talk about consumer perception in general or in the particular case of Missouri.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Dr. English, more calories have just entered the room and perhaps providing evidence or information to your seminar, your class this semester.
A. We could do an analysis at some point, if you want to —
MR. SURPRENANT: Off the record.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 11:53.
(Discussion was had off the record.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 11:54. BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yeah, I wasn't in my last question and your answer to it, Dr. English, I wasn't attempting to communicate that all the lawyers would agree that, as I phrase the issue, that was a central issue, but assuming that's the central issue, that is, the degree to which -- or whether or not Marlboro Light smokers in Missouri between 1995 and 2003 were misled by the "Lights" descriptor on the box and by the "lowered tar and nicotine," as we've established, you don't have an expert opinion on that topic.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I have not studied consumer perception either generally or in the state
of Missouri, so I don't have an opinion on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Moreover, you have no expert opinion that the work you did on what was known to the public health community about the relative delivery and risk of lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes is even inferentially related or -- strike that. I was almost there and then I ended in the ditch.
The opinions that you do have about what was known to the public health community does not even inferentially address the issue of how Marlboro Light smokers in Missouri understood the "Lights" descriptor and the "lowered tar and nicotine" legend, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Inferentially by who? I mean, you're talking about inferentially the smoker? Inferentially the public health community in Missouri? I'm not sure exactly who the -BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. No, that's fair. That's fair. And because you've been deposed so much, Dr. English, I have not and I now realize I have not needed as I usually do to come to the agreement with a witness that, if I ever
ask a question that you don't understand, rather than guess at my meaning, you will call out, as you just did, that you don't understand it. So that's perfectly fine. We can proceed on that basis. Can we have that agreement?
A. Of course.
Q. I keep meaning to want to go over to the flip chart because I think this is something that could — that would help — that I could help illustrate it. But let me, before lunch — I'll move that at lunch — but let me try to work on it.
So here we have the question. How did class members understand "Lights" in the term "Marlboro Lights" on the pack and the legend "lowered tar and nicotine"?
Okay. So I've just written out on this piece of paper the question. How did class members understand "Lights" in the term "Marlboro Lights" on the pack and the legend "lowered tar and nicotine."
And on the left-hand side of the paper I'm putting Dr. English's expert conclusions in this case. And my question to you, Dr. English, is the conclusions you have reached in this case do not bear directly or inferentially on the answer to that
question, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Let me say how they -- how they might bear on this, and that is the public health community clearly recommended low-tar cigarettes to American smokers for a period of decades because it was -- as a -- what I call a third-tier recommendation. The most important recommendation always was don't smoke. The second thing was, if you're already a smoker, you need to stop. But if you are smoking, you know, you should smoke low tar, nicotine -- and this was done by governmental authorities, members of the American Cancer Society and others.
So this information was out there. It was a determined decision in public communication. Exactly where Missouri smokers got their information, I can't tell you, but I — but it certainly is conceivable to me that they got their information from the public health community. And I suspect, although I don't know that, that there will be people here who do know how to study consumer perception that may be able to connect the public health message with the consumer response, but that's not something that I can do.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. So beyond having the nonexpert conclusion that your expert conclusions in this case might or conceivably might address what I have termed "the question," you yourself have no expertise that says, even inferentially it bears on that question, though you do believe there may be other experts who can connect what the public health community — the information available to the public health community, connect that topic to how class members understood "Lights" and "lowered tar and nicotine," correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it’s not just the information that was available to the public health community. I mean, it's another step there. They process that information and actually had, you know, a concerted educational program to recommend. So it's more than just what's available to them. It's what they actually were saying. But the reception of that message, that fairly clear public health message, in Missouri smokers is not something I can do.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. In other words, it's possible that the message of the public health community on Light
cigarettes, lowered-tar and nicotine cigarettes, was read and understood by some members of the class, by all members of the class, by no members of the class, and, on that topic, you would, given the work you have done and the nature of your expertise, you would just be speculating.
A. I haven't studied the class and what they knew, so I don't have an opinion on that.
Q. And you would be speculating to conclude — it would just be speculation on your part, if you were to conclude that there was a connection and that what the public health community knew and recommended had an influence on the -- what the consumers believed to be the relative risk and delivery of Marlboro Light cigarettes, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I would not speculate.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. On that topic.
A. On that topic. Well, I hope I wouldn't speculate on any topic.
Q. Okay. Now, I want -- I put down a series of verbs.
A. You know, I'm going to have to rely on your
oral question because I can't read --
Q. It's just for helping me.
A. I can't read your spatial representations on a paper.
Q. I understand.
A. Okay.
Q. So the verbs I've written down, you see that's how come I'm going to bring that flip chart over here after lunch. In fact why don't we break for lunch and I'll do that because I think that would be more helpful.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 12:04.
(Proceedings recessed.)
(Exhibit No. 5 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 12:38.
MR. SURPRENANT: We're back on the record. This is Dominic Surprenant. I've sketched out on this flip chart some words that I'm going to use to examine Dr. English. At the top it says, "public health community," and then there are the words "understood," "believed," "recommended," "information was available."
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Dr. English, now I'm going to focus on the study you did about what the public health community knew, believed, understood, recommended. We'll go over them one at a time.
MR. ROSENTHAL: For the record, this looks like it's been marked as Exhibit 5?
MR. SURPRENANT: It's been marked for identification as Exhibit 5.
THE WITNESS: Are we in a particular moment or are we talking about a 50-year span?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I'll try, as the questioning goes on -A. Okay.
Q. Now, I think that one area you have reached an expert conclusion on as a medical historian is what information was available to the public health community on the relative delivery and risk of lower — lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes, correct?
A. Right. Of course we have to put years on it, but, in general, yes.
Q. Okay. And you also have reached an expert conclusion on what the public health community recommended on that same topic, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now, who did they make recommendations to? I know the different -- different recommendations would go to different people, but, in general.
A. Well, they made recommendations to smokers.
Q. To the public, in other words?
A. To the public. Some of the recommendations they made were to physicians with, I think, ultimately the physicians were an intermediary to the public.
Q. Okay. Now —
A. I mean, they also -- I mean, the "New York Times" commented on the recommendations, and so it was picked up by the media. Lots of magazines picked up various elements of it. So I think there probably were a variety of audiences.
Q. Okay. Now, where we've had some discussion is about the ability of a medical historian to reach expert opinion, expert conclusions, on what the public health community understood. Okay.
Now, I take it, it is your testimony that you can have some insight, not only into what information was available and what recommendations were made, but you can gain insight into what the
public health community understood because you have written documents where they talk about their understanding; is that correct?
A. Yes, I think I can do that in some instances.
Q. Okay. Now, it may not matter. It may be semantics, I don't know, but, as a historian, you're not able to reach expert opinions on what people believed because belief is inherently subjective.
A. Well, of course, you know, the public health community can be people, it can be an organization, you know, and we may be getting into semantics there, but sometimes when they come out and say, we recommend low tar because, that comes close to a belief, I think, or an understanding. So I'm not sure I'm making a distinction there that you maybe are making in asking your question.
Q. Okay. Fair enough. Now let me try another one. Okay. We will mark as Exhibit 6 this sheet. If you could focus on that just for a moment.
(Exhibit No. 6 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
community," in italics, "PHC," "information available," "recommend," "understood," and then over here, "consumers and class members."
MR. ROSENTHAL: Technically it's "information was available."
MR. SURPRENANT: What did I say?
MR. ROSENTHAL: "Information available."
MR. SURPRENANT: What?
MR. ROSENTHAL: You left out the "was."
MR. SURPRENANT: Oh, okay.
THE WITNESS: In your visual representation there you have a line in the middle.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I do, and I'm going to ask about that.
A. Okay.
Q. So you would be required to speculate to draw a conclusion that there is -- strike that.
You do not have any expert opinion that the information available to the public health community, what they understood and what they recommended reached either consumers in general or the specific class members in this case, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it's reasonable to say
that this message could have been heard, but I have not studied the consumers and I have not studied the class members, but I think I can say something about the concerted effort of the public health community to get their message out.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I have a fancy graph that I want to do next, but I'll have to do that over the break because it's going to be elaborate. So I'll just go back to my nongraphic examination.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I can't wait to see this. Sell tickets.
MR. SURPRENANT: Oh, it will be a beauty.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me mark as my next document Exhibit 7. Let me describe it for the record and then I'll hand it to you, Dr. English. These are typed on separate pieces of paper, "Findings of Fact," from the amended final opinion by Judge Kessler in United States v. Philip Morris, USA. Finding of Fact 2027, Finding of Fact 2066, Finding of Fact 2080, Finding of Fact 2174, Finding of Fact 2346, Finding of Fact 2349, Finding of Fact 2351, and Finding of Fact 2627.
(Exhibit No. 7 marked for identification and
attached hereto.)
MR. SURPRENANT: And Finding of Fact 2110.
MR. ROSENTHAL: So what I'm going to get is identical to that.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. It should be. It should be. I kind of put this together myself, so it is my intent — aspirationally it will be the same.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Understood. Now it looks like some of these you don't actually quote the entire finding of fact, right? You have ellipses.
MR. SURPRENANT: I think where there is — unless it was ellipses that were in the original.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Well, I'm looking at finding of Fact 2174, there are ellipses at the beginning of the Finding of Fact, which would suggest to me as a reader that there is a portion of 2174 that isn't actually in here.
MR. SURPRENANT: That is likely and you can object on that basis. I had not shined such an acute light on the exhibit as you have.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Understood. And I do so object to the extent you get the questions on that Finding of Fact.
MR. SURPRENANT: I will pass them along to
your longtime pal Andrea Hertzfeld, who prepared this.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Okay.
MR. SURPRENANT: You know she has now joined
our firm.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm aware of that, yes.
But so, I mean, for instance, looking at Finding of Fact 2080, there are ellipses in the middle. And is it your representation that the ellipses are original to Judge Kessler —
MR. SURPRENANT: Well, since it's inside a quotation -MR. ROSENTHAL: That's your assumption.
MR. SURPRENANT: -- that's my assumption, but we will proceed in, as Hamlet says, "a hugger mugger fashion."
MR. ROSENTHAL: Understood.
MR. SURPRENANT: One of the things Hamlet says is there has been much tossing about of brains in a certain -- there was a controversy about children as actors, which was current at the time Shakespeare was writing "Hamlet." And I always loved that phrase,
"much tossing about of brains."
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
different questions on these different findings of fact depending on what they say. Now, Finding of Fact 2027 -A. You're going to have to explain to me what a finding of fact is.
Q. Well, you read Judge Kessler's opinion?
A. I did read portions of it, but I’m not sure what a finding of fact is.
Q. What I'm going to say is that a judge in a judge trial where the judge is the trier of fact -there is not a jury — is the judge will, after the trial, with the input of the parties, will then reach Findings of Fact, that is, the Court will find as a fact a certain fact, a certain datum, as it were, and will also reach conclusions of law based on those facts.
A. So the finding of fact is based on evidence that the judge has heard.
Q. Yes. Right.
A. Okay.
MR. ROSENTHAL: In theory, at least.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay.
A. Uh-huh. And presumably there is dispute at
the trial about the facts.
Q. Right. A judge in a judge trial, as Judge Kessler did here, will hear conflicting evidence, and, like a juror, a jury, will decide essentially who to believe and who not to believe, but a jury is a black box. They don't — they don't -- they aren't required to -- they are just required to fill out the special jury interrogatory, you know, which are usually used and not just a verdict. But a judge has to find facts, make conclusions of law, so it can be appealed and the court of appeal can understand what the judge found.
And so with that little introduction to law, Professor English, so the first one I'm going to have, as I was saying, I'm going to have different questions on different of these findings. And the defendants, as you know from being an expert witness in the case, included Philip Morris, correct?
A. That's -- yes.
Q. Okay. So Finding of Fact No. 2027:
Defendants did not disclose the full extent and depth of their knowledge and understanding of smoker compensation to the public health community or to government regulators.
Because you have not done a systematic study of what Philip Morris knew about compensation, you have no opinion one way or another as to whether this factual finding is correct or not.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Full extent, no, I don't. I don't have that. I mean, I have seen some documents, but I haven't done no systematic research.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. And so you have no expert opinion on that finding, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, presumably there would be a document that would be shown to me or you're just going to show me Judge Kessler's opinion, I mean, just like this — I would normally expect at trial that you would then show me a document and then ask me to compare that to what the public health community did know. And if I'm only here commenting on Judge Kessler and her determinations, I mean, then I would answer slightly differently. We're just looking at the one sentence here.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, yeah, and, you know, just to -- we're
being quite conversational, but that's — perhaps it will lead us to greater clarity in the future. I'm not asking you did Judge Kessler get it right or not.
A. Okay.
Q. Okay. What I'm asking you — and I could be saying Hercules instead of Judge Kessler for present purposes. In other words, I'm just asking, do you have an expert opinion on whether the assertion/factual finding is accurate or not, and the answer is, you don't have an expert opinion, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form and characterization.
THE WITNESS: Well, given this, I did not study what Philip Morris has done as far as disclosing, and so I can't -- I don't have an opinion on whether it was a full disclosure or not.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now what I'm going to do in the next one, Dr. English, which is Finding of Fact No. 2066, which is somewhat lengthier -- you can read the whole thing to yourself. I'm going to read it one sentence at a time and then ask you about that sentence. Is that an acceptable way to proceed?
A. There is a couple of things here before we
go into it too much. There are numbers here, which I think must be relating to a document that she was relying on; is that right?
Q. I think she is citing deposition testimony.
MR. ROSENTHAL: It's actually written
direct.
THE WITNESS: Written direct and —
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Oh, okay, the written direct of that witnes s.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Correct.
THE WITNESS: So it's going to be hard -I'll see what your question is, but it seems to me this is shorthand for a longer answer, so that's why I'm -BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. We'll proceed, and -- we'll proceed and see how we do.
Finding of Fact number 2066, I'm going to read the first sentence.
Defendants — and, again, as we discussed, Dr. English, that would include Philip Morris -defendants did not, however, disclose their knowledge that smokers would ultimately ingest as much if not
more nicotine and tar from low-delivery cigarettes as they would from full-flavor products. End of first sentence.
Again, Dr. English, I'm not asking you with respect to that sentence whether you agree with Judge Kessler, disagree with Judge Kessler, whether -whether she had an adequate basis for that or an inadequate basis. I'm simply asking, am I correct that you do not have an expert opinion as to whether that assertion is accurate or not, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I haven't studied what Philip Morris did in that respect, so I don't have a professional opinion.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Next sentence will be the same.
I'll read it and then I will ask you simply am I correct that you don't have an expert opinion as a medical historian as to whether the sentence, the assertion the sentence makes, is accurate or not.
Quoting: Defendants knew that the phenomenon of smoker compensation discussed in greater detail infra — infra means Latin for later on -would cause smokers to smoke low-delivery products
more intensely and more frequently in order to obtain their desired level of nicotine.
You do not have a expert opinion as a medical historian whether that assertion is correct or not.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, I really — since I haven't done a study of the defendants Philip Morris, I mean, certainly smoker compensation and would cause smokers -- I don't know whether she is referring to every smoker or smokers under 20 -- I mean, it's kind of — kind of a vague sentence there, but I think the thrust of your question is do I know what the defendants knew at that time. No, I don't know that.
I guess part of my answer is that, you know, her finding of fact, you know, is problematic to me, but I think your question is we're not trying to second-guess Judge Kessler on this.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Determining -- what I'm trying to determine here in a kind of granular way, Dr. English, is, again, admittedly, a granular way, what you don't have expert opinions about.
A. Okay. So the part I don't have the expert opinion about would be what the defendants knew.
Q. Correct.
A. Okay.
Q. Now, the next sentence we're going to run into the first instance where the Court, Judge Kessler, is citing written testimony on direct.
You know, they should have written testimony on direct in every case. Direct testimony is so boring.
Quoting the third sentence: To feed their addiction, therefore, these smokers would defeat the stated purpose of the lower delivery products, and then she cites a witness, Henningfield, written direct, and she gives the page and line citation.
Reading that sentence in conjunction as I think it should be with the prior sentence that I read to you, I am correct, am I not, that because you have not studied Philip Morris's internal documents in a systematic way, you have no expert opinion on whether that third sentence read in conjunction with the second sentence is accurate or not, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Actually I'm not sure that
that's a correct reading of that or a fair reading of that. I don't know whether she's referring to feed their addiction, the smoker's would defeat, or whether she is referring back to the defendants, or is she making a separate finding based on Dr. Henningfield's written direct. I can't make a comment on that because I don't know what, you know, what all the antecedents are.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. So you find the sentence either read with the preceding sentence or not to be ambiguous, and, therefore, you're not sure what position she is asserting.
A. Well, I wouldn't want to get into Dr. -Judge Kessler's head. I mean, the idea of how smokers responded to lower delivery products is something the public health community had a lot of things to say about. So, in that sense, I have, you know, I do have opinions.
Now, you're trying to tie it to the prior sentence of what the defendants did not disclose, and I just don't know if that's even — if that's Judge Kessler's intent at this point. I mean, I just can't tell by looking at the document.
Q. Okay.
A. And I certainly don't know, you know -- I mean, I have read a lot of papers by Dr. Henningfield, but I don’t know what this particular citation refers to.
Q. Okay. Let me try to avoid other findings that I've read to you, that I've given you, that may kind of cause us to have similar problems, and skip ahead to Finding of Fact 2346.
And you will see there, Dr. English, there are a large number of what a lawyer would call evidentiary citations after the first two sentences. Evidentiary citation, i.e., a citation to evidence either testimonial or documents.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And so I'm not going to ask you if you have, you know, any opinions on evidentiary citations, but just the first two sentences, which I will read.
Finding of Fact No. 2346: Despite evidence spanning multiple decades showing Defendants' extensive knowledge of compensation, Defendants concealed that knowledge and disseminated false and misleading statements to downplay its existence and prevalence. As part of their attempt to portray
low-tar cigarettes as less harmful, Defendants publicly endorsed retaining the FTC Method well into the 1990's because of its usefulness to consumers.
Taking the first sentence, am I correct that you do not have a expert opinion as to whether that sentence is accurate or not?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: This is actually even more difficult for me to interpret because there is just so many evidentiary citations after that, which I am assuming would illuminate those two or three sentences that you read. So without having a chance to read all that, and even then I'm not sure I could respond to your question, based on -- based on either the Finding of Fact 2346 —
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I hear you. I have a plan on how I'm going to try to return to this topic, but I hear what you're saying. Let me try, if we can work through Finding of Fact No. 2349.
Quoting: As noted in section V(E)(1)(c) supra, which is Latin for above -A. Just for explanatory, what is this section V(E) (1) (c) ?
Q. It is an earlier part of her opinion that she is addressing. It's not another document.
A. I know, but, in particular, what she is noting that she is coming back to?
Q. Well, I think she then goes on to summarize it. Okay. And maybe we will run into problems.
Let's proceed and see if we can.
As noted in section V(E)(1)(c) supra, while the FTC contemplated at the time it adopted its method that numerous potential variations among individuals in everyday smoking behavior could have some effect on tar and nicotine yields, it did not have a full understanding of smoker compensation -- that smokers' addiction to nicotine would cause them to smoke low-tar cigarettes more intensely to satisfy their nicotine addiction, and thereby inhale amounts of tar and nicotine comparable to those inhaled by smokers of full-flavored cigarettes.
I take it you do not have an expert opinion whether the assertion that I've just quoted is accurate.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I don't know is what she is -- first of all, I don't know the prior
section, and so there may be some facts in there.
THE REPORTER: Read slowly, please, Doctor.
THE WITNESS: The first part here of this sentence, while the FTC contemplated at the time it adopted its method that numerous potential variations among individuals in everyday smoking behavior could have some effect on tar and nicotine yields, and -I mean, I assume, but this is where I don't know the assumption here, nicotine yields as smoked in the Cambridge machine, I think, it did not have a full understanding of smoker compensation.
Well, I'm not sure, you know, what she means by "full" in the sense that did they have -- did they have a 196 7 view of what smoker compensation was or does she mean full 2000 and whatever the opinion was, five or six, view of compensation? That that -- I mean, in other words, I'm — I'm hampered because I don't know enough to be able to make a comment.
Certainly some of the things in this paragraph are things I do have opinions on, but I'm not sure exactly with her wording -- I mean, you're asking a question using her wording, and I'm sort of losing the thread a little bit.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. That's fair enough. And let me read the next sentence and examine you on that, and then I'll try to generalize the point and see if we can get a clearer communication.
The next sentence said in Finding of Fact
2349 :
Defendants, which would include Philip Morris, withheld the long-held knowledge that the primary reason the FTC Method could yield misleading data was that nicotine addiction would drive smokers to obtain relatively stable nicotine intakes through smoker compensation, and then a citation to the written direct of Henningfield.
Do you feel an expert opinion — strike
that.
I take it you do not have an expert opinion because your testimony didn't -- your analysis -didn't address it whether the tobacco companies, including Philip Morris, withheld from the FTC their long-held knowledge that the primary reason the FTC Method could yield misleading data was that nicotine addiction would drive smokers to obtain relatively stable nicotine intakes through smoker compensation.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry. There are just so many things wrong with the sentence, I don't even know where to begin.
First of all, I don't, as I've said many times, I haven't studied what the defendants -misleading, I think, has a certain meaning in a legal context than it does in other contexts. I mean, the fact is the -- I'm assuming we're not talking about the machine being misled or yielding different kinds of things.
And then we get to the point of Dr. Henningfield's citation. I don't know whether he somehow charged the defendants or whether the judge is taking a comment that he made about contemporary views about the FTC Method and somehow conflating that with something else. I just can't -- it's very hard for me to give you an answer given the nature of the question and includes a third-party's phrasing making reference to documents that neither one of us has in front of us.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me -- as I told you I would,
Dr. English --
VIDEOGRAPHER: Excuse me. I'm getting a
buzz. Off the record at 1:11.
(Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 1:12.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. I had Dr. English on the ropes. He was just about ready to withdraw his report.
THE WITNESS: You're going to object, right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: I think that was so facetious on its face that no objection is necessary. However, it is an absurd characterization of what was occurring.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. So let me, as I told you, let me try to generalize the point.
A. So we're no longer looking at this document?
Q. Not now. We're going to go back to it.
A. Okay.
Q. But right now the Plaintiffs in this case, one of the claims they made -A. Okay. Which case?
Q. This case, our case.
A. DOJ?
Q. No, in our case.
A. Okay.
Q. Is that one of the ways that Philip Morris, in concert with the other tobacco companies, misled the FTC about whether its testing method was appropriate or not or useful or not was they knew, based on internal data and studies, that because nicotine addiction most smokers would smoke the cigarette in such a way, consciously or unconsciously, to obtain relatively stable levels of nicotine when they switched from a higher tar and nicotine cigarette to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette. That is a topic your analysis has not addressed and you do not have an opinion on.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, of course the FTC knew that irrespective of what Philip Morris said. But, again, I haven't studied Philip Morris's disclosures to the FTC, so I can't reach -- I don't have an opinion on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. When did the FTC -- let me see if I understand this correctly. Is it your testimony that the FTC understood throughout the time period that it employed the FTC Method that compensation would be driven by nicotine addiction and the smoker's
unconscious efforts to smoke the cigarette in order to -- it would provide relatively stable levels of nicotine after switching from a higher tar and nicotine cigarette to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Let me try to answer it this way. From the very beginning the FTC understood that what a smoker got and what the machine got were different and for all the reasons that they enumerated in the news release at the time. This, of course, was 1967, a full idea of what compensation was and nicotine titration, that was a -- that was a scientific idea that emerged a little bit later especially with Michael Russell's studies in the 1970 ' s.
Certainly, I think, in some of their annual reports and also reviews of whether they should change the FTC Method, the FTC clearly states that they know that what a machine gets and what the smoker get are different. They mention the fact that compensation exists. Whether they put it, all the elements, like you have in your question, into a single document, I'm not sure they do that precisely, but I think that they
are very well aware that compensation exists, that nicotine addiction or at least nicotine titration is what is fueling compensation. I think they were very well aware of that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, you put several things together.
There is no doubt, Dr. English, that the FTC was aware that compensation was possible, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. There is no doubt that they were aware and stated that the FTC methods results would not be tracked by actual smoking and the actual smoking intake could vary based on the smoker, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And they obviously knew there was a variety of ways a cigarette smoker could compensate by smoking more puffs, by smoking more deeply, by holding the smoke, inhaling it longer, as it were, and smoking further down into the -- what is the technical term of the cigarette?
A. Closer to the butt?
Q. Closer to the butt, yes, okay. And all of that was known and talked about in the public health community, correct? I am asking a very specific
question -A. Uh-huh.
Q. -- which is, I'm correct -- do you -strike that.
Well, let me ask it this way. I'm correct, am I not, that for much, if not virtually all of the period of time the FTC Method was in effect, the FTC did not have the core knowledge that it was the nicotine addiction that would cause the smoker to extract as much nicotine from a lowered tar and nicotine cigarette as from the higher one they had switched from, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't agree with that. I mean, I think the reason smokers compensated was for nicotine. I mean, that was a standard public health -- in fact, I can't think of a single document that comes to mind at the moment that would say that smokers compensate for any other reason than nicotine. That goes with the concept of compensation.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Let me hand you and mark your report and I'm going to ask you to identify in your report any document from the FTC that says the FTC testing method
is misleading because -- strike that. Any document, communication from the FTC that said, one of the reasons the FTC Method may not apply to actual smokers is they are addicted to nicotine and will smoke cigarettes to obtain the -- essentially the same level of nicotine from the lowered tar and nicotine cigarette than the higher one they switched from. It says that in sum or substance.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Is that a question? I'm a little confused.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. I'm handing the
witness -MR. ROSENTHAL: And that's the question you want -- I'm trying to determine whether I need to object.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to the form of that
question.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I did not see a document like that,
Dr. English, and if there is one there, I'd like you to call my attention to it.
(Exhibit No. 8 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
THE WITNESS: Well, they talk about compensation, but compensation implies nicotine.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I understand. We already agreed they talk about compensation.
A. Okay.
Q. I'm saying where they say that we, the FTC, are aware of the fact that nicotine, in sum or substance, that nicotine addiction would drive smokers to obtain relatively stable nicotine intake through smoker compensation.
A. Well, as I pointed out here, we could flip through this, but my point is they were aware of compensation and compensation implies nicotine -smoking for nicotine levels. I mean, I think that's just part and parcel of the public health community's understanding of what compensation was. There is no -- what else would be driving it?
Q. Well, first of all, are you now saying that that is the implication in the FTC's communications but they never made that implication express?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I think when they use the term "compensation," they are using it to mean that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now let's ask -- let's go to the next level. It is one thing, Dr. English, to say, we all know the only reason a smoker compensates is because of nicotine addiction. It is a far different thing to say that addiction will cause them to smoke lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes in such a way as to obtain relatively stable nicotine intakes. That's another point, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: The way the public health community used the term "compensation" in the 1970's and onward is that the smoker adjusted smoking behavior based on the level of nicotine. And the way was that they would adjust their behavior upward, more intensive smoking, in response to lower levels of nicotine. That's the only way that I have ever seen in the historical documents I've read how people understood this. I mean, the question might be did every smoker do it or not. That was -- I mean, there was discussion about that aspect of it, but not the sense that compensation existed and that it was -- it was linked to nicotine.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Dr. English, just as a matter of logic, if the FTC knew, if the FTC knew that because of nicotine addiction that the addicted smoker would smoke the cigarette, whether consciously in part, unconsciously in part, all consciously, all unconsciously, to obtain relatively stable levels of nicotine, that would have told them for that reason that the FTC Method was misleading the public, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The FTC knew that what their — their Cambridge Method — FTC was measuring -- had nothing to do with what a smoker, an individual smoker, got. They were very -- they were -- and they knew it had nothing to do with what an average smoker got. What they were interested in doing is coming up with a machine number that would give smokers a way to distinguish higher based on FTC measurements and lower based on FTC measurements. That's all they did. That's all — I believe that's all they ever claimed to do.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. That wasn't my question, though. My question was, just as a matter of logic, if the FTC Method -- if the FTC knew that its machine test
results indicating that lower -- smoke by a machine a Marlboro Light had less tar and nicotine than a Marlboro regular. But if they also at the same time knew that almost invariably that smoker of Marlboro Light is going to smoke the cigarette so in such a way as to get comparable levels of nicotine, they -- then they would have known the test was misleading, right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, a couple things. One is, I don't think anyone who was discussing compensation would have used the word "invariably." They knew it was possible for some smokers but maybe not all smokers. So that was one.
The question of misleading gets the intent of, you know, do I have any evidence that the FTC, even with this idea, they knew compensation was trying to deliberately mislead the public? I mean, I have no comment on that. I just don't have any — I don't have the ability to make that kind of discernment, nor do I have any ability to say, on the other side of your proposed perception, what the public understood from the FTC Method.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. So let's go back to my original
reason for giving you your report, which is, is there any document that you cite that expressly says, from the FTC, that we understand that the smoker is going to change his smoking habits when they switch from a higher to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette in such a way that their addiction will cause them to smoke in such a way where they get comparable levels of nicotine?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, certainly they never expressed it the way you did. First of all, they would never say "the smoker." They might say it's possible for, you know, a smoker but not — or some smoker, but "the smoker" implies the population. But I'll come back to what my original answer, and that is that they understood that compensation exists, they kept the method despite that, the FTC. The public health community kept it because they had epidemiological evidence as well. And, you know, did they phrase the whole thing -But my view is that compensation inherently includes the notion of smoking for nicotine.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
report -A. I'm not sure -- going back —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Wait. Let him finish his question first.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I was going to go back to the other question, but that's all right.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Is there any document cited in your report from the FTC where compensation isn't inherently linked to satisfying nicotine addiction but is expressly linked?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Expressly linked? I can't
remember.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let's jump to Finding of Fact 2627. It is clear -- quoting -- it is clear, based on their internal research documents, reports, memoranda, and letters, that defendants have known for decades that there is no clear health benefit from smoking low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes as opposed to conventional, full-flavor cigarettes.
I'm correct, am I not, that you do not have an expert opinion on the accuracy of that assertion?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: That's correct.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Continuing, it is also clear that, while Defendants knew that the FTC Method for measuring tar and nicotine accurately compared the nicotine tar percentages of different cigarettes, they also knew the method was totally unreliable for measuring the actual nicotine and tar any real-life smoker would absorb because it did not take into account the phenomenon of smoker compensation.
Do you have any expert opinion on the accuracy of that sentence?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The only way I could answer that question is I do know what Philip Morris and other tobacco companies, what their submission was when the Cambridge Method first came up in the FTC held hearings, and the -- and the tobacco companies expressly said that they did not believe that the method actually measured what smokers obtained from cigarettes, and that opinion was taken over virtually verbatim by the FTC when they announced the method.
Now, there are other parts of that which I
really can't comment on.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Like they knew it was totally unreliable. MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. They didn't say that, did they?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I think if you go back to the original submission, they were pretty clear that they didn't think that it was reliable.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay.
A. But -- and it was something that the FTC agreed with, but that wasn't the purpose of the -- of the Cambridge Method.
Q. Let me go lastly to Finding of Fact 2110. Moreover, epidemiological —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Epidemiological.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. -- epidemiological studies may underestimate the risk for lower tar smokers because these smokers may have other characteristics such as healthier lifestyles that contribute in risk. Regardless of the type of cigarette smoked?
MR. ROSENTHAL: That was actually -- you misread it in several respects. Let's just start over.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Let's go again, beyond my bad pronunciation. Moreover, epidemiological studies may underestimate the risks for lower tar smokers because these smokers may have other characteristics -- such as healthier lifestyles — that contribute to a reduction in risk regardless of the type of cigarette smoked...
MR. ROSENTHAL: And we don't know if the ellipses reflect the fact that there is more of Finding 2110 that you just haven't reproduced here, correct?
MR. SURPRENANT: That's true.
MR. ROSENTHAL: It's entirely possible that there is something else here that's missing.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. But do you agree with that?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: This, you know, there are lots of epidemiological studies and they have strengths and weaknesses. The public health community took great
store in epidemiological studies to be able to answer questions about the risks of certain diseases. There always are questions about confounding factors, but, beyond that, I can't say.
So one is that I understand that any epidemiological study can have confounding factors, but that doesn't change my opinion in my report that the public health community relied very heavily on epidemiological studies.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me return to a topic that we kind of had some examination on without being duplicative and try to get a better understanding.
You have framed your analysis around what the public health community understood, what knowledge was available to it, about the relative delivery and health risk of lowered tar and nicotine cigarette versus higher tar and nicotine cigarette. What recommendations they made based on that and what they understood as discerned from the recommendations and the documents they published.
That, at a general level, is a fair summary of what you've done, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. But among the things you haven't done is to identify in a systematic way that would comport with the rigor of medical historical research to identify what the tobacco industry, including Philip Morris, communicated to the public health community. I'm correct in that as well?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Yes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, what would be your answer to the criticism, Dr. English, that, in order to determine what the public health community -- what information was available to it and what it understood, you needed to include the tobacco industry's communication as part of that analysis?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What I was -- what my task was was to look at what the science and — what the scientific and medical communities knew about the health risks and what the recommendations were. That did not include the tobacco industry. So I didn't —
I did not look there. I certainly have found no evidence from looking at scientific and public health documents that the public health community was relying
on information that, you know, that they were getting from the public health -- from the tobacco companies, but it's simply not something that I've done.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And the reason — the reason is because you were attempting to identify the knowledge and understanding of the public health community and you did not include the tobacco companies as participants in that community?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I was looking at primarily almost entirely of the scientific and public health communities.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, but didn't -- doesn't Philip Morris have doctors and physicians who study, you know, smoking and who take public positions, including public positions to the public health community, on issues related to the risk of smoking?
A. Some of Philip Morris's scientists publish in the scientific literature. I have seen some of those because they are part of the scientific record. So, in that sense, they are included. But I have not made a systematic study of what the -- what the
tobacco industry did.
Q. Now, there is another part of your answer, several answers ago, do you think the public health committee -- community -- regarded statements made about health issues involving tobacco with skepticism?
A. I'm sorry. Which -- whose statements?
Q. Let me re-ask the question.
First re-read it and see if I misspoke.
(Record read.)
MR. SURPRENANT: I did misspeak. Quite
right.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you believe, as a medical historian, that the public health community regarded statements made by tobacco companies and the tobacco industry about health issues involving tobacco with skepticism?
A. You know, they don't comment on it. I don't see that in a Surgeon General's Report from the '70s or '80s or -- about that. So I -- I can't really -- I don't really have a comment on that.
I think there were some very negative comments about the tobacco industry that got into Monograph 13. That's not really a Surgeon General's Report, but I see it there where, as I recall, that
they had some -- they had some representations of tobacco industry positions, but, for the most part, they don't talk about the tobacco industry.
Q. Do you have, based on the 20 or 25 cases you've been retained by tobacco companies -- I take it you principally have been retained more often than not by Philip Morris?
A. I suspect that's the case.
Q. Okay. Have you ran across any communications by Philip Morris or other tobacco companies on the topic of health issues and tobacco that you believe were -- would be misleading, would mislead members of the public if the public believed them?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, I haven't — again,
I haven't studied that. I haven't seen that. Occasionally in cases I've been presented with plaintiffs attorneys with some documents, but when you get to the question of being misled, my understanding of what the word means is that there is intent, and I can't tell the intent of the person writing a document would be.
And then the other half of misleading is the
reception, and I don't know if I can be able to show that someone was misled by or deceived by the document.
So — but that's the best I can answer for your question.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I actually anticipated both objections and I thought I avoided both of them. I said misled, would be misleading, if believed, and I didn't put into the question whether the misleading effect was deliberate or intended.
So let me try to proceed. You are aware, are you not, that Congressman Waxman from actually west L.A. held a hearing in 1994?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And Mr. Campbell testified at this hearing? He was then the CEO of Philip Morris.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And the other CEOs of the major tobacco companies testified?
A. Uh-huh.
MR. ROSENTHAL: By the way, generally, yeses, nos, not —
THE WITNESS: Oh, sorry. Yes, yes, I am
aware of that. I've seen the video.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And each of them, each of the CEOs, in 1994, testified that smoking was not addictive, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I think it's more complicated than that. That's certainly the sound bite that came out of that, but what they were trying to do was to connect that particular conclusion back to this 1964 Surgeon General's Report. So, I mean, I think it's more complicated than that, but, yeah, they said, based on how they looked at -- defined addiction, they did not think smoking was addicting.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, and do you believe that was a responsible position to take in 1994?
A. I think —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it was a silly thing to say, but — I mean, the public — and I guess they are correct in that, when they refer to the '64 Surgeon General's report -- but the Surgeon General had moved in his position from 1964 to 1988.
And so in 1988 the Surgeon General and I think the public health community agreed that nicotine was an addicting substance.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, do you think that -A. So, I think, you know, I mean, do I — do I think they were wrong? I don't agree with them.
Didn't agree with them at the time.
Q. Do you think if a smoker or a potential smoker in 1994 thought, gosh, all seven of the CEOs testified under oath that it wasn't addictive, and if they believed that and continued or began smoking based on it, were they misled in my hypothetical?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: That gets into consumer perceptions and that's not something I have an opinion on.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right, but as my -- as my first-year law professors drilled into our heads, they were the master of the hypothetical. We poor students had to accept the hypothetical and answer it. And, in a similar way, I am the master of the hypothetical. And so I can set up a hypothetical where I'm asking you to
assume is true certain facts. Let me try to do it again.
If I was a potential smoker in 1994 and I believed what Mr. Campbell of Philip Morris and the other six testifying CEOs testified that nicotine was not addictive, and then I started smoking in reliance on their statement that I wouldn't be addicted, in that hypothetical would I have been misled?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, this is, you know — historians try to figure out, you know, what happened, not what might have happened if something that didn't happen happened. So I'm getting confused here.
But, first of all, is the smoker in your hypothetical relying on everything that Mr. Campbell said? In other words, his whole testimony? He saw the video that I saw and so he saw the idea that the Surgeon General changed his opinion and they are looking back at a '64 -- I mean, is that what they are referring to or are they -- if they just saw the photograph of them taking — which is not really swearing, it's where they are being sworn in, that was in all the newspapers, if you just saw that, I mean, I’m -- you know, consumer perception is a very
complicated field, and I don't have expertise into parsing it. And so I don't know how -- I don't know how to give you a professional opinion on this.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. You certainly -- you certainly would understand the logic that a potential smoker of cigarette, if they believed the sworn testimony of Mr. Campbell and the other tobacco CEOs that smoking tobacco wasn't addictive, that might lead to a tendency of a nonsmoker to start smoking if they believed that sentence, right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think consumer behavior is much more complicated than that. I mean, what little I do know, and I'm not an expert there, I suspect that a potential consumer might consider all the information that's out there. But, again, I'm getting into a field where I really don't have expertise, and so I don't want to give -- I don't want -- I just don't know how to answer that question.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Now, you've referred, Dr. English, a number of times to a sound bite where they all said it's not addictive, and there was substantially more testimony.
It was a day-long testimony. And the transcript from that hearing is several hundred pages, correct?
A. I haven't read the transcript, but I assume that's probably correct.
Q. Have you read some of the transcript?
A. I think so, but not in -- certainly not in preparation for this deposition.
Q. Did you read it where the seven-year-old boy who had asthma testified that there were a lot of things that he wanted to do that he couldn't do because smoking was allowed in public places, like bowling alleys, and occasionally when he was around secondhand smoke he would feel sick for days, and the secondhand smoke and the smoking in public places, like bowling alleys, made him feel as if he was not normal and not equal to his other friends who didn't get as sick as he did from secondhand smoke. And they asked the CEOs, doesn't this child's testimony indicate there is a real issue with secondhand smoke, and none of them would agree that public smoking should be banned.
A. I don't remember that.
point?
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. Sure.
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the end of Tape 3. We're going off the record. The time is 1:47 p.m.
(Proceedings recessed.)
(Exhibit No. 9 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the beginning of Tape 4 in the deposition of Dr. English. On the record at 2:01.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I am going to examine Dr. English with a couple of charts that I drew up during the break.
What I've marked for identification as Exhibit 9, which I will turn to the witness after I read it, it says on the left: "What the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes."
And on the right-hand side there are three points: "What class members understood," quote, "Marlboro Lights, and," quote, "lowered tar and nicotine to mean, what class members understood about the health risks associated with Marlboro Lights versus Marlboro Reds."
MR. SURPRENANT: "Whether Philip Morris designed and marketed Marlboro Lights in a misleading way. "
MR. ROSENTHAL: Do you want to do the other one now just to get it over with?
MR. SURPRENANT: Sure.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Since we got the —
MR. SURPRENANT: This is not as fancy as my aspirations were. On the left, which is circled in a shape that I don't think mathematics has a name for.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Looks like one of those Mayan heads.
MR. SURPRENANT: It could be.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Or Easter Island.
MR. SURPRENANT: Easter Island.
MR. ROSENTHAL: That's what I was thinking.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. "Tobacco companies, including Philip Morris, manipulating the FTC, and then the FTC," and then there is an arrow to "PHC," which means the public health community. And I will mark that as Exhibit 10.
(Exhibit No. 10 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, Dr. English, I appreciate your patience with me. I'm not saying that the lawyers, your -- Philip Morris counsel and I -- will agree that what I've put on the right-hand side of Exhibit 9 are the relevant issues. That's an argument we can have.
What I want to do is understand the relationship, if any, between what's on the left-hand side of Exhibit 9 and what's on the right-hand side of Exhibit 9.
Now, on the left hand is what the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes. And, Dr. English, that's just kind of my shorthand telegraph for what your testimony is. Okay?
A. Okay.
Q. And I am correct, am I not, that there is no relationship between your testimony on what the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes and the topic of what class members understood Marlboro Lights and lowered tar and nicotine to mean, correct?
THE WITNESS: That's not exactly what I said. What I said is that I don't know what class members understood, but I think there is a connection in the sense that the public health community wanted smokers -- these are people who would not stop and wouldn't, you know, smoking — they wanted them to know about low-tar cigarettes.
So I think there is a connection there. That's certainly what the message was. But what I haven't done is studied the class. So I don't know about their reception of the message.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, what is more is that's a question of consumer behavior, and you told me just before we broke that that is a topic that you have no expertise on and would be extremely reluctant to opine on, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, that's not something I've studied, yes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. And there are perhaps other experts that you believe conceptually or theoretically could connect what the public community knew and recommended
about lower tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes to what the class member understood Marlboro Lights and lowered tar and nicotine to mean, but that's not — that's not a connection you can provide, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. Now, the second one, issue, I put there is what class members understood about health risks associated with Marlboro Lights versus Marlboro Reds. And, again, because that is an issue of consumer behavior and marketing and advertising, all of which are topics you're not an expert on, there is no connection between that issue — strike that.
Your opinion on what the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes versus higher tar and nicotine cigarettes does not address the issue of what class members understood about health risks associated with Marlboro Lights versus Marlboro Reds, correct?
A. I would answer in the same way. I mean, certainly the public health community had the information, but I'm -- I haven't studied the class, so I'm not able to make that -- that assessment.
consumer behavior, so I'm kind of reluctant to go down this path, but let me ask a few questions.
I've asked you about tobacco -- whether you've studied the impact of communications from the Tobacco Institute to the public health community and whether that affected their understanding or communications by Philip Morris to the public health community, and I believe you've expressed in sum or substance that you don't think that any such communications would have had an impact on what the public health community knew and understood; is that correct?
A. Certainly the ones that I've seen. I mean, I haven't made a systematic study, but over the years I've seen quite a few documents, you know, probably in the hundreds of documents.
Q. Now, just as a matter — and I know you're not an expert in consumer behavior -- but do you have any kind of lay opinion that the public would much more likely be influenced by -- about, you know, risks and dangers or the absence of risks and dangers from smoking cigarettes by communications from the -strike that. Strike that. Let me start again.
open-question strategy. Do you recall that?
A. Yes, I do. I do remember the line of questioning.
Q. Okay. Now, are you aware that an express aim of the open-question strategy was to create in the smoking public or the potential smoking public's mind an issue that said, while there are statistical correlations between smoking and lung cancer, it is an open question whether there is really a cause and effect?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Are you done?
MR. SURPRENANT: Yes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. That was one of the aims of the open-question strategy.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I don't know what the aims of the strategy was. I have seen one of the ads that appeared in a newspaper. I don't — I didn't review it for this case, so I'd have to take a look and actually see what was in the ad. I just don't remember it well enough, but I certainly don't have any knowledge about what the aims of the campaign.
And I don't even know it was a campaign.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay.
A. To my recollection, only seeing one or two ads in a specific time, and so I don't know whether that's actually an ongoing campaign. I just don't have any information about that.
Q. Okay. We’ll pursue that a little bit, but, as a medical historian, you know that Philip Morris and the tobacco industry denied that smoking was addictive until 1999, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I haven’t studied it well enough to know exactly what their public statements were on addiction. I do know that in their — on their website they mention in 1999 that the public health community thought that cigarette smoking was an addiction and they thought the public should pay attention to the public health community.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. And that was one of the results of the 1998 settlement of the lawsuits by the attorney general -- the attorney generals of most of the states -- versus the tobacco company, as part of the
settlement they agreed that they would put that on the website, correct?
A. I'm not sure that that was part of the settlement.
Q. Okay. Now, they also, Philip Morris and the public -- Big Tobacco companies, denied from 1954, for a considerable length of time, I believe 1999 again, that cigarette smoking killed people, killed smokers, and caused disease, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form,
foundation.
THE WITNESS: I'm not — again, I haven't studied their public statements on that, any systematic fashion, so I don't know. I'd be happy to look at a statement that we can look at it and see what it says and compare it to what the public health community was saying at the same time, if you want, but I just haven't studied it in a systematic fashion. BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. Now, I understand why you haven't studied it in a systematic fashion with respect to the public health community because you told me you were interested in identifying what the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and
nicotine cigarettes. And since Philip Morris and the tobacco companies are not members in the public health community, you didn't look at that statement. I understand why you did that. But — and I understand you're not an expert in consumer behavior or consumer understanding, but do you have a lay opinion whether the public would likely have been more susceptible to being persuaded by the efforts of the tobacco company to create uncertainty about whether nicotine was addictive and harmful versus members of the public health community?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form, foundation, competency.
THE WITNESS: It's just not something I've studied. Consumer behavior, I understand, is a very complicated field, and it's not something that I have expertise in.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, the last thing I put on here is whether Philip Morris designed and marketed Marlboro Lights in a misleading way. Now, that is not a topic you've considered or have expert opinions about, correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Okay. Now, so it is entirely possible that the Finder of Fact could agree with you, Dr. English, as to everything you testify about what the public health community knew and recommended about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes and yet still find that Philip Morris designed and marketed Marlboro Lights in a misleading way, right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know — I mean, who's the finder of fact?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. It would be the jury.
A. The jury?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Again, that's up to the jury to make its decision. I don't have an opinion on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. And your work doesn't bear on that
topic.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, the — I have not studied Philip Morris's marketing of Marlboro Lights, so I don't have an opinion.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now we're going to my graph that I thought -- it's an Easter head graph -A. Easter Island.
Q. Easter Island.
MR. ROSENTHAL: It really looks like one of
those guys.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I actually happen to know a little bit about those Easter Island things. There is a professor, Professor Jared Diamond -A. Jared Diamond, yes. I've heard him talk a couple times. He had a couple kids at Duke.
Q. Oh, he did?
A. Uh-huh, or does. They still may be there. Q. Doesn't he teach at UCLA or —
A. He does, but when his kids were at Duke he used to do a lot of commuting.
MR. SURPRENANT: Off the record. VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 2:15. (Discussion was had off the record.) VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 2:16. BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Dr. English, were far more than my graphic abilities, but I am trying to communicate a point here. And let me kind of walk through it.
And so we have tobacco companies, including Philip Morris, manipulating the FTC. We then have the FTC and then we have the public health community.
Now, let me try to develop this into something that you can understand. You did not, as a medical historian, examine in any systematic way that would allow you to reach expert conclusions as a medical historian the communications between the tobacco companies and the FTC, including Philip Morris, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: In a systematic fashion, no.
I think I have seen some documents that Plaintiffs' attorneys have shown me from time to time, but I haven't made a systematic study.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. There is the assertion in this case which Judge Kessler agreed with —
A. Okay. The "this case" --Q. This case is our case here.
A. Craft.
Q. Craft?
A. Okay.
Q. You know, I told you, when you come onto a new case, you always feel like you're speaking a second language. Is the case Craft or is the case Lorsen?
MR. ROSENTHAL: This is my understanding. It was originally Craft. When Craft dropped out, Judge David requested that we continue to refer to it as Craft to keep it straight in his own mind. I personally have been referring to it as Craft even though Craft is no longer a plaintiff. But we're talking about the case in Missouri, the reason why we are sitting here today.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. The Missouri case.
A. Okay. You mentioned Judge Kessler, and that's what confused me. I wanted to make sure we were talking about DOJ or we were talking about the case why we're all here.
Q. Right. Okay. And let me — okay. One of the assertions Plaintiffs in this case are making is that the tobacco companies, including Philip Morris, had greater knowledge on compensation than the FTC
had. They withheld that knowledge and manipulated the FTC to adopt and maintain the FTC Method. That is not a topic that you have studied, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well —
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. That's not a topic you have reached expert conclusions on.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, let me answer this way. I do know a lot about compensation and the FTC, limitations of their testing and all of that, so, although I haven't made a systematic study, I am fully prepared to talk about any document that you can have that purports to show that and I'll look at it and give you an opinion on it.
So, I mean, I certainly know that I haven't seen any like that, and, I mean, I've read some of the documents that Dr. Burns in his expert report cited.
I didn't see anything like that that would be a manipulative document. I mean, you probably have some documents in mind you could show me, but — so depending on the kinds of questions I'm asked about a document, I probably -- I might well have an opinion.
Q. Okay. Let's spend some time on this because it's important. As you sit here today, you do not have an expert opinion reached by standards appropriate in the circumstances for a medical historian where you can testify, I have made a systematic study of the communications and the interaction between the tobacco companies and the FTC with respect to the FTC testing method, and I have an expert conclusion that the tobacco companies did not manipulate and mislead the FTC. You don't have that opinion, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I have not made a systematic fashion -- I haven't seen a document that would indicate that. You know, if you show me a document, I'll be happy to take a look at it, but beyond that I can't go.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. Because you told me that, other than documents Plaintiffs' attorney has shown you, you haven't attempted to get an expert understanding as a medical historian about the nature of the communications and interactions between the tobacco
companies and the FTC with regard to the FTC's adoption and maintenance of the FTC testing method, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, mischaracterizes the testimony.
THE WITNESS: Well, I guess maybe put it more boldly. I'm sort of counting on Plaintiffs' attorneys to show me the strongest documents and I haven't seen them. I haven't seen any that would go to the question about manipulating the FTC.
So, you know, I'm willing to look at a document, but your question is have I made a systematic search, and what I mean by systematic would mean that I would try to find every communication between Philip Morris and the FTC, no, I have not done that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And there is even a greater reason that you are unable to opine on that topic, isn't there,
Dr. English, which is you haven't studied internal Philip Morris documents, right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Two things. First of all, he's changing, just for the record, he's writing things on the chart, which was previously shown on the
video.
just did.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Fine.
MR. SURPRENANT: I drew two arrows, two lines, and I'll show you this masterpiece when it's done, Mr. Videographer, and then I put "internal PM docs.”
MR. ROSENTHAL: I also object to the form of the question.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me just ask a fresh question,
Dr. English. As a logical matter, as a logical matter, unless you have determined in a systematic way sufficient to form expert opinions about what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when it knew it, you could not arrive at an opinion as to whether Philip Morris manipulated the FTC on the issue of compensation and the FTC testing method, correct? You would be missing a vital input.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I certainly have not in a systematic way studied Philip Morris internal documents. I mean, I hear numbers of multiple
hundreds of millions of internal documents, and so I don't know whether that number is even in the ballpark, but it's a lot. I haven't done that.
In these cases I have seen quite a few documents that Plaintiffs' attorneys have shown me, internal documents, and I haven't seen one, as I mentioned in answer to the prior question, that goes to the issue of whether Philip Morris was manipulating the Federal Trade Commission.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me — because you brought it up, Dr. English, let me kind of explore your understanding of an expert witness testifying. You've been retained by Philip Morris to offer expert opinions in their case-in-chief, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: And case-in-chief is -BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. When they put their case on, they are going to call you as a witness and you're going to testify.
A. Okay. Is that what "case-in-chief" means? Q. Yeah.
A. Okay.
Q. And you also say that you reserve the right
to testify in rebuttal to anything our experts put on, correct?
A. I believe that's correct, yes.
Q. Okay. And so it is my job to cross-examine you on the opinions that you've expressed. You understand that, correct?
A. I'm not sure I know what your job is --
Q. Okay.
A. — but I'll take that.
Q. But it's not my job to cross-examine you on a topic that is not addressed in your direct testimony. In other words, you have not in your direct testimony said, in sum or substance, I understand that the Plaintiffs allege that Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies knew important information about compensation which they did not provide to the FTC, thereby misleading the FTC, and I have studied the internal documents of the tobacco companies, which are available at
tobaccodocuments.org, and I have made a systematic study of both those internal documents and the documents relating to the communication between the tobacco industry and the FTC with respect to compensation and the FTC method, and I conclude that
there was no manipulation.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to that characterization.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Now, if you had put that in your expert report, Dr. English, you can be sure I would be cross-examining you. Okay? But you did not do a systematic study of the tobacco company documents on tobaccodocuments.org, correct?
A. No, I did not do that.
Q. And you do not have an expert opinion on what the internal Philip Morris documents show about what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when they knew it, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I certainly have seen a lot of documents shown to me by Plaintiffs' attorneys about that. I have not made a systematic — and I think I do address that in my report. There is a portion in there that talks about this issue.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right, but that's -- I know what you're referring to.
Q. You're referring to one document or two documents from Dr. Burns.
A. Uh-huh. That's not what I'm referring to.
Q. What are you referring to?
THE WITNESS: Do you have it there?
MR. ROSENTHAL: You have your report in front of you. Feel free to look through.
I don't want to coach the witness. I'm happy to clarify what we intend to do so you're on notice.
MR. SURPRENANT: Well —
MR. ROSENTHAL: I think his report speaks for itself, and the reason you're getting the answers you are is you are intentionally asking the question in a very precise way to get a certain answer, which you're then twisting the meaning of it. That's the -MR. SURPRENANT: I agree with the first half and I disagree with the second half.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Just because you may not have done a systematic study on one particular website does not mean you don't have opinions on specific issues.
MR. SURPRENANT: We're now getting -- okay.
of my report.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, I'm quite familiar with that, but let's go back to how expert medical historian reaches expert conclusions. You would first have to frame a historical inquiry, which is, what do the internal documents of the tobacco industry indicate what they knew on the issue of compensation and when they knew it. And then you would have to do a systematic study of those documents to reach an expert conclusion. You haven't framed that inquiry and you haven't done that analysis, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I have not looked at a systematic view — I haven't -- actually I don't know whether I've seen all the Philip Morris documents on compensation. I do know that in the Price-Miles case there were lots of documents there, and I looked at every document that Plaintiffs introduced in the case dealing with compensation.
But getting back to the systematic, I have not done or trying to identify every possible compensation document. That's something that I have not done.
Q. And you haven't -- you haven't done a systematic analysis of the communications between the tobacco companies and the FTC on compensation and the FTC testing method and maintaining its use, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Okay. Again, I have not done it in a systemic way, and, I mean, I haven't seen any document that would — that could be interpreted as manipulating. I anticipate that someone might show me one of those, and then I'll study it and give an opinion, if I haven't seen it already.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, so — now let me go back. Let me go back. Did you know there was an allegation in this case that the internal documents from Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies indicated they knew important information about compensation and addiction that they did not reveal to the FTC in such a way that the FTC was misled into the adoption and maintaining the use of the FTC testing method? You're aware that that is a contention that is made in this case, correct?
A. I'm actually not aware of that.
Q. Okay. Are you aware that that contention has been made in other cases in which you were an expert ?
A. I can't remember whether that was -particularly the FTC? I mean, I think in Price-Miles there was some allegation about whether the Surgeon General was misled in that 1981 Surgeon General's Report. That's a little different than the Federal Trade Commission. But beyond that I can't go. I don't know -- I don't know all the allegations in each of the cases that I've been an expert in.
Q. Well, how did you arrive at what topics you would consider in your direct expert testimony?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: You mean in my report?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yes.
A. Is what the public health community knew.
Q. I'm sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt you. I know what -- you've told me before what your historical inquiry was. How did you choose those topics?
Q. Those were the topics that the tobacco companies' lawyers indicated that they wanted you to address in your expert report, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: In broad strokes, yes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Right. And so they could have told you, Dr. English, you're our only medical historian expert and we want you to address in an expert way, based on systematic study that satisfies the rigors of medical historical research, whether Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies manipulated the FTC by withholding important information from compensation. They could have asked you to do that inquiry and that's an inquiry you would have been capable of doing.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, they could have asked me. I'm not entirely sure that I have the expertise to do that in the sense that, if you're talking about scientific studies and information, I probably could — could do some of that. If you're talking about all the other possibilities that might exist, that would probably get out of my expertise.
Q. Okay. Now, I just realized I need to ask a question. Is the FTC -- is this, my graph 10, this orphan of my imagination, is it mis-graphed?
A. I think so.
Q. Because the FTC is a member of the public health community.
A. Yes. I think so. Especially in tobacco and in this particular issue because I think the Federal Trade Commission certainly worked in concert with the public health community in getting information about tar and nicotine out to the American public.
If anything, I would reverse the arrow from the public health community to FTC, but I really think the FTC is part of the public health community.
Q. Okay. I'm going to make a modification to this orphan of my imagination. I will draw a box around FTC, arrow, public health community, and put public health community on the box.
And what I'm attempting to do now,
Dr. English, is to put the public health — the FTC — within the public health community, but indicate what is substantially addressed in your expert report, which is the FTC's communication to other members of
the public health community.
A. I'd reverse the arrow. I mean, I think that it was the public health community that asked the FTC, persuaded the FTC, to take up — to essentially reverse its position on tar and nicotine in advertising in 1966, and then from that point on we're collaborating with the public health community.
Q. Okay. I'll mark out that arrow and I'll put the arrow the other way. Is that —
A. I think that -- I think it goes back and forth, but --
Q. There would be an arrow on both sides.
A. Arrow on both sides. But I think it's a bigger arrow the other way.
Q. Okay. And then I'm going to make another change to my Exhibit 10, which where it now says tobacco companies including Philip Morris manipulating the FTC, I'm going to add "and other members of the public health community."
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to — I mean, you're asking questions on a series of words contained within your Easter Island bubble. You then add words to the bubble after you've asked the questions.
MR. SURPRENANT: Well, but it's clear —
it's clear that I'm doing it. I've just called out that I'm doing it.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And this is obviously trial like. You can take this examination at trial. You build graphs all the time.
And I realize, Doctor — Dr. English -- that I have been leaving out a part of my question that I am now going to put into the question, which is, you have not made a study of the internal documents of the tobacco companies on the issue of compensation and the FTC testing method to determine if the tobacco industry, not only misled the FTC, but also misled the public health community by withholding important information about addiction and compensation.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, I — as I said, on systematic, no. I have seen many, many documents shown to me by attorneys, Plaintiffs' attorneys, about Philip Morris's knowledge of compensation. I have not seen any significant piece of information about compensation that was not already in the public health community's knowledge. In some ways the public health community had superior knowledge in many ways.
Q. Superior knowledge than?
A. It seems -MR. ROSENTHAL: Let him finish.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Oh, I'm sorry.
A. Seems to have had even greater knowledge than Philip Morris, at least in the documents that I've seen. So, you know, I simply cannot subscribe to the use of manipulating. I just haven't seen the evidence for that.
Q. All right. But there is a difference between saying the Plaintiffs' attorneys haven't provided you the evidence and what I believe we've established here today, which is you have not done — you do not have expert testimony, an expert opinion, on what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when it knew it, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to characterization.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I've said that I've not done in a systematic fashion, I've seen lots of documents about that and we just answered that, but, beyond that, I can't go.
Q. You told me earlier today that you did not have an expert opinion on what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when it knew it. That testimony was correct then and it's correct now, right ?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: That I have not made a systematic fashion — I do know something about it because I have been shown all those documents, but I have not made a systematic search, no.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. As a medical historian, unless you make a systematic search, you can have opinions, but they are not expert opinions, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, certainly, you know, I know a lot about the FTC and the public health community, so, you know, if I had seen some documents indicating manipulation, I might have an opinion about them, but, you're correct, I have not made a systematic judgment -- systematic research.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
sufficient to support an expert opinion by a medical historian of communications between the tobacco companies and the public health community, including the FTC and non-FTC constituents of the public health community, on the issue of compensation and addiction, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I thought that was the same question you just asked me before.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. No. My question -- it shows the beauty of these charts, despite their ungainly nature, I was asking about internal tobacco company documents. Now I'm changing it to communications between the tobacco companies and the public health community. You haven't made a systematic study of that either, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Again, I have not made a systematic study of all the communications between Philip Morris and the FTC or all the communications that Philip Morris may have had with the Surgeon General or the American Cancer Society. I don't — and, I mean, I've seen some documents, but I've never
seen any one that would come to the level of manipulation. I don't see any evidence of it, but, you're correct, I have not made a systematic -systematic study of communications between tobacco companies and members of the public health community.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay.
MR. ROSENTHAL: We've been going an hour.
If you're in a new section, do you want —
MR. SURPRENANT: Sure. Absolutely.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 2:41.
(Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 2:51.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. I drew a box around FTC and PHC, public health community, to reflect Dr. English's testimony that the FTC is actually within the community of the public health community, and then I put an arrow on both ends of the arrow, of the line between FTC and public health community, to reflect the testimony that there were communications each way. I drew these two lines and put "internal PM docs."
MR. ROSENTHAL: You also added "other members of the public health community."
MR. SURPRENANT: I also added "and other
members of the public health community" to again capture Dr. English's testimony that the FTC was a member of the public health community.
This is a new chart that I've just prepared. It addresses points we've been discussing.
(Exhibit No. 11 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. What I have at the top, and I'll show it to you in a moment, Dr. English, what the public health community knew and understood about compensation and when it knew it versus what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it.
Now, you have studied in a systematic way sufficient to allow you to reach expert opinions -strike that.
You believe, as an expert medical historian, that you have studied with sufficient rigor and sufficient consideration of relevant sources to reach a conclusion about what the public health community knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it, correct?
A. I think so, yes.
Q. Now, what you haven't done and what you do not have an expert opinion on is what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it. You've seen some documents that have been shown to you by Plaintiffs' attorneys in other cases, but you have not made a systematic study of that topic, and, therefore, you do not have expert opinions on that topic as a medical historian, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, let me just say how it's happened in other cases and you can say whether something like that might happen in this case. In other words, when I've been shown a document from Philip Morris, I'm asked an expert opinion about whether that document represents knowledge that was not generally available in the public health community.
In other words, I don't think I have to know -- do research on every possible document that Philip Morris had in order to be able to make -- have an opinion about a single document, usually one introduced by Plaintiffs, with a claim that it really is superior knowledge than what the public health
community is. I've been shown those documents, and then I would make -- have an opinion about whether the public health community actually knew this particular point. I mean, that's the way it's gone in the past. And I suspect that that's what may happen in this case, but I'm — I'm not certain about that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, if I have my hands on the wheel, it won't, okay? If I were to look in your report, if I were to ask you, Dr. English, can you point me in your report where you address in a systematic way sufficient to allow you to reach expert conclusions the topic, what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it, would there be a part of the report you could point me to?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: It would be that same paragraph. What did I say, 65?
MR. ROSENTHAL: 68.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. 6 8.
A. 68? It would be that — that particular paragraph.
Q. Is this a new paragraph on this report or is this paragraph appeared in other reports?
A. I believe it's appeared in other reports.
Q. Okay. Do you recall why you first inserted it into your report?
A. My recollection is that it covered the general issue that we're talking about here this afternoon, in that in many -- in some of the trials I've been in, I was thinking particularly of the Miles-Price one, I was asked questions about whether a particular Philip Morris document or Philip Morris study was, you know, how that fit into what the public health community knew, what was it -- did it show superior knowledge, no difference, and in a general way sort of covers that -- the issue of that.
Q. Okay. So am I correct that the sum and substance of your discussion of the topic of what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew or understood about compensation and when they knew it, the sum and substance, the totality of that discussion is in paragraph 68?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: That's, I believe, is the only place where I discuss it in the report.
Q. Okay. And so -A. But, I mean, the knowledge, I mean, comes from the documents, I mean, the knowledge is not actually in the paragraph.
Q. Right.
A. Okay.
Q. And so you say, on page 28, the last sentence of paragraph 68: I've reviewed documents identified by Plaintiffs in support of this allegation in previous litigation. "This allegation" being -strike that. Let me start that again.
The first sentence of paragraph 68 says, I'm aware that in previous litigation against these tobacco company defendants -- who does that refer to, Philip Morris?
A. Yes.
Q. And how do you say the corporate parent? I can never get it right. Altria?
A. Altria?
MR. ROSENTHAL: I think technically it's
Altria -MR. SURPRENANT: Is that a made-up name?
MR. SURPRENANT: Does it refer to anything in the real world or did some marketing person invent it?
MR. ROSENTHAL: The short answer is I don't
know.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I mean, what was -- didn't, like, they spend millions of dollars coming up with Cingular?
And remember when AT&T became Cingular and -MR. ROSENTHAL: Verizon is made up too.
It's a derivation of the Latin for truth or something like that.
THE WITNESS: So not horizon.
MR. SURPRENANT: Right. The phrase, the slogan of my law school is "in vino veritas." No, it's not. It does have "veritas," but I don't think it has "vino."
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Paragraph 68. I'm aware that in previous litigation against these tobacco defendants — tobacco company defendants — some plaintiffs have alleged that had the tobacco company defendants disclosed their knowledge about compensation in the 1970 's, the
conclusion of the 1981 Surgeon General Report would have been different.
So that's the conclusion we're talking about. And then to skip to the last paragraph, you say: I have reviewed documents identified by Plaintiffs in support of this allegation in previous litigation and am unaware of any Defendants internal study that reflects information not known to the public health community about compensation by increasing the number of cigarette smoked per day, the one form of compensation not taken into account by epidemiology.
Okay. So this kind of relates to what I'm talking about, but it's clearly different and much more narrow. And so I am correct that, in your report, you do not address in a systematic way that would allow you to reach conclusions of a medical historian what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: With the way I've tried to answer that question before, I've not made a systematic attempt. I have been asked to analyze
documents shown to me by Plaintiffs' attorneys and I do try to put it into the context that I did in that paragraph in my report and in the context that we talked about earlier.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, I take that into account.
A. Okay.
Q. I understand what you're saying,
Dr. English, but logically you cannot reach an expert conclusion as a medical historian about whether the public health community knew and understood everything Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew about compensation and that they knew about it at the same time because you don't have the antecedent expert opinion about what Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew and understood about compensation and when they knew it, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I'm not sure I entirely understand your question, but I do know what the public health community knew and understood about compensation. And as for whether Philip Morris knew anything different or anything better or more helpful, it's the same answer I've given -- I've tried to
give -- in a couple other issues — questions -- and that is I have seen lots of documents shown to me. I don't think I need to view every document that Philip Morris had about compensation to be able to ask -answer -- the question, again, as an expert in medical history about whether this particular document that I'm being shown would have changed in any material way the public health community's understanding about compensation.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you know who Dr. Burns is?
A. I do.
Q. Dr. Burns disagrees with you, doesn't he.
A. He does.
Q. Okay. Now, tobaccodocuments.org, that contains millions of documents, right?
A. I don't know that. That's my understanding, but we talked about that earlier.
Q. Now, if you wanted to form an independent expert opinion about what Philip Morris knew about compensation and when they knew it, that is something you certainly could do simply with the documents that are available on tobaccodocuments.org, correct?
THE WITNESS: I don't know if that's the occasion or not because I haven't gone there to know what their documents are.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. But you understand that what tobaccodocuments.org is, it's an archive that was created as part of the 1998 master settlement, and it contains millions of pages of internal public -internal tobacco — company -MR. ROSENTHAL: Nice ring tone.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. But, you know, if you have that and it goes off in a judge's presence in a courtroom, it will be in the last pocket you look in.
THE WITNESS: There is a message there.
MR. SURPRENANT: Turn it off. Let the record reflect I, once again, had Dr. English on the ropes and that call was actually from Mr. Rosenthal's secretary.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm not even going to dignify that with a response.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me go back to tobaccodocuments.org is an archive that contains as
complete a record as human ingenuity has been able to create of internal tobacco company documents. That's generally your understanding, correct?
A. I can't say —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: And I certainly can't —
(Cell phone.)
MR. SURPRENANT: This was actually my secretary. I talked to her about travel plans and I told her I would call her back.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Actually I want Dr. English to have the opportunity to fully answer since that went off in the middle of his answer.
MR. SURPRENANT: No, why don't we do this. Why don't you re-read the question, re-read the answer, and then you can finish your answer.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Okay.
(Record read.)
THE WITNESS: I certainly don't know that. I'm taking your representation. But particularly I have no idea whether there are studies on compensation or on the archive, whether it's their scientific studies, whether it's their scientific meetings, whether it has to do with perhaps some corporate
conversations. I just don't know what's in it so I can't make a conversation on that.
But I haven't studied everything, but I do feel comfortable evaluating documents that I'm shown, especially when the question is, is this information materially different than was already — that the — did the public health community already know those subjects.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I take it, it is your opinion that the publication of Monograph 13 in 2001 was when the public health community no longer believed that lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes were safer than higher tar and nicotine cigarettes, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't think that's quite what I say in my report. What I think what happened in Monograph 13 was that the public health community concluded that it could no longer recommend low tar and nicotine cigarettes to smokers as a third-tier recommendation.
In other words, before -- up until that point the primary message was don't smoke, stop if you are, last, third tier, was, if you're going to smoke,
smoke low tar. I think Monograph 13 took that third tier off the table.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Why? What's your understanding?
A. Took — the understanding that low tar and nicotine cigarettes were -- were — that it was -that it was a strategy for smokers. In other words, I think there was enough doubt at that point. But I don't think necessarily that everyone concluded that low-tar cigarettes didn't have some kind of health advantage. I think what they decided they couldn't make the recommendation. Because I think what we've seen in the last, you know, six, seven, eight years is people are continuing to study it. And so, I mean, I think there is still an interest in there. Whether it will come back as a recommendation at some point, I don't know. But currently now I don't know of any public health organization that recommends low-tar cigarettes to smokers who refuse to quit.
Q. And are you aware of any members of the public health community who believe the designation of "Light" as in Marlboro Light is misleading and causes public health concerns?
THE WITNESS: I think up until around Monograph 13 there wasn't any discussion about the term "Light" in this country. I think there was some in Canada and I believe there was some in Great Britain. I think since then there has been I see in Surgeon General's Reports and the like that there is a discussion about some concern about using those terms. And, of course, we know that Congress passed a law saying, you know, that those terms cannot be used until the FDA determines whether they have some validity. But up until then I don't see — I'm not sure I see any comment about the descriptors.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you know what Philip Morris believed "Lights" in Marlboro Lights would communicate to the average smoker or prospective smoker?
A. No.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Would it have any relevance to any expert opinion you hold if in fact Philip Morris believed that the designation "Lights" in Marlboro Lights would convey to the average smoker or prospective smoker a
health benefit versus smoking Marlboro Reds?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Certainly there is nothing I've studied, so I don't — I don't have an opinion on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Have you studied whether -- have you studied whether Marlboro Light cigarettes are actually riskier than Marlboro Reds because of compensation and the deeper and more frequent and more prolonged puffs that a compensating smoker takes?
A. In particular have I looked at Marlboro Light? No, I haven't done that.
Q. Have you looked at Light cigarettes in general along those lines?
A. Okay. Let's go back to your question about have I looked at --
Q. Whether Light cigarettes are actually riskier from a health perspective due to the compensating smoker taking more frequent and deeper puffs.
A. You know, the public health community -- I have to answer the question, what did the public health community believe. And I think there has
always been a concern that some smokers could compensate and get more tar and nicotine from low-tar cigarettes, and — but whether -- I certainly haven't come to the -- seen them come to the conclusion that all smokers get more dangerous substances from smoking low-tar cigarettes. I just -- I haven't — I haven't come across that kind of conclusion.
Q. Okay. I'm going to be kind of switching topics kind of back and forth here. There is, as I referred to before, there is an agreement among the parties that what would otherwise be allowable expert testimony or lines of inquiry, the parties have agreed on both sides that they won't do that, they won't engage.
And one of the things that I don't intend to examine you on, Dr. English, is communications you have had with the Philip Morris lawyers except to the extent, if any, that you have relied on those communications in preparing your expert report or reaching conclusions.
And I just call that out because we're going to be kind of around that topic, and please let Mr. Rosenthal have sufficient time to object, and, if he chooses, instruct you not to answer if he thinks my
question goes over the line.
But I don't think this one does because I think the way I phrase it you necessarily will have relied on, I think — okay. Let me just ask the question.
Of the information that you have relied on in reaching the expert opinions contained in your expert report, what information was supplied to you by tobacco companies or lawyers working for tobacco companies ?
Now, let me kind of, before you answer that question, Dr. English, just observe that the present report goes back a number of years and has been through a number of iterations, and so I'm talking about over the trajectory or the evolution of what is the expert report that I have marked for identification as -MR. ROSENTHAL: I believe it's 7.
MR. SURPRENANT: — as Exhibit 8.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Does any of that material, was that originally provided to you by the tobacco companies or their lawyers?
you may answer.
THE WITNESS: Well, we almost would have to go through source by source. I mean, the vast majority of material in the report I found along -along the way. Sometimes, though, I request that a tobacco company attorney send me the materials, especially if they aren't available at Duke in the library. And so I do get material sometimes from them. And from time to time, you know, a small percentage of the time they send me materials they want me to look at and consider. But we would almost have to go through — and I'm not sure that, if we did it today, I would be able to tell you exactly how I obtained, you know, the information about every subject there or on my reliance list. But if you want — do you have a question about a particular document ?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. No, I was just asking you in general.
A. Okay. I can try, but I'm not sure at this point I would be able to say, but, as a general rule, the vast majority of the ones I identified, but some of the ones I actually physically get hold of using the attorneys as a document procurement facility.
Q. Right. Let me tell you where I'm going. Either later on today -- and I have a feeling that we will continue tomorrow but that we will be done before lunch and maybe by midmorning, but one of the things I do want to do is to go through your report. I'm not going to go through every line. That would take us up through 6 p.m. tomorrow, and I'm not going to torture either of us in that fashion. But I will be asking you about how you learned of particular documents. I won't do that in that comprehensive way. But let me try to get at it at least a little differently.
As I understand from some of your earlier depositions, and I think you referred to it here, you have a chronology of documents that relate to the tobacco issues you've looked at, correct?
A. Uh-huh, I do.
Q. And you write notes on the documents as you're examining them, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And then when you draft your report you essentially get the documents out and kind of string together, at least in part, put together the notes you had previously written on the documents; is that correct?
Q. Okay. And you started working for Kirkland -- Kirkland -- Arnold & Porter in 1988, your first retention, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Worked for a couple of years and you had a
file.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And has that file —
MR. ROSENTHAL: You can answer yes or no.
THE WITNESS: Yes. Yes. I'm sorry.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Have you kind of continued to build on that original file?
A. I have built on it, but I've also weeded as time goes just because of space.
Q. Okay. How big is your chronology file?
A. It is two shelves, floor to ceiling shelves, and then a number of file cabinet drawers. I'm not sure how many linear feet it is.
Q. So you have two floor to ceiling bookcases full of documents. And how are the documents housed, in binders or boxes?
A. Redwelds.
Q. In Redwelds. Okay. And then you have some additional file cabinet drawers?
A. Yes.
Q. And so that is a document repository that you have been building for two years, 1988 through 1990, '91, and then from 2000 to the present; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And some of those documents have been obtained by the work of people under your direction and supervision, such as paralegals, correct?
A. Yes, but in that case only in the City of Missouri case.
Q. Okay. The City of Missouri case was the singular time you used paralegals to do research?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And have you had research assistants?
A. I've had the one that I mentioned earlier.
Q. Okay. And some of the time, in terms of that document repository, it would contain documents that you knew about but did not have ready access to, so you asked the tobacco company, Philip Morris lawyers or the tobacco company lawyers, to provide
you, but it was really at your request. They were just giving you data you knew about and asked for, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. But occasionally they have sent you documents and said, in sum or substance, Dr. English, we'd like you to take a look at these.
A. Sure.
Q. And at this point in time, if we were to go through your expert report and ask with respect to every exhibit you list, in some cases you would not be able to remember how it got into your document repository.
A. I think that's a fair summary.
Q. Okay. I apologize for switching between my sight glasses and my reading glasses. I tried using, what are they called -MR. ROSENTHAL: Bifocals?
MR. SURPRENANT: Not bifocals.
THE WITNESS: Graduated.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. And I was dizzy for three weeks.
THE WITNESS: You have to persist. You have to persevere.
MR. SURPRENANT: I was dizzy for three weeks. I was tired of being dizzy. But what has happened is, I'm going to have to solve this problem because, if I tried a case like this, the jury would hate me because the jury pays attention to little tics like that.
There is actually something called True-Focus. They are relatively ugly glasses. They have a switch right here and they are like a camera. And you can switch them to length and distance and reading and anywhere in between. But that would be even a more gruesome tic for the jury to get distracted by.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I think you may agree or disagree on some of these points. Let me see.
Would you agree that the availability of information to the public health community does not equate to the public health community necessarily understanding that information?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: You're talking about a particular piece of information or this is some sort of global statement about —
Q. Well, let's start off —
A. I mean, is this like it's available somewhere in the universe and -- I mean, I'm not sure exactly how this applies to this case, but could you --
Q. Fair enough, Dr. English. Let me ask that. As a general, theoretical matter, the fact that information is available to the public health community in the United States does not mean that it is necessarily understood by every member of the public health community or understood in the same way, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think I agree with most of that. Of course, you know, in no public health decision does everyone agree, so that's sort of a standard, you know. There is always some — there is always an outlier.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. In any of your work as a medical historian have you attempted to address what information was available to the -- to just the general public?
THE WITNESS: I haven't really -- I mean, let me put it this way, I certainly haven't tried to understand what the public understood about these issues. I mean, I certainly read a lot of Gallup polls and all that, but I certainly know what -- what the public health community tried to communicate, some of that's in the report, about this information about the benefits of low-tar cigarettes, but actually what the public took away from that information I don't know.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me follow that up and try to flesh it out a little bit. I was a smoker off and on in the late '70s until April 1st, 1988. I smoked a low-tar cigarette, Merits. I understood that it had health benefits over non-Light cigarettes. And prior to getting on this case a few months ago I would have said that I thought it was common knowledge that Light cigarettes were not as dangerous as full-flavored cigarettes. And I would have never heard of Monograph 13 or the FTC testing method or compensation. And I take it that illustrates that there is a big difference with respect to the public of what information is, quote/unquote, available and
what any individual member of the public actually knows about it, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think that's a good — a good assessment. I mean, I don't know what individual smokers thought about this. You clearly had an opinion that you now remember two decades later. I'm not sure, you know — there are people who study memories and what, you know, how valid your memory actually is -- we're not going to get into that -- but there are people who study that as well, but that's just not something that I've studied.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. No. I mean, my -- my belief, what I just said, is that it was obvious that a Light cigarette had health benefits over regular cigarettes, that's something I would have believed in 2009, in early 2010 .
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And so I think with respect to the public we would agree that there is a big difference with respect to the public about what information is available and what any individual member of the public understands and what he or she has incorporated into
their knowledge base, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I have not studied it in consumer perceptions.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Let me kind of continue on the topic that we have been on and addressed several times today. With respect to the public health community, I take it you — well, do you agree that awareness of information does not equate to acceptance of the information?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Are you talking about within the public health community?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yes.
A. I suppose that they could be aware of an idea and not accept it. As a general principle, I can accept that.
Q. Do you know whether the public health community has considered whether global warming, climate change, poses public health risks?
A. You know, that's certainly not something I've studied.
Q. I mean, certainly there is a lot of information available about climate change and global warming, but at least ostensibly there is members of the public who don't agree that it poses the risk that other people agree with, correct?
A. Now we're talking about global warming?
Q. Yeah.
A. But we were talking about the public health community. There is a difference there. But, I mean, I'm sure that, yes, there appear to be quite a lot of opinions about the causes, whether global warming exists at all, and what the consequences might be.
Q. I think this is a question that I can ask you, though, again, I would give Mr. Rosenthal time to object, if he inaccurately believes it trenches on areas I shouldn't be asking about. I think it is only lawyers who use "trenching" as a verb.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I've never heard anyone use "trenching" as a verb.
MR. SURPRENANT: To trench on? That means
to invade.
THE WITNESS: To slog?
MR. SURPRENANT: No, slog is different. Trench on means to improperly invade --
MR. ROSENTHAL: I would use the word
"encroach."
MR. SURPRENANT: Encroach.
MR. ROSENTHAL: But I've never heard "trench." Anyway, ask away.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Would you have expected -- and I'm not asking for communications. I'm asking for your subjective expectations. Would you have expected the Philip Morris lawyers, if they knew of a Philip Morris document that, fairly read, contradicted the opinions in your expert report, would you have expected them to have shown you that document so you would be aware of it?
MR. ROSENTHAL: I object to form, but you
can answer.
THE WITNESS: I would hope that they would have shown me that document.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. The FTC test does not measure taste, correct?
A. Taste?
THE WITNESS: I don't — I don't believe so,
no.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Can you think of any Light product where you get more of the bad stuff in the Light than you get in the regular if you consume the same amount?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form and
competency.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I can do that. I was thinking, with diet soda, you get more of aspartame, which some people say might be more harmful than high fructose corn syrup, but that really does get me into an area where I don't have any opinion.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Like Light beer, that has less of the bad stuff than full-flavored, than non-Light beer, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objections.
THE WITNESS: I don't know what's in Light
beer.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Now, I take it in all the cases, 20 to 25, that you've been retained as an expert witness, you have not read the deposition testimony of any Philip
Morris employee or executive, correct?
A. I don't think so, but I -- I can't be 100%
sure.
Q. Now, why haven't you made a systematic study of the depositions that have been taken of Philip Morris executives in the tobacco cases in order to gain a real broad and deep insight into what Philip Morris knew and when it knew what it knew on the issue of smoking and health?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What my task was was looking at the scientific community and the public health community. I don't put Philip Morris executives in that category. And I haven't looked at them.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you have an expert understanding of what test Philip Morris did on compensation prior to launching Marlboro Lights?
A. I'm not — I don't know.
Q. Do you know when Philip Morris launched Marlboro Lights?
A. I believe it was 1971.
Q. Okay. Have you looked at internal Philip Morris documents about marketing and advertising for
Marlboro Lights and packaging of Marlboro Lights and what messages Philip Morris was trying to communicate to the consuming public?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form, compound.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Have you ever heard of the term of "Light" cigarettes being referred to as a health assurance product?
A. I think in one of the documents I've been shown there may have been that phrase in there, but, beyond that, I can't -- I can't go any further.
Q. And you don't have any understanding or information or knowledge about whether or not Philip Morris developed and marketed Light, Marlboro Lights, as a health assurance product because of concerns that people without a health assurance cigarette alternative available would otherwise quit or attempt to quit?
A. I don't — I don't have an opinion on that.
Q. Do you have opinion either as a pediatrician or as a medical historian whether nicotine is addictive? I think you do.
A. I think I've already mentioned that, you
know, I think -- you know, I follow the public health community on this, and they have determined that nicotine is addicting, and so I accept that.
Q. Medically what kind of chemical is nicotine?
A. I believe it's an alkaloid.
Q. It's an alkaloid? And is it a stimulant or depressant or both?
A. I think it's — it's a stimulant. I suspect that there is -- idiosyncratic reaction in that some people may experience nicotine differently.
Q. I —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Were you actually done with your answer?
THE WITNESS: What I'm saying is I'm not sure I can categorize it for all people who smoke, but -- that's getting a bit far from my -- I mean, I was an undergraduate chemistry major, but that's been a long time ago.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Oh, I see what Mr. Rosenthal said. Were you actually done with your answer.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Yes. I thought it was one where you were talking over each other.
MR. SURPRENANT: No, it's called stepping on an answer, and we have mostly avoided that today. You have witnesses that you say, I'll try not to step on your answer and please don't answer my question before I'm finished even if you know what I'm going to ask, and they will do that all day long.
Can you put my next question before I say it? Oh, yeah. Okay. After that repartee, where were we?
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I was just wondering, I think I understand that alcohol is both a stimulant and a depressant in the sense that it stimulates you when you first begin drinking, but, then, if you continue to drink or after a period of time, it then turns into a depressant. Is that incorrect?
A. Could be.
Q. Oh, okay. Do you have any understanding, either as a medical historian or as a pediatrician, how a addicted smoker typically satisfies his or her addiction over the course of a day? In other words, they wake up, they smoke cigarettes right away.
A. What I do know, as a medical historian, is that's something that the public health community has
studied. And I'm thinking particularly in the case of some of the studies in the 1970's beginning with Ashton and then Michael Russell was the notion that, during their waking hours anyway, a smoker sought out a particular level of nicotine and then tried to maintain that level through the course of the day.
Q. In other words, you'd smoke and attain it, and then it would begin to drift down and you would smoke — is that the idea?
A. In a rough way. I'm not -- but basically trying to maintain some sort of nicotine level.
Q. Okay. Let me now turn to your report. If I could direct your attention to paragraph 5, you state there:
I have extensively researched the history of the development of scientific knowledge regarding the relationship between smoking and serious disease and the public health community's response to the evidence linking smoking to fatal disease, such as lung cancer.
As part of that history I've specifically examined the public health and scientific communities' consideration of the reductions in tar and nicotine yields as a possible means of reducing the risk of cigarette smoking.
Now, I am correct that, although you have extensively researched the topics you've described, you have never published on this, on these topics, correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. And all of this extensive research you have done has been as an expert witness retained by the tobacco -- by a tobacco company or companies, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Much of it. I mean, the tobacco and smoking is a big part of 20th century medicine, and that's a course I teach. So parts of this research is part of my general teaching, but you're correct in saying that most of the detailed research I've done has been as a medical history consultant.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. You teach 20th century medicine?
A. Yes.
Q. And to undergraduates or medical students?
A. Undergraduates.
Q. At Duke.
A. At Duke.
A. I don't have a chapter. I have a class on smoking.
Q. You have a class on smoking. And how do you lecture, from notes or PowerPoint —
A. I never use a PowerPoint. I lecture from
notes.
Q. I see. And you teach — so how many -- in your class on 20th century medicine, how many -- how many sessions do you have in a semester approximately?
A. How many times does the class meet?
Q. Yeah.
A. Twenty-eight times.
Q. And do they meet with you 28 times?
A. Yes.
Q. So you teach that class 28 times.
A. Yeah. It's —
Q. On 28 occasions?
A. Yeah, 14 weeks, two classes a week.
Q. And one of the 28 days -- is one of the 28 days devoted solely to smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. And could you summarize for me what the substance of your lecture is to students in your 20th century American -- I mean -- medical history class?
A. Well, we talk a little bit about the development of the cigarette. That's important for Duke University because our founder was -- made at least part of his fortune dealing with the development of cigarettes. Then we talk about the accumulation of knowledge about smoking and health risks, talk about the first Surgeon General's Report. I sometimes show them a video clip from the Edward R. Murrow, "See It Now," TV show in the 1950's.
Q. When he's smoking all the time?
A. He was smoking all the time. And I do that partly because they haven't seen what television in 1950's was like and also because, you know, he tries to seek out, you know, what the opinions were about smoking and health in 1955. Do the Surgeon General's Report, and then we talk about what happened after the Surgeon General's Report. And so we talk about the public health campaign. And usually then I sort of ask them, can they tell me about the dangers of cigarette smoking and list them on the board, and it determines that they pretty much know what the public health community wants them to know about the dangers of cigarette smoking. And we talk a little bit about the low-tar cigarettes. We talk about addiction. We
talk a number -- about a number of substances. I also give some information about the number of Americans who smoked and how those numbers have changed over time.
Q. Do any of your students who list -- do they come up and list it on the board?
A. No.
Q. Oh, okay. I told you I went to my 25th law school reunion. They have these cool chalkboards where they are on rollers and so you can roll it up real high and you have a chalkboard here and you have one up there you can't reach, but then you reach and pull it down, so you can have -- you double the amount of chalkboard space. It's great.
Do you use chalkboard or white board?
A. Depends on the classroom I'm in. I prefer slate boards.
Q. Black or green?
A. They are all black.
Q. Didn't they used to be green?
A. I suspect they were painted if they were
green.
Q. I grew up with green blackboards.
Q. Do some of the students who identify the dangers of smoking identify themselves as smokers?
A. You know, I ask them sometimes to raise their hands about that, and no students actually raise their hands.
Q. Do you think you don't have any cigarette smokers at Duke?
A. No, I don’t think that at all.
Q. Why do you think they are not raising their
hands ?
A. I think there are -- it’s become such a socially unfavored activity that I suspect a number of my students don’t want me to know that they smoke.
Q. Who was the founder of Duke who made his fortune or some of it off tobacco?
A. James B. Duke. The university is actually named after his grandfather, but he was one of the — one of the people who began using machines to roll cigarettes.
Q. Was he associated with any particular tobacco company?
A. American Tobacco.
Q. I see. I direct your attention to paragraph 8, consensus that low-yield cigarettes
reduce the risk of lung cancer started with the public health service, quote, technical report, closed quote, in 1966 and was reaffirmed by the Surgeon General's Report of 19 81.
Now let me focus on "technical reports." Do you know by measure — the way you measure tar, I take it, is by milligram per cigarette?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
A. You mean in 1966.
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. Is that how it's measured today?
A. Well, sometimes they can give ingredients and things like that, but in 1966 it was done by milligrams per cigarette.
Q. And nicotine is also measured by milligram per cigarette?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And do you know in 1966 when the technical report was issued what a low-yield cigarette was -- what was considered to be a low-yield cigarette as measured by milligrams of tar and of nicotine?
THE WITNESS: What the public health community knew in 1966 was that there appeared to be a dose-response relationship, which means that the less tar, less disease. So they hadn't gotten to the point where — that they used necessarily the term "lower tar . "
So what they were determining here in 1966 was that, based on the knowledge of a dose-response curve, that any reduction would be better than, from a disease point of view, than a cigarette that had a higher -- so it's a long way around saying they hadn't quite come up with a designation yet of, you know, below a certain number was considered low. It was that anything lower was better than anything higher.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. What tar levels would you get in the 1960's from an unfiltered cigarette?
A. Well, you know, before the FTC Method, of course, these were being measured by organizations like "Reader's Digest" and "Consumer Reports," and I think they had cigarettes that would get a tar, you know, into the 40rs milligrams, and then they had some that were considerably lower than that as well. And then nicotine is, you know, usually considered to be a
fixed, you know, component of tobacco, and so it would be proportionately lower as well.
Q. I'm correct, am I not, that — well, do you know whether or not the tobacco used in a Marlboro Light is exactly the same tobacco in a Marlboro Red?
A. I don't know that.
Q. Do you know what the differences are between a Marlboro Light and a Marlboro Red?
A. You mean differences in the FTC rating of them or do you mean differences in the actual cigarette?
Q. Differences in the actual cigarette.
A. No.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Could we pause one second?
I just want to look at two questions ago on the screen.
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the end of Tape 4. Going off the record at 3:49. (Proceedings recessed.)
VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the beginning of Tape 5, Volume I, in the deposition of Dr. Peter English.
On the record at 3:59.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Let me ask you about paragraph 8. And when you say a consensus that low-yield cigarettes reduced
the risk of lung cancer started with Public Health Services Technical Report, that consensus was a consensus that, in your view, was shared by the public health community.
A. Yes.
Q. I mean, it wasn't like a global, universal consensus.
A. No. I'm talking about the public health community, yes.
Q. Now, I have -- I've only asked you questions about paragraphs 5 and paragraphs 8, but, as we go through this report, one of the things that I'm going to ask you is to call out any discussion that the public health community was aware that the -aware of the role of nicotine addiction in causing compensatory smokers to smoke in such a way as to keep generally consistent levels of nicotine when they switched from a higher to a lower-yield cigarette.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Hold on for a second. You can ask questions. He can answer questions. I'm not sure you can have a pending question hanging out through the entire examination of the report in addition to the specific questions you're asking about.
MR. SURPRENANT: No, I was just calling out that I will be asking that question as I now will.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Okay. That's a different
issue.
MR. SURPRENANT: Yeah. I was just providing rules of the road, as it were.
THE WITNESS: Now, there is a section in the report that deals with that. Did you want to just go to that section and do that or —
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, let me first ask my question I was going to ask and then we'll do that. Okay.
I take it paragraph 9 — in paragraphs 6 through 11 you set forth in summary and explained below your conclusions, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Under the heading "Conclusions."
A. Yes.
Q. And nowhere in your conclusions do you address in sum or substance that the public health community was aware that a compensatory smoker would smoke lower-tar cigarettes in such a fashion, unconsciously or consciously, to derive comparable levels of nicotine once they switched to lower tar and
nicotine cigarettes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, when we get to that section, you'll see that, but, as I tried to, I guess, maybe it was this morning or maybe it was early this afternoon, is my view of compensation it inherently has nicotine as a component. I mean, that's why people change their smoking behavior and the public health community — I don't know of anyone who is proposing that people change their smoking behavior for any other reason than for nicotine.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. There is a -- there is a -- well, let me see. You and I can agree that there was discussion about and knowledge in the public health community about compensation, correct?
A. With a certain — yes, there is a lot of dis cus sion.
Q. Okay. And there was discussion that a compensatory smoker might obtain higher levels of tar and nicotine than measured by the FTC METHOD because of the manner in which they smoked, correct?
A. Yes. Certainly that's what — the public health community.
Q. And it is your testimony that inherent in the concept of a compensatory smoker is the smoker is compensating how he smokes because of the role of nicotine addiction. Is that your testimony?
A. That's my understanding of what the -- of how the public health community viewed this issue, you know, in the '70s and '80s.
Q. But I am adding a different and additional component, is that, not only would smokers compensate and not only would they compensate because of nicotine addiction, but that compensation, as a general matter, would reach, perhaps not exact, but comparable levels of nicotine addiction so the smoker would get comparable levels of nicotine and tar in the lowered tar and nicotine cigarette as they did with the higher one they switched from. That's what I'm looking for.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Is that a statement or a
question?
MR. SURPRENANT: That's a question.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. I'm looking for discussion, not merely of compensation, that compensation is driven by nicotine addiction and that the average smoker of a Light cigarette will unconsciously compensate to derive
essentially compensatory levels of nicotine.
A. Well, I would direct you to section 7 of my
report.
Q. Okay. And what page is that?
A. 18.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm still not sure what the question is. To the extent there is a question, I object to the form.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. I'm looking for that. We know what I'm looking for, and so point out where that topic is addressed in section 7.
A. Paragraph 48, for example, British researchers conducted a study of 34 smokers finding that, quote, under varying conditions smokers of low-nicotine cigarettes had a higher puff frequency and drew into their mouths nearly the same amount of nicotine as smokers of high-nicotine cigarettes. The researchers concluded that these findings are, quote, are consistent with the possibility that there exists an optimum nicotine dose for a given activity that smokers unconsciously modify their smoking patterns to obtain -- in an attempt to obtain this dose.
that out to my attention. That's footnote 55. That is the British Medical Journal, correct?
A. I believe, yes, that's where that article appeared.
Q. Okay. Now, this is a study of 34 smokers, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now, is this anecdotal or are you saying that this report in 1970 in the British Medical Journal was widely known and widely accepted in the public health community?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I believe it's widely quoted. I don't know how -- how broadly accepted it was. Certainly when people do articles dealing with nicotine research in the 1970's, it's often there as an important initial study.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Does the word "addiction" appear
here?
A. I don't see the word "addiction" there, no. Q. And didn't you tell me earlier that the public health community did not conclude or reach consensus on addiction until much later time than
A. Well, certainly the Surgeon General concluded in 1988 that cigarette smoking was addictive. There were alternative hypotheses going forth that cigarette smoking was driven entirely by a nicotine addiction. And that was Michael Russell. He is quoted in the Surgeon General's Report as one of the primary researchers. And certainly people, I think, who were in the field of compensation studies accepted the notion of people, at least in the 1970's and 1980 's, that people smoked to titrate the level to a certain level, which is another way of — I mean, addiction is a term, which is in many ways not a scientific term. It's a -- it's a term that has both sort of common-sense meanings to it as well as more scientific meanings to it. But I think most of the compensation people thought that people smoke cigarettes to get a certain level of nicotine, which is -- which is a form of addiction. So, therefore, if they were shown — if they were smoking a cigarette that had a lower level of nicotine in it, then they would smoke that more intensively to get the higher level of nicotine in their system.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you know if the British researchers who conducted this study in 1970, do you know whether or not they considered nicotine addictive?
A. I don't know whether they ever used that term or not.
Q. Okay. And then let's go to paragraph 49. This is Dr. Michael Russell -A. Uh-huh.
Q. -- speaking at the second World Conference on Smoking and Health in 1971. And you quote him as saying, I know of two recent studies in this country that have shown cigarette smokers tend to modify their puff rate to maintain a certain level of nicotine intake. If you give them low-nicotine cigarettes, they tend to puff harder to achieve the same intake of nicotine and thereby possibly take in more tar.
Oh, and that you're citing to the proceedings of the second World Conference on Smoking and Health in London.
A. Yes.
Q. Now, with respect to either the report in footnote 55 or the report in footnote 56, do you recall how you came to be aware of that document?
A. I mean, I came across Ashton in my research.
British Medical Journal is easily obtainable, so I'm sure I got it in Durham. World Conferences, you know, that -- I have proceedings for a number of the world conferences in my collection.
Q. Okay. Now, do you know if Dr. Russell at the time he wrote that believed that nicotine was addictive?
A. Well, he was certainly a leader in the -that nicotine titration theory of -- in fact on both sides of the Atlantic. He was British, but his work was well-known in the United States. So I think he, you know, believed that smokers smoked to get a constant level of nicotine in their blood. I can't remember whether -- I think in some of his articles he may well use the term "addiction" to it, but I think throughout his work his view was that smokers smoked to get a constant level of nicotine into their blood.
Q. Okay. Then let's read paragraph 50. The Surgeon General in his 1972 report also considered the hypothesis that smokers sought a constant level of nicotine. An alternative point of view held by some is that smoking behavior is a response to the need to reach a certain nicotine level and that lowering the amount of nicotine available from a cigarette may
result in an increase in the number of cigarettes smoked, the depth of inhalation, or the number of puffs in order to maintain an accustomed level. Such an increase in smoking might result in an increased inhalation of other hazardous substances in the smoke, thereby potentially negating the effect of reducing the amount available in each cigarette.
Now, do you know what the view was that this view is an alternative to?
A. Yes. In that section of the Surgeon General's Report, I believe the Surgeon General was talking about whether a lower-tar cigarette would have clear health benefits, and so the -- this asterisk comment was the alternative view was that smokers might compensate, and, therefore, not get the benefits of low tar.
Q. And we know that in 1972 this was not the consensus view because the Surgeon General calls out that this alternative point of view was held by some, correct ?
A. Right.
Q. And was there a consensus in the alternative point of view that some of these people had, i.e., that there were clear health benefits from
smoking low-tar cigarettes?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm confused, but let me see if I can answer.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Let me withdraw the question. Strike it.
The consensus report in the 1972 -- the consensus view that the Surgeon General reported in 1972 is that there was clear health benefits from lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes, correct?
A. I think the general view, and I think that's in my conclusions there, of the public health community is that they believe that low-tar cigarettes had health benefits despite the fact that some smokers could compensate. But this is an early phrase. They had a few studies that were — human studies — at this point in 1972 that were -- thinking particularly of the Bross study, exciting studies that would indicate that there was less risk in filtered cigarettes.
The difference of moving to animal to human studies, I think, was a big step for the public health community, but they are saying right here, as I think they said in the public health community and members
of it said back in the '50s was that, generally speaking, it's a dose-response curve, so less exposure, less disease, but only if smokers don't compensate. They didn't use the word "compensate" in the 1950's, they used other phrasing, but the fact is that the public health community believed that low-tar cigarettes had some health benefit. They made that recommendation even though there was the concern about compensation, which got increasingly more detailed throughout their understanding as time went on.
Q. Okay. So the Surgeon General in 1972, he did not yet consider cigarette smoking and nicotine addictive, correct?
A. Well, you know, he didn't use — he didn't use that term, no, I don't believe. I'd have to see in the whole report again, but -- but I don't want to be caught up too much on what the public health community viewed about the nature of cigarette smoking. Because whether you're talking in 1950 or 1940, 1960, 1980's, cigarette smoking is hard to quit. There is no question about it. Some people use the term "addiction." Some people use different terms.
The Surgeon General did opine in the, you know, in 1964, but what they said was it's hard to
quit, some people can't quit, and the substance involved is nicotine. And, you know, that's sort of what -- that's what our opinion is now. Sometimes we actually use the term "addiction," but the point is that cigarette smoking in 2010 is hard to quit, and the public health community still thinks that the substance within cigarette smoking that makes it hard to quit is nicotine.
Q. Now, you're a pediatrician, correct? You for a long time, many years, were a pediatrician.
A. I am.
Q. And you are now a retired pediatrician.
A. That is correct.
Q. Okay. I'm correct, am I not, that teenagers, one of the reasons they occasionally engage in irrational or immature behavior, is not only they're relatively inexperienced, but that their neurodevelopment isn't complete, correct?
A. That's certainly one of the ideas about that. I think it's probably more complicated than that, but that's one of the ideas, yes.
Q. Okay. And so teenagers and pre-teens, you know, they often find cigarette smoking glamorous, correct?
A. You know, that gets into, you know, what -smoking perception, and that gets out of my field of expertise.
Q. Well, I can remember when I was eight years old going down in the basement and getting a glass of water and a pencil and pretending I was drinking whiskey and smoking. Now —
A. And your point?
Q. Kids will find that behavior — it's predictable. We earlier said 1 in 5 high school students smoke, right?
A. It may even be higher than that.
Q. Right. And they do that despite, you know, the fact that advertising for cigarettes has been restricted, correct?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. That the warning labels are on there.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And Philip Morris -- you would expect that Philip Morris -- strike that. You're also aware of surveys that said children under six had a 96 recognition of Joe Camel, the same as Mickey Mouse?
A. It's interesting because my current students don't know who Joe Camel is. I asked them that question.
Q. Right. Because the advertisement hasn't run for a while.
A. Right.
Q. But Philip Morris has to understand that immature middle school and high school students who are underage are going to smoke and are going to get addicted before they can make a mature decision about smoking and they are going to be addicted and it 1s going to be very hard for them to stop, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don’t know what Philip Morris knows on that subject.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Do you think it would be possible they could not know those facts?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I just haven’t studied it, so I don't want to make a comment on that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, do you believe that it's appropriate to manufacture and market cigarettes knowing that 1 in
5 or more underaged people who are unable to make mature decisions about whether they want to smoke or not are going to be addicted before they reach the age of adulthood?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form,
foundation.
THE WITNESS: I'm not a marketing expert. I don't have any comments to say about that.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And then paragraph 51, we turn to Dr. Russell, a letter to the editor in the British Medical Journal, and then a research Monograph 17 in 1977 .
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Do you know how widely viewed — first of all, he doesn't mention nicotine addiction, correct?
A. Well —
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: We're quibbling a little bit here because he doesn't use the word "addiction" in this particular quote, but, again, he's talking about compensating to maintain a level of nicotine in the blood, which is one of the characteristics, I think, that many people would consider as evidence of
addiction. But I don't want to quibble on terms, but I think it's — you seem to be very fixed on the word "addiction" maybe more than the scientific community was in the 1970's. They were interested in explaining what was driving the behavior of compensation, which, as they -- I think these examples show their understanding was that what was driving the compensation was the quest of the smoker, unconsciously, to maintain a level of nicotine in the blood during waking hours, of course.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Yeah. No, I am -- I am interested in addiction and the role that plays in compensation.
I'm explicitly interested in it. And I didn't think I was going to find an explicit statement and we haven't so far. But I understand your point, Dr. English, is you're saying, Surprenant, you're overly focused on the word "addiction," it's more or less in here, and you and I disagree, but that's fine. We can proceed.
Now, do you know how widely shared Dr. Russell's views were as stated here in 1975 and 1977?
A. His view about nicotine were widely viewed, known, in the public health community, and I think his
understanding of what drove compensation was commonly held.
Q. Have you -- is that an anecdotal view or do you have an expert view on that?
A. That's my opinion. That's an expert opinion.
Q. But in 1972 the Surgeon General referred to the substance of what Dr. Russell was stating as an alternative view, correct, held by some?
A. Yeah.
Q. So I take it there was no consensus around this point in the mid '70s in the public health community.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, we're getting into the point, how public health consensus are made on a given topic. Certainly over the course of the 1970 ' s I think this notion of compensating to maintain a level of nicotine grew in its acceptance. I don't know that I can actually give you a date when that happened, but the public health community understood that compensation could exist, and the only explanation I've ever seen about compensation, what drives compensation, is that of nicotine.
Q. Okay. Now, do you think it is pretty likely that in each of the time periods that we've covered so far — 1950's, 1970, '71, '72, '75, '77 — it would be a trivial matter for me to obtain something from the tobacco industry or the Tobacco Institute condemning the statements we've been discussing as being unsubstantiated?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form, foundation.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry. First of all, Russell didn't start publishing until the 1970's, and so something earlier than that -- you can't condemn something that hasn't happened yet.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Well, I think we -- maybe my question was imprecise. You start off talking in 1950 in paragraph 47.
A. But I thought, you know — maybe I'm — okay. About compensation, well, again, I have not studied what the tobacco companies' public announcement, so I don't have an opinion on that.
Q. Yeah, but we know that in the Frank Statement published in 1954, Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies, assured the readers that
there was no consensus and no proof that smoking was addictive or caused health issues, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not — we have to have —
I haven't looked at the Frank Statement for a long time, so I don't know. We would have to look at the wording again of the Frank Statement.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. I'm going to go to another exhibit, which I will make as we proceed in open air.
MR. ROSENTHAL: 12.
MR. SURPRENANT: Exhibit 12.
(Exhibit No. 12 marked for identification and attached hereto.)
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. What we're going to have, and I'll show the videographer when it's complete, we have on the right "public," and then we have to the left and up above "public health community." And then below that we have "Big Tobacco."
MR. ROSENTHAL: As opposed to small tobacco? BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. And that is tobacco companies and their agents, including Tobacco Institute. Now, one of the
things that you believe, Dr. English --
VIDEOGRAPHER: Do you want to show -MR. SURPRENANT: I'll show it to you when I'm done because it may morph.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. One of the things that you have said is that the public health community knew and understood certain information about lowered tar and nicotine cigarettes and made recommendations to the public, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now, ultimately in this case what we're concerned about isn't what the public health community understood or knew. We're concerned with what the public understood and knew, and, most specifically, the class of Missouri smokers of Marlboro Lights.
And so, as a matter of logic, if every time the public health community said something about smoking and then "Big Tobacco" including the Tobacco Institute said, there is no proof, they are making it up, it's unsubstantiated, there is no evidence for it, that has a likelihood of frustrating what the public health community is telling the public, doesn't it,
just as a matter of logic?
MR. ROSENTHAL: First of all, I object to the paragraph-long preface, which I'm not even sure was a question, but I also object to the form and foundation of the question.
THE WITNESS: Well, part of your question had to do with public health community recommendations about low-tar cigarettes to the public. I don't think I've ever seen a tobacco company, a Tobacco Institute document, in any form -- I mean, I know I haven't done a systematic search — shown that would countermand that particular message that low-tar cigarette -- that the public, if they are going to smoke, should smoke low tar. Maybe they have; I just haven't seen one.
And, again, how the public achieves -- how they process the information, it's not something that I have an expert opinion about.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, if in 1988 the Tobacco Institute is, even on that late date saying, it's an open question, we don't know if cigarettes are addictive, we don't know if cigarettes cause health issues, we don't know if they kill people, they are necessarily saying that about Light cigarettes,
correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I haven't seen that statement. We would have to look at it together. I don't — you know, I certainly haven't seen any statement about — like that, but, you know, if you have a statement you want to show me, we can look at it. But I certainly haven't seen any, you know, any representation in any of these cases where there was any attempt to undermine the public health community's message about low-tar cigarettes.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. But, as a matter of logic, if the public health community is telling smokers, if you switch from higher tar and nicotine cigarettes to lower tar and nicotine cigarettes -- strike that.
According to your testimony, Dr. English, there was a three-tier platform of advice given by the public health community to the public about smoking from 1955 through 2001. That was, don't smoke, if you smoke stop, but if you can't stop, switch to a low-tar -- a lowered tar and nicotine cigarette, correct?
A. I wouldn't put '55. I think I said '66,
but —
Q. Okay. Now, if the tobacco companies and the Tobacco Institute are denying the basic premise that cigarette smoking causes health concerns, they are obviously denying that you need to go to a lower tar and filtered cigarette -- a lower tar and nicotine cigarette -- because there are no health problems even if you're smoking Marlboro Reds.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I haven't studied what they said. I certainly don't know the intent behind any statement and we don't have a statement in front of us to look at. And, again, how the public processes messages is something that's outside of my expertise. BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, the Surgeon General, how do you say his name, the guy with the Amish beard?
A. Koop?
Q. Koop. What president was he the Surgeon General for?
A. Reagan.
Q. And in the late '80s he issued a report saying that cigarette smoking killed over 400,000 people a year. And I was in Washington on a case as a young associate and the spokeswoman for the American
Tobacco Institute came on, and in a very indignant tone asked what the Surgeon General thought he was doing issuing that report, he had no business issuing such a report.
Assuming my memory is correct, was that in any way a responsible statement for the American Tobacco Institute to question Surgeon General Koop even him having the termidity to address the fact that cigarette smoking was killing people?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I would have to look at that with you again and see what they actually said.
Without looking at that or -- I guess it was a video — I wouldn't be able to tell you, make a comment.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay. Now, I take it that because you're a medical historian, if you thought it was a worthwhile task, you could reach a expert opinion as to what the message was of the tobacco industry, and, in particular, the Tobacco Institute to the American public about health risks associated with smoking. That's an analysis you could do, correct?
public relation campaigns. If it dealt with scientific facts and studies, I might be able to have a comment there, but it's certainly not something that I have done.
Q. Right. But if what we wanted to know is what the public understood or believed about the risk of health smoking -- the risk -- the health risks of smoking cigarettes, certainly conceptually one of the things we would want to understand is the efforts that the tobacco industry, including the Tobacco Institute, undertook to persuade the public that there were no proven health risks, correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, someone who studies how the public processes information would probably look at a whole variety of different inputs of information that might include that, but it's certainly not something that I have expertise in.
BY MR. SURPRENANT:
Q. Okay.
MR. SURPRENANT: Mr. Rosenthal, it is now 4:35. We began at 9:01. I am not going to finish today, but I will finish by noon tomorrow. So it is up to you and to, most of all, you, Dr. English, when
you want to quit.
I have a conference call I have to prepare for, but I'm willing to go further and get you out slightly earlier tomorrow, but how long do you want to proceed?
MR. ROSENTHAL: It's entirely up to you.
THE WITNESS: It's up to you. I mean, you have to run and catch a flight at noon tomorrow?
MR. SURPRENANT: Well, I'm going to change. It's just I know that -THE WITNESS: Are we off the record?
MR. SURPRENANT: No, we're on the record. Knowing what I have left to examine you on and what evil genius I will work out of my hotel room tonight is I can commit to you I will finish by noon tomorrow, and one of the reasons I'm going to do that is just efficiency and it will allow me to get home earlier. But we can go to 5:00. I don't want to go past 5:00. We can stop now. It's up to you, Dr. English.
THE WITNESS: Why don't we stop now.
MR. SURPRENANT: Okay. Fair enough. Thank you for your patience today and it's been an educational day.
MR. SURPRENANT: Let's reconvene --VIDEOGRAPHER: This marks the end of Tape 5, Volume I, in the deposition of Dr. English. This concludes today's deposition. The time is 4:37. We are off the record.
(Proceedings recessed.)
//
(Signature having not been waived, the deposition of PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D. concluded at 4:37 p.m.)
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF DEPONENT
I, PETER C. ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D., do hereby acknowledge that I have read and examined the foregoing testimony, and the same is a true, correct and complete transcription of the testimony given by me and any corrections appear on the attached errata sheet signed by me.
(Date)	(Signature)
CERTIFICATE OF SHORTHAND REPORTER - NOTARY PUBLIC
I, Linda S. Kinkade, Registered Professional Reporter, Registered Merit Reporter, Certified Shorthand Reporter, Certified Realtime Reporter, and Registered Diplomate Reporter, the notarial officer before whom the foregoing proceedings were taken, do hereby certify that the foregoing transcript is a true and correct record of the proceedings; that said proceedings were taken by me stenographically, to the best of my ability, and thereafter reduced to typewriting; and that I am neither counsel for or related to, nor employed by any of the parties to this case and have no interest, financial or otherwise, in its outcome.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my notarial seal this 1st day of May, 2010 .
My commission expires: DC July 14, 2012.
NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
ERRATA SHEET DAYNA CRAFT, JASON STONE, DEBORAH LARSEN, WENDI ALPER-PRESSMEAN, individually and on behalf of all others similarly situated v. PHILIP MORRIS COMPANIES RETURN BY: _
PAGE LINE	CORRECTION and REASON
ERRATA SHEET DAYNA CRAFT, JASON STONE, DEBORAH LARSEN, WENDI ALPER-PRESSMEAN, individually and on behalf of all others similarly situated v. PHILIP MORRIS COMPANIES RETURN BY: _
PAGE LINE	CORRECTION and REASON
s 179:1	added 46:5 74:5 85:20	138:5	al 6:4,5 39:18,19 41:1,2 67:23 81:4 143:17
120*18 15019 86:12,20,23 199:22	adopting 96:8	alcohol 9:10 68:22	answer 10:1413:15
>0272*11 199:24	adoption 96:1 183:2	81:10233:12	20:15,17 21:2 43:9
•9 21*12 37-5	addicted 17:10 66:24	190:20	alive 10:7 48:4 54:16 57:17
110:6,11 115:22 146:4 149:3 164:7	ads 173:19 174:5	alkaloid 232:6,7	67:10 73:4 88:23
5138-18 156-1 233:20 257:10,11	adulthood 258:4	allegation 95:8,13,14 96:697:998:21 99:6
L 171-23201-21 258:3	advance 57:3	96:7,11,12 190:15	99:6 112:13 114:24
1210*1217*13	addicting 13:15,19	advanced 36:21	191:6 204:10,11	128:21 129:10 130:1-
’1 221:12 267:14 162:14 163:3 232:3	advantage 212:11	206:6 132:16 140:17 143:7
>	addiction 14:18,24	advertisement 26:1	allegations 95:21	151:15 153:15 156:1
)n53;16 15:7,10,13,15 16:13	257:4	191:10 157:10 159:2 161:4
e 172:21 86:22 87:6,6,8 103:4	advertisements 26:11	allege 186:14	163:22 165:20 171:2(
tely 65-1 199-9 103:24 133:12 134:3	advertising 66:21	alleged 205:22	181:10 185:7 188:15
J53-J0 ’ 137:14,16 139:10,22	100:13 171:11 194:6	alleys 166:12,15	205:5 206:23 207:24
141'.10 142:6,24 144:2 145:9	230:24 256:14	allow 179:10 200:16	208:5 210:12,13,16
51.3	* 147:9 148:5,6 149:3	advice 68:11 69:5	202:12 206:17 269:17 210:16 214:23 215:2^
93:12 163-22 151:6 152:10 162:13	265:18	allowable 215:11	216:11217:1219:10
L8 19232-3 174:15,18 190:19	advise44:2	allowed 166:11	228:16 232:14,22
ible 129-23 195:15 198:5 233:21	advised 29:2	ALPER-PRESSME... 233:2,4,4 243:20
ince 226-10 237:24 243:15 246:4	Advisory 57:1,3	1:6 3:4 273:3 274:3 253:4
l9	‘ 246:11,13,23 248:19	advocacy 104:21	alternative 231:18	answered 73:2191:4
>d 248 10 14 248:21,24 249:6,13	advocate 104:24	249:4 251:21 252:9 196:23
' ’ 249:19 251:15 254:22	advocated 106:15	252:14,19,23 260:9	answers 98:17 159:3
76:19,19 220:22 255:4 258:16,20	advocating 103:21	Altria 204:19,20,22	188:13
its 9-10 36*24 259:1,3,13,18	affirming 91:24	ambiguous 134:11	antecedent 207:14
1153 10 206 11	addictions 15:4 81:9	affixed 272:17	amended 123:19	antecedents 134:8
-	addictive 13:9,24 14:17	afield 54:3	amending 65:5	antennae 55:20
ts 52-21 89'5 15:16,24 16:9 162:4	afternoon 203:8 245:6	America 34:18	anticipate 190:10
ulating 86 7 163:11 164:6 165:9	afterward 68:11	American 7:22 8:1,6,15	anticipated 161:7
illation 28:14 165:24 174:11 176:10	age 31:24 36:21 258:3	8:20 9:1,8 10:4,15	anti-Semite 56:6
j 231:23 249:4 250:3	agents 262:24	11:8 12:4 32:17	anti-Semitism 55:3,6,7
cy 94-1 152-24 251:7 254:13 262:2	ago 19:19 21:4 49:16	39:17 40:23 52:18	55:7,9 56:2
[3 ' ' 264:22	63:6 85:10 159:3	53:15 58:2,8 77:6	anyway 27:19 67:17
te25:2,2 93:7,12	»dding246:8	224:17 232:19 242:15	115:6,13 193:12	228:5 234:4
t 129 9 13110	Edition 42:15 243:23	agree 9:5 10:7,9,15	198:23 236:24 239:22	apologize 221:15
>0 133*22 136-6	additional 73:23 85:17	11:22 12:4,9 13:6,8	266:24 267:6,21	appeal 91:23 127:11
^ ' ' 220:2 246:8	16:7,10 23:6 25:18	Americans 9:10 12:1	appealed 127:10
tely 153-6	address 41:15 111:14	47:18 48:1,8 51:23	28:11 238:2	appealing 40:15
>med 2523 113:12 116:4 139:18	52:3 59:16,21 60:4	Amish266:16	Appeals91:23
,250-15’ 171:17 187:19 192:3	71:1 92:12 95:13	amount 102:10 229:6	appear 227:10 248:19
‘s 264-15 192:9 202:11 206:16	107:22 111:20 112:14	238:13 247:17 251:24 271:7
dedge 271:4 223:22 244:20 267:8	131:5 145:14 155:20	252:7	APPEARANCES 3:1
OWLEDGM	addressed 22:6 47:10	163:7,8 166:20 169:3	amounts 137:16	appeared 23:23 24:3
[ "* 142:11 186:11 193:23	177:2 188:17 222:15	analysis 48:5 55:13	78:20 173:20 203:2,3
ld87.7 226:7 247:12	222:17 223:15,17	87:16,24 88:16 112:5 241:2 248:4
[2-10 16 55 7	addresses 14:15 200:5	225:21 226:9 227:4,5	139:17 142:11 156:14	applicable 2:13
j' ? '	addressing 48:12 137:2	245:14	157:15 189:12 190:3	applies223:5
r 239-12 247-21	adequate 131:7	agreed 147:4154:14	267:23	apply 146:3
125-20	adjust 148:15	163:2 175:1 179:21	analyze 21:13 89:12	appreciate 169:1
53:22 67:22	adjusted 148:13	215:12	206:24	approached 27:8 88:4
>76*4 144-12 12	Administration 74:24	agreeing 92:13	Andrea 125:1	appropriate 52:7,8
i 153-9 242*10	administrator 77:17	agreement 42:21 78:10	anecdotal 68:5 248:8 53:4,11 54:2 59:17
[2 ' '	admirable 18:12 19:4	113:24 114:5 215:10	260:3 94:10 142:4 182:5
24-19 19:12,16 20:11,13,16	ahead 135:9	anecdotally 67:17	257:23
22’ 20:20 21:7	AIDS 9:10	Angeles 3:10 79:24	appropriately 52:4
§2;9	admittedly 132:23	aim 173:5	animal 253:21	53:7
d 85* 14	adolescent 68:4	aimed 47:10	announced 153:23	approval 75:19
11:11 13:2 26:1	assistance 77:22	110:12 116:9,14,18 134:5 136:14,14	119:3 121:9 160:13
94:18 236:9	assistant 81:24 82:6	118:23 119:16 120:23 142:5 144:13 148:14 161:9 163:12 164:4
: 18 6:8 224:14	assistants 84:6 220:18	122:2,5,7,19 156:16 149:17,18 152:17	165:7,11 211:12
s 81:13,16 84:8,9	assisted 84:21	157:13 186:19 201:17 156:19 160:4 162:13 213:14,22 225:17
>,24210:22	associate 266:24	208:23 217:7 223:3,9 163:13 192:9 241:8 251:6,12 254:6 268:6
;s 78:3 79:12	associated 80:12	223:23 224:24 225:23	basement 256:5	believes 227:15
6	100:15 167:22 171:9	227:2 231:18 251:24	Bases35:23	believing 106:18
i: 17 92:16	171:18 239:20 267:22	252:7	basic 58:19 266:2	benefit 152:20 214:1
L5 119:14 229:13	associates 70:8	average 105:17 149:15	basically 62:9 234:10 254:7
0:21 227:16	Association 77:7,7,8	213:16,24 246:23	basing25:3	benefits 224:8,16
>4:19	assume 34:14 83:18	avoid 67:1,5 68:17	basis 9:2 11:9 19:8	225:16 252:13,15,24
g 105:7	111:9 138:8 164:1	109:19 135:6	38:15 43:8 114:4	253:9,14
ent24:18 169:5	166:3	avoided 161:8 233:2	124:19 131:7,8	beset 17:4
ants94:10 97:4	assuming 112:16	avoiding36:5	bat 32:3	best 54:19 99:5 161:4
9:13	136:11 140:8 267:5	award40:12	bear 114:23 115:4	272:11
12:6 3:17 6:19	assumption 18:16	aware 16:22 17:7,13	177:19	beta49:24
5	125:12,13 138:9	21:19 25:11 26:7,8	beard266:16	Betsy82:9
184:17 191:12	assurance 69:24 70:21	37:9 57:5,14,19 81:13	bearing 78:21	better 104:10156:13
168:19 193:13	231:8,16,17	81:14 95:7 96:7,11,12	bears 116:6	207:23 241:9,14
18	194:2,8,9,12	assured 261:24	97:2 106:17 125:5	beauty 123:13 198:11	beyond 23:23 116:2
[3,14 199:17,17	asterisk 252:13	144:1,4,7,10 147:8,13	beer 229:15,16,20	155:5 156:4 182:17
184:5	asthma 166:9	161:12 162:1 173:4	began 12:20 68:7	191:9 196:24 231:12
4:13 21:20,23	Atlantic 251:10	190:22,24 191:1	163:12 239:18 268:22	bifocals 221:18,19
>,18,23 23:16	attached 4:10 19:23	204:14 205:20 212:20	beginning 20:5 50:17	big 21:21 23:7,15 25:18
88:2,7 248:3	23:1 34:21 35:1	226:17 228:13 243:14 64:20 67:21 105:12 76:17 77:13,19,23
s 35:11 51:2 82:1	61:23 118:15 121:22	243:15 244:21 250:23 105:19 110:22 124:14 175:6 219:17 224:23
[5 251:14	124:1 146:24 167:6	256:20 143:8 167:7 234:2	225:21 235:11 253:2:
in 110:7,11	168:23 200:7 262:14	awareness 226:9	242:19	262:20 263:20
[234:3 250:24	271:7	a.ml:19	begins 6:2 32:1	bigger 194:14
>3:5 91:4 166:18	attacks50:3	__behalf 1:6 3:3,5,15	billion40:8,13
5 181:23 192:14	attain234:7	_B_ 273:3 274:3	binders 219:23
8	194:3,23	attempt 69:24 102:23	B 4:9 89:23 239:16	behavior 66:17 68:12	bit 74:19 77:5 138:23
>201:15 203:10	103:19 135:24 206:24	baby68:13 73:16 109:22 137:11 143:14 174:8 178:9
>4 220:23 221:2	231:18 247:23 265:10	back 15:10 16:23 21:14 138:6 148:14,15	224:13 232:17 237:1
[0257:2267:2	attempted 58:16	21:24 26:23 27:1,4	165:13 170:14 171:11 237:23258:19
10:13 13:10,17	182:22 223:22	35:10 56:24 61:1,8	172:1,18 176:5,15	bite 162:8 165:23
66:2 121:17	attempting 38:6 112:13	70:6,779:15 89:20 245:8,10251:22	black 127:5 238:18,19
5,5,7 131:4,8	158:6 193:20	104:8 110:12,24	255:16 256:9 259:5	blackboards 238:23
>2 144:24 163:24	attention20:2 24:1,8	112:10 118:16,17	belief 17:23 121:9,14	blind32:3
[4 194:21 198:13	146:22 174:19 222:5	123:10 134:4 137:4 225:14	block 45:18
19218:8227:16	234:13 239:23 248:1	141:3,16 150:24	beliefs 110:8	blood251:13,17 258:2?
S,8	243:23 244:2	attorney 111:20 174:22	151:15 152:2,5 154:8	believe 17:18 18:18	259:10
1:12	174:23 182:21 217:6	162:10 164:19 178:22 19:20 20:1,8 26:10	Blue 31:7,7 39:16,17
inie 229:11	attorneys 24:13 25:6	189:4,21 190:14,15 32:20 39:4,7,10 45:2	board 237:20 238:6,15
148:21	39:22 40:14 160:19	194:10 199:12 209:23 45:13 54:23 72:18	boards238:17
; 98:12	179:17 183:8 185:5	210:10 212:16 214:16 73:15 74:14,14 81:18	body 50:2,4,7 54:7,12
ionally 124:7	187:17 195:19,19	215:9 216:13 254:1 84:1489:11 92:6,11 55:13 108:20
ions 168:9	196:13 201:6 207:1	background 38:10	95:3 116:7 127:5,5	boldly 183:7
>4	217:24	66:13 149:19 153:20 159:13	book 49:6 50:19,24
ig 134:13	attorney's 40:13	bacteria 50:10	160:12 162:16 170:23 51:1,4,8 88:5
hi 70:19 131:10	AT&T 205:10	bad 155:5 229:5,15	172:8 175:7 186:3	bookcases 219:21
>0 132:4 137:20	audiences 120:16	ballpark9:16 185:3	196:14 200:18 203:3	boring 133:10
14 179:20	aunt 50:14	banned 166:21	203:23 212:21 213:4	born 68:13 69:4
his 180:22	authorities 14:3 115:13	Barker 1:24 6:9	214:24 216:18 229:1	bottom 20:9 62:6
Hi/factual 129:9	authority 74:23	base 38:12 46:13 48:18 230:22232:6248:3	bound 107:24
nent 111:21	availability 222:17	226:1 248:13 252:11 253:13	bounds43:3
>3 225:5	available 54:5,20 59:18	based 14:18 48:7 62:15 254:15 257:23 263:1	bowling 166:12,15
L9 127:6 193:17	calories 112:2	201:12221:11 229:22	certify 272:8	231:17234:24237:2
[9 199:13	Cambridge 96:2,10,23	230:6 265:9	chalkboard 238:11,14	237:20,23 239:6
>2:6 64:2 219:23 101:1 138:10 149:11	case-in-chief 185:15,17 238:15	240:7,16,18,21,22
5:9 153:18 154:15	185:21	chalkboards 238:9	241:10,17 242:11,12
125:18,22	Camel 256:22 257:2	catalog 76:21	chance 136:12	243:18 246:15,24
42:22	camera 222:9	catch 70:3 269:8	change 106:16 107:5	249:3,5,20 250:12
>6:2047:24	campaign 25:20 94:17	categories 30:11 143:18 151:4 156:7	251:24 252:7,12
[64:16 110:14 173:24 174:1,6	categorize 232:16 194:16 226:22 227:2	254:12,18,20 255:5,7
[5,16 111:7 237:18	category 230:14 245:8,10 269:9	255:23 264:12 265:2:
>123:8 167:12	campaigns 268:1	caught254:17	changed 63:2 164:18	266:3,5,6,22 267:9
ig 166:23	Campbell 161:16 164:4	cause 7:14,17 10:5 208:7 238:3	cigarettes 14:6 18:24
5:18 172:24 164:15 165:8	104:1 131:24 132:10	changes 50:8,9 74:10	19:4,15 21:16 28:14
6:6 74:16,19	Canada213:4	135:8 137:14 145:9	changing 183:23	30:6 33:14,22 44:16
i	cancer 7:23 8:1,4,6,15	148:6 151:6 173:9 198:14	45:4 48:15,16,18,21
213:5 8:18,20 9:1,8 10:4,15	264:22	chapter 14:14 77:9	56:11,17 57:21 58:3
32:17247:13 11:8 12:5,8 24:14,17	caused 18:10 75:9 235:24236:1	58:10,2361:12,13
1,9 250:1 251:1 24:20,21 49:4 77:6	175:9 262:2	chapters 77:8	67:7,16,16 68:15
[0 258:11 82:20 84:11,12	causes 24:17,20 48:17	character 92:24	69:13,18,20,23 70:20
30:10 101:14 115:13 173:8 198:23	212:22 227:11 266:3	characteristics 154:22	70:23,23 75:10,21
>	230:7 234:19 240:1 243:1	causing 243:15 155:8 258:23	76:7 82:17 88:18,18
r 72:2 100:7	candidate 52:17 53:14	ceiling 219:18,21	characterization 99:4	90:15,2391:12,12
y 38:5 248:14 55:2	Cell210:7 129:12 141:10 187:3	92:3,10 94:4,24 97:1(
[70:15	capable 192:15	central 111:21 112:15 196:20	98:24 99:19,19 100:5
153:18	capture 77:19 200:2	112:16	charged 140:13	100:6,9 101:15,17,20
r49:9,10 50:15	car9:10	centrifuge37:6	chart4:17,18,21 5:4,5	106:7,19,20 109:24
it 46:22 79:15	care 41:10 68:1	century 29:24 30:4,5 5:6 114:8 118:8,19	110:4 113:6,7 115:5
[1	carries 94:12	44:17 51:18 235:11 178:24 183:24 200:4	117:1,1,15 119:18,19
32:14	case 1:5 6:6 7:9 9:18,19	235:18 236:8,24	charts 167:12 198:12	131:1 136:1 137:15
194:22,23 9:21,24 10:18 11:24	CEO 161:17	chemical 14:22 232:4	137:18 146:5 148:7
95:5 219:13 11:24 18:19,20 28:6	CEOs 161:19 162:3	chemistry 232:18	152:21,22 153:7,22
ig 220:5 28:13 29:13,15,16,18	163:10 164:5 165:8	chewing 30:12,14	167:17,17 169:12,13
19:15 30:2 31:8,9 34:11,13	166:18	child 51:3 69:4	169:20,21 170:7
5:16 37:23 39:5,9,12,21	certain 35:21 57:14	children 12:5,18 51:5	171:1,2,16,17 172:22
111:1 40:3,7,17,23 41:4,5	61:3 71:12 125:19 68:19 125:19 256:21	176:1 177:5 211:13
§2:1 181:19 41:16 42:19,22 43:16	126:14,14 140:6	child's 166:18	211:14,20 212:6,10
'208:11,13 44:19,24 45:15 47:7	156:2 164:1 188:15	choose 191:21	212:19 214:8,14,18
is 21:12 267:3 59:14 61:2 74:1,2,12	202:6 241:13 245:17	chooses 50:8 215:24	215:3,6 224:8,16,19
4:21,22 76:11,13,15 79:4,5	249:12,18 250:13	chose54:14	224:20 225:16 231:8
H:1 81:22 82:24 85:6,8,13	251:23 263:8	chronologically 44:23	233:22 237:5,24
_ 85:14 86:4 87:7,24	certainly 15:18,19 18:2	chronology 86:9,11	239:19,24 241:21
C_ 93:14 94:19 101:5	19:5 21:18 26:7 65:9 87:3 218:14 219:17	242:24 244:22 245:1
2:24:26:1,23 102:22 111:10,24	65:17 93:20 96:19	Chubby 17:15	247:16,18 249:18
89:24 270:10 114:21,23 116:3	98:8 103:10,17	cigar 30:15	250:14 252:1 253:1
! 122:22 127:17 133:9	115:18 132:9 135:2	cigarette 8:13 9:4	253:10,13,20 254:7
1219:19 220:2 141:18,20,21,21,23	138:19 143:17 151:10 10:22 11:2 13:8,24	256:14 257:24 263:9
ted 11:16 160:8 173:21 179:20	157:22 162:8 165:5,5 14:4,16,21 15:23	264:8,21,22,24
nia 3:10 22:4 179:22,23,23 180:4,5	166:6 170:9 171:21 17:24 18:5 19:2,11	265:11,15,16 268:8
1930:14 35:19 180:5,13,16,20,22	172:13 173:23 181:17 30:3,4 62:6,7 63:11	cigars 30:10,12,14
[ 65:4 114:2 185:19 189:17,19	184:22 187:16 193:10 63:24 75:24 76:5,5	Cingular 205:9,10
J 135:11 146:22 190:16,23 201:13	197:17 208:22 210:6 100:16,18.19,23,23	circled 168:9
»0 209:18 210:10 202:6 220:12,13,14	210:19 214:3 215:3 100:24 101:8,10	Circuit 1:1,2 6:5,6
11	243:13 269:2 222:4 223:5 224:17	224:2,4,5 226:23 102:1,10 104:3,4	circumstances 182:5
[7:1525:11 234:1 263:12 266:23	227:1 245:23 248:15 105:23 142:7,9,10	citation 133:15 135:4
[35:2 39:6 272:14	249:2,8 251:8 255:19 143:1,4,5 144:16,20	135:13,13 139:12
i,23	81:13 88:11	cases 24:12 25:4 27:15	260:17 265:5,8 145:11 146:7 149:4	140:12
) 195:1 221:17 28:1,5 31:17 42:2,5,7	266:10 268:3,8,18 150:5 151:5 154:24	citations 135:12,17
1233:1 247:24 42:9,11,15,16 46:4,21	certificate 35:1 272:1 155:10 156:17,18	136:10
[9	215:7 238:6 241:12	59:19,24 60:6,9,17,19 153:17,19 158:2,8	205:24 206:9,11,19
13:14	comes 121:14 145:18	60:19 61:1 63:19,20 159:15 160:5,11	207:13,16,22 208:4,9
30:4 133:7	204:3	63:24 64:1,8,12 68:24 161:20 168:17 175:6 208:21 210:21 214:9
[7	comfortable 11:19	69:17 71:12,17,23	176:2 179:4,12	224:22 230:17 245:6
>	45:3 211:4	74:7 76:24 86:2 89:2 180:23 182:8,10	245:16 246:11,22,22 36:640:23	coming 137:4 149:16	89:2,14 90:6 91:11,14 183:1 186:15,19 249:9,17 254:9 259:5 ',15 42:9 76:13 205:9	96:15 97:15 98:9,12 190:4,17 192:2,12 259:8,13 260:1,22,23
>	77:2,18 79:5,5	comment 18:15 26:15	99:17 100:4 101:7,15 194:17 195:11 198:3 260:24 261:19
23	80:1,284:22 70:18 89:6 99:10	102:7 111:6 113:5,11 198:15 199:5 216:9	compensatory 243:16
13	220:12,14 134:6 138:18 140:14	113:18 115:5,20 216:10,22 235:8 244:21 245:20 246:2
13	150:18 154:1 159:17	116:8,9,15,24 117:12 261:20,24 262:23 247:1 01:23 159:20 213:12 252:14	118:21 119:3,17,23 266:1 273:4 274:4	competency 176:13 1 149:20 257:21 267:15 268:3	120:20 121:1,11	company 19:11 24:15 229:8 27:15 51:21	commented 120:13	122:1,19 123:4 32:17 40:24 82:23	complaining 28:2 [9,21141:19	commenting 128:19	127:23 128:18 134:17 83:23 98:3 174:24	complete 20:2 210:1 188:9	comments 159:22	144:24 148:12 151:18 176:8 187:8 198:13 255:18 262:17 271:6 129:2 258:8	155:24 156:8,15 204:15 205:22,23	completely 55:5 7:1444:2445:1	commission 96:14,21	157:6,12,24 158:7,9 209:9 210:2 217:6	complex 67:9 104:13 112:4 114:12,17 97:5,17 185:9 191:9	158:18 159:4,14 220:23,24 235:8	complicated 28:5 56:4 [0 117:2,3,3,7 193:10 272:19	163:2 167:15 168:20 239:21 264:9 60:8 162:7,12 165:1
S,21	123:3	commit269:15	169:11,19 170:4,24	comparable 103:10 165:14 176:16 255:2( [9,21169:21	committed 52:15	171:15,21 172:5,8,11 137:17 150:6 151:7	component 11:1 24:13 ',10 171:2,8,17	committee 57:2,3 159:4	174:17,19 175:17,22 244:23 246:12,14 242:1 245:7 246:9 '2 236:1,3,8,10	common 50:1,16	175:24 176:3,11	comparative 102:11	components 11:4 [5,24 263:16 224:18	177:4 179:6 191:18	compare 105:22 128:18	comport 157:3 236:18	commonly 260:1	193:7,11,14,15,18,19 175:16	compound 231:4 om238:16	common-sense249:15	193:22 194:1,3,7,19	compared 62:10 153:6	comprehensive 36:3 5:22 104:15	communicate 58:17	195:14,24 197:19	comparing 100:17,22 37:21 38:2 91:7 '0 152:17,17,20 75:22 112:14 179:2	198:3,5,15 199:5,14	compensate 101:23 218:10 H 54:9 194:24 213:15 224:6 231:2	199:16,16,18,23 102:3,6,8 144:16	concealed 135:22 [252:13,24	communicated 58:2,8	200:1,3,11,21 201:18 145:19 215:2 246:9	conceivable 115:18 ) 59:23 91:10 95:12	202:1,3 203:13 206:9 246:10,24 252:15	conceivably 116:4 139:4 157:5	207:11,21 211:7,12 253:15 254:4,4	concept 145:20 246:2 115:5 143:19	communicates 76:3,6	211:18 212:21 214:22	compensated 145:15	conceptually 170:23 [4 225:6	communicating 96:14	214:24 222:18,19	compensates 148:4 268:8 4:13 39:21	communication 43:19	223:10,12 224:6	compensating 214:11	concern 213:7 215:1 ) 60:13 79:11 88:14	226:8,14,21 227:9 214:20 246:3 258:22 254:8 ! 226:22 227:2 98:23 115:16 139:4	230:12,13 232:2 260:18	concerned 64:1 70:1 7:8 146:2 157:15 183:14	233:24 237:22 241:2	compensation 15:21 80:23 263:13,14 21:14 186:22 193:24	243:4,9,14 244:21 69:9 71:13,14 72:1,8	concerns 19:3 212:23 24:17,20 240:2	communications 42:24	245:9,15,24 246:6 74:7 85:22 86:3 231:16 266:3 144:21,22 44:4,7 57:6,15,20	248:11,23 253:13,23 102:24 103:4,11	concert 142:2 193:10 p 62:11 58:24 88:14 89:3,9,13	253:24 254:6,18 109:12 127:23 128:2	concerted 116:17 123:188:8 90:4,11,21 97:14,21	255:6 259:3,24 131:22 132:9 135:21	conclude 117:9,11 ve 67:1,5,18 147:20 160:10 172:4	260:13,21 262:19 137:13 138:11,14,16 186:24 248:23 tit 10:3 172:7,10,22 179:11	263:7,14,19,24 264:7 139:12,23 142:23	concluded 33:13 irating 194:7 182:7,24 190:3 198:2	265:14,19 143:12,21 144:1,3,8 211:19 212:9 247:19 ral 45:14 198:14,20,21 199:4 community’s 29:22 145:20 147:2,2,5,11 249:3 270:10 on 251:4 199:19 215:16,19	85:22 147:16 195:23 147:14,14.17,24	concludes 107:20 270:^ 12:22 228:8	208:8 234:18 265:10 148:12,22 150:11,16	conclusion 55:16.20,22 bia2:18 91:23	communities28:10 commuting 178:18 151:16,21 152:9 61:4 66:4,14 93:17 12 41:19 82:1691:15 companies 1:10 18:12 153:11 180:24 181:11 94:7,14 109:4 111:14 led 9:11 94:22 100:8 157:19	18:12 19:2 20:11,11 184:16,19 186:16,24 111:15 116:2 119:15 2:8 52:1068:10 158:13234:21	20:13,20,20 21:7,21 187:13 189:8,17,20 119:23 122:17 162:1( 74:15 78:5	community 13:14	23:7 25:13,19 26:17 189:23 190:4,18 182:10 189:10 200:2] 181:19 83:6,17 14:11 19:16 21:16	31:13,13 41:6 42:17 192:13 195:11,15,20 206:1,3 207:10 215:4 113:24 118:8 25:1 28:16 29:2	81:20 83:2 86:8 195:22 196:17 197:4 215:7
[,21 51:24 92:7	consortium 15:5	corn229:12 255:9,13,14,18,24	currently 51:4 212:17
194:23 95:5	constant 251:13,17,20	corporate 21:11,11,13 256:15 257:12 258:16	curve 241:9 254:2
[3 108:24 111:5	constituents 198:4	204:18 210:24	260:9 262:2 263:10	_
>1,23 116:3	consult 81:20,21 84:3	corporation 1:10,11	265:1,22267:5,23	_D_
[9 126:15 127:10	consultant235:16	19:6 268:12 271:5 272:9	D4:l 5:16:1
[0 181:8 189:5	consulted 84:5	correct 7:9,10,15,23	correcting 65:6	damages 24:15
[2 206:17 215:20	consume229:6	9:12 11:12 12:11,12	correction 101:3 273:7	danger 38:14 88:11
[5,17,19 253:12	consumer 66:17 90:24	12:14,24 18:4,12,16 274:7	dangerous 215:5
in 261:12	105:22 109:21 111:23	19:21 27:9,16,22 28:3	corrections 271:7	224:19
ining 261:7	112:24 115:22,23	29:6,11 30:2 31:3,14	correctly 17:22 142:21	dangers 28:9 29:1,22
on 49:22	163:15 164:24 165:13	32:11,19,20 33:3,4	correlations 173:8	41:21 172:21,21
ons 247:15	165:16 170:14 171:11	36:16 38:2 39:12	cost 108:16	237:19,22 239:2
t66:11	172:1,18 176:5,5,15	40:8 43:22 46:7,23	Council32:18	data 16:22 52:22
ted 247:14	226:4 241:20	52:5 56:12,13,17,18	counsel 6:12 169:3	105:21 139:10,21
>	consumers 106:18	57:23,24 58:4,5,10,11 272:12	142:5 221:2
ting 36:5 108:5	109:22 111:16 117:13	59:2,7,8,11,1260:7	countermand 264:11	databases 83:7
ince 86:19 250:9	122:3,21 123:2 136:3	63:16 65:16 66:15,18	counting 183:7	date6:8 8:19 15:17
[8 269:2	consuming 231:3	66:20,22 69:10,11,13	country 8:4 213:3	25:16 26:12 74:16,19
;nces 75:14	contain 220:21	69:14,20,2170:23,24 250:11	260:20 264:20 271:1;
),11 251:2,4	contained 76:11 83:1	71:4,14 75:2,15 83:2	County 34:6	273:24 274:24
ing 140:15	194:21 216:7	84:2,7 90:15,23 92:3	couple 52:11 74:20	dates 25:24 45:5
ting 127:3	contains 48:10 208:16	92:10,11 97:18 99:2 82:1 86:12,23 111:22	datum 126:14
nding 156:3,6	209:8,24	99:20 100:6 101:10 129:24 150:9 167:12	David 180:9
id45:15 103:7	contemplated 137:9	101:18,21 102:1,4	178:13,13 208:1	Dawkin92:21
[0 164:13 180:18	138:4	104:7 106:14 109:5 219:6	day 206:10 233:6,21
!	contemporaneous	109:24 110:145,8	course 9:13 18:23	234:6 269:23 272:17
;ss 74:22 213:8	88:12	111:16 113:14 115:1 36:23 51:18 54:3	Dayna 1:5 3:3 6:4
;ssman 161:13	contemporary 140:14	116:11 117:15 119:19 84:4 89:4 101:22	273:2 274:2
ction 133:16,21	contention 190:22	119:24 121:3 122:22 105:19 114:6 119:20	days 166:13 236:19,20
1115:23 116:8	191:1	127:18 128:4,11	121:10 142:14 143:11	day-long 166:1
[0 162:10 170:24	context 24:10 36:4	129:10 130:11 131:8 213:8 223:16 233:21	day-to-day 19:8
tion 117:11	140:7 207:2,3	131:10,18 132:4	234:6 235:12 241:19	DC 3:19 272:19
5,8	171:5,13	contexts 140:7	133:3,18,22 134:1	259:10260:17	deal 33:21 67:18 81:19
ation 94:13	continue 49:19 63:6	136:4 144:8,13,24	court 1:1 6:5,10,11,21	dealing 17:3 28:13
tusly 142:7	103:22 104:24 180:9	145:3,5,12 148:9	40:9 70:13 91:22	54:19 74:6 82:14
1,5	244:23	218:3 226:6 233:14	149:8 152:23 153:2 126:13 127:11 133:6 87:7 105:4 189:20
sus 15:15 239:24	continued 5:1 163:12	155:15 156:23 157:6	courtroom 209:13	237:4 248:15
>4 243:2,3,7	219:13	162:5,22 166:2,4	Court's 74:11	deals 81:18 244:8
>4 252:18,22	continuing 153:4	169:17,23 170:17	covered 203:6 261:4	dealt 41:18 81:24 84:8
?,8 260:11,16	212:14	171:5,6,19 172:12	covcrs203:15	90:5 268:1
I	contradicted 228:11	174:11 175:2,9	Craft 1:5 3:3 6:4	death 7:15,17 10:5
suses 16:4	contribute 154:23	176:23,24 179:13	179:24 180:1,5,8,8,10	debating 36:20
uences 227:12	155:9	181:3 182:12 183:3 180:11,12 273:2	DEBORAH 1:5 3:4
ir 20:10 89:16	contributions 96:1	184:19 185:15 186:2 274:2	273:2 274:2
[6 108:2,11,18	control 84:12	186:3,6 187:9,14	create 70:21 173:5	decade 106:14
>4 165:16 191:13	controversial 55:19	189:12 190:5,23	176:9 210:2	decades 29:17 97:1
[1 254:12 258:24	68:23	192:3 196:18 197:5,5	created209:7	115:6 135:20 152:19
;rable 175:7	controversy 11:14	197:15,21 198:6,17	critical 167:24	225:7
;rably 241:23	24:16 125:19	199:3 200:23 201:9	criticism 157:11	decades-long 89:15
;ration 200:20	conventional 152:21	203:16 206:15,20	cross 31:7 39:16 65:18	deceived 94:16 96:16
12	conversation 30:23	207:17 208:23 210:3	cross-examine 186:4 98:6 99:1 161:2
‘red 108:19	211:2	211:14 218:15,18,24 186:10	deception 98:2 99:10
12	226:21 240:22	conversational 129:1	219:4 220:7,11 221:3	cross-examining 187:7	deceptive 33:14 94:15
[3,24 250:3	conversations 211:1	223:13 225:2 226:1	CRR 1:23	96:15 97:16 98:8,24
[9	convey 213:24	227:5 228:21 229:17	cruel 106:1	deceptively 92:9 93:10
;ring 107:17	Conway 1:24 6:9	230:1 235:1,4,5,8,14	CSR 1:23	decide 127:4
[2,19	cool 238:9	242:3 244:15 245:16	culled 80:6	decided 212:11
[6 223:17 257:10	depositions 10:1	253:21	disease 7:14 11:10	190:16 195:10,18
ns 38:10 95:1,10 218:13 230:5	differences 242:7,9,10 49:23 50:6 88:19	196:8,23 197:10,19
I	depressant 232:8	242:12 100:15,17 101:8	198:13,24 201:5
50:7 233:12,15	different 13:16 14:1 175:9 234:17,19	202:1 204:4,9 206:5
214:10,20	depth 127:22 252:2	28:6 36:13 37:2,2 241:4,10 254:3	207:1 208:2,16,22
144:17	derivation 205:12	44:20 46:17 47:1	diseases 41:10 48:17	209:3 210:2 211:4
133:12 134:3	derive 244:23 246:24	50:3 53:12 55:14 80:11 156:2	218:9,14,17,21,23
lant 3:15	describe 14:12 53:20	61:19 69:6 86:16	disinformation 89:16	219:22,22 220:9,21
ants4:14 32:10 123:16	87:5,14 100:18 120:3 89:19	221:6 230:24 231:10
5 33:13 34:17	described 235:2	120:3,4 126:1,1	dispute 126:24	doing 15:20 74:21 77:2
94:3 127:16,21	DESCRIPTION 4:11	127:15,16140:9	disseminated 135:22	77:3 88:16 90:24
>1,23 131:21 5:3	143:10,21 148:5	dissonance 67:2,5,19	149:16 192:16 195:1
5,14	133:2 134:4	descriptor 100:13	153:7 191:8 206:2,14	distance 222:10	195:2 267:3
>1 135:20,21 111:12 112:19 113:13	207:23 211:6 227:23	distant26:9	DOJ 87:7 141:22
[139:7 140:5,13	descriptors 75:7	244:3 246:8 254:22	distinction 13:13,22	180:19
[9 153:5 204:15 213:12	268:16 66:1 121:16	dollars 40:13 108:6,7
>1,22,23 206:7	designation 75:10,21	differently 128:21	distinguish 149:17	205:9
ant(s) 1:12 212:21 213:23 241:12 218:11 232:11	distracted 222:13	Dominic 3:6 6:14
ed 27:18	designator 75:3	difficult 16:20 136:9	distribute 77:13	118:18
ing27:12,14	designed 33:14 168:2	Digest241:20	distributed 77:11	dose 247:21,23
j 24:13 25:6 176:20 177:6	dignify 209:21	District 2:18 91:23	dose-response 241:3,8
6:10	desired 132:2	diphtheria 51:3 272:22	254:2
14:8,9 91:13	despite 18:9 135:19	Diplomate2:17 272:6	ditch 60:3 113:9	double 99:10 238:13
145:1,2 162:13 151:17 198:12 253:14 direct 20:2 24:1,8	divided 15:7	doubt 144:7,10 212:8
47:22 256:13	130:6,7,9 133:7,9,9	dizzy 221:21 222:1,2	downhill 36:17
ion 14:24 15:6	detail 84:8 131:23	133:15 134:6 139:13	docs 184:8 199:21	downplay 135:23
ions 14:18 15:3	detailed 41:18 108:8	186:11,13 191:13	doctor 35:12,13,14,15	Dr 6:3 7:6 9:19 11:21
112:16 235:14 254:9	234:13 239:23 247:2 35:16 67:15 76:16	13:22 19:17 27:1
ate 161:11	details 22:141:8	direction 78:2 220:10 104:19 138:2 195:7	34:17 35:9 36:16
ately 150:17	deteriorate 32:2	directly 68:2 84:5	doctors 158:16	44:2 59:3 64:21,23
y 56:11,16 58:3	determinations 128:20	111:14 114:24	document 35:2 103:18	71:11 73:13,22 82:1
23	69:17 91:11	determine 62:24 65:14	disagree 9:5 131:6 105:4 106:24 107:9	87:15 88:9 91:3
5 98:23 99:18 91:6,8 132:21 146:14	188:18 222:15 259:19 123:15 128:14,17	92:20 109:18 110:19
5	113:5 117:14 157:12 195:12	disagreeing 92:13 130:2 134:24 137:2	110:23 111:8,9 112:2
[7 133:13 134:16	determined 101:1	disagrees 208:13 141:15 143:23 145:17	112:13 113:22 114:2;
[6 109:11 115:16 184:14 disbanded 88:11 145:24 146:1,20	114:22 118:20 119:1
14:20 174:10 232:2	discerned 156:20 151:2,24 152:8	123:17 125:24 129:15
)	determines 213:10	discernment 150:19 160:22 161:3 181:14	130:22 131:4 132:22
1:22 237:21	disclose 44:3 127:21 181:21,24 182:15,16	134:5,14 135:3,10
g 266:2,4	determining 132:21	130:23 134:21 183:12 188:1 189:19	140:12,23 141:4
nient 33:10 241:7	disclosed 205:23 189:23 190:9 201:14	144:7 146:21 148:3
ments 77:3 81:3	detested 52:19	disclosing 129:15 201:16,20.22 203:11	149:1 157:11 165:22
lency 14:8	detour67:12	disclosure 4:15 34:17 208:3,6 217:17,24	167:8,11 169:1,13
ling 105:24	develop 69:19 179:7	34:24 129:16 220:4,21 221:12	177:2 179:1 181:19
>181:23	developed 69:13,23	disclosures 142:16 228:11,13,18 250:23	183:20 184:13 185:1:
Is 53:21 65:11 70:20 94:3 231:15	discuss 111:7 203:24 264:10	187:6 188:2 192:8
238:16 267:24	development 21:15	discussed 109:18	documents 36:4 80:6	193:21 195:7 199:15
SENT 271:1 44:16 48:6 234:16	130:21 131:22 81:18 82:22 83:2,6,9	200:2,10 202:10
d 32:24 38:23 237:2,4	discussing 150:10 86:5,11,12,23 89:1,9	207:9 208:11,13
113:22	developments 44:22	200:5 261:8 97:5 102:17 121:2	209:17 210:11 215:1(
ion 1:16 2:2	device 92:22,23	discussion 46:6 51:13 128:7 133:19 135:14	216:12 221:6 223:7
6:2,189:18,23	devoted 236:20	52:6 63:23 64:3 140:19 148:18 152:18	242:20 250:7 251:5
i,18,24	19:18	Diamond 178:11,12	70:16 85:15 92:3 156:21 157:24 160:19	258:11 259:16,21
21:14 26:10	died 9:3 11:10 92:20	96:1 105:4,13 112:9 172:15,16 179:16	260:8 263:1 265:17
>64:20,2465:2	diet229:10	120:17 148:21 178:21 181:19,22 182:21	268:24 269:19 270:3
',1498:16	differ 81:5	203:17,20 213:2,7 183:8,21 184:24	draft 35:5 218:20
[9,23 130:4	difference 59:22 63:7	243:13 245:14,18,19 185:1,5,6 186:18,21	drafted 35:6
■s 219:19 220:2	effort 123:4	enterprise 79:1	113:19 115:16 138:21	73:24 82:13 87:20,23
38:17	efforts 143:1 176:8	entire 33:18 80:20	170:1 174:14217:13	90:1092:1493:13
67:12 184:5	268:9 124:9 243:22	223:5 242:5	94:19 98:22 99:24
[3,20247:17	eight 19:19 44:20 77:15	entirely 155:17 158:12	examination4:2 7:2	100:2 102:21 109:21
54:8	212:13256:4 177:1 192:19 207:19	20:7 109:19 110:13	110:2 111:4,14,15
163:20	either 11:5 16:15 31:11 249:5 269:6	123:10 156:12 172:24	112:21 113:3 114:21
19:7 233:14	84:5 93:20 109:3	enumerated 143:10	195:5 243:22	116:3 119:15,22
ig69:2 233:14	111:12 112:24 122:21	epidemic51:5	examine91:7 118:19	120:19,19 121:8
)	134:10 135:14 136:14	epidemiological 102:12	139:2 167:11 179:9	122:18 127:17 128:1(
39:10,22 147:9	198:16 218:2,8 151:19 154:17,18,20	215:16 269:13	129:8,10 131:9,18
142:24 246:22	231:21 233:19 250:21 155:6,23 156:1,6,9	examined 42:23 83:9	132:3,24 133:1,20
j	elaborate 123:9	epidemiology 69:3	234:21 271:4	136:5 137:19 139:14
260:24	elements 120:15 143:22 206:12	examining 218:18	139:16 152:24 153:K
\ 147:18 259:5,7	ellipses 124:10,12,14	equal 166:16	example 14:13 52:14	165:15 171:12,24
d 180:8 I 125:7,9 155:13	equate 222:19 226:10 I 54:15 57:1 60:24	172:18 176:5,22
560:1	emails 36:14	Er 35:15,15	65:2081:293:4	179:10 181:7,19
5:16 74:24 86:22	Emanuel 3:7	eradicated 55:8,24	247:13	182:4,10,22 184:15
6	emerged 143:14	errata271:7	examples 52:11 259:6	185:13,14 187:5,11
):11	emphatically 15:12	erred54:ll	excellent 71:10,10	189:4,5,10 191:3,11
>7:7,7	40:11	especially 8:18 12:5	excerpt 4:12 19:18 20:1	191:13 192:3,8,9
10214:19	employed 142:23 15:21 68:12 143:15	exciting 253:18	193:23 196:16,16
7:6 178:13,17	272:13 193:8 211:5 217:7	Excuse 140:24	197:3,15 198:1
r 235:22,23	employee 230:1	ESQUIRE 3:6,16	executive 230:1	200:16,18 201:2,8,15
5 239:7,14,16	encompassing 88:7	essential 21:20	executives 230:6,13	202:12 207:9,14
24	encroach 228:2,3	essentially 104:1 127:4	exhales 10:23	208:5,20 213:21
46:5,9,16,17	ended 27:20 113:9 146:5 194:4 218:21	exhaust91:5	215:11,19 216:7,8,16
ite 46:18	endorsed 136:2 247:1	exhibit 4:12.13,14,16	221:10 228:12 229:2:
itive 156:13	ends 199:17	established 112:20	4:17,18,19,20,21 5:4	230:16 235:7 258:7
m 84:24	engage 215:14 255:15 196:15	5:5,6 19:17,22 22:24	260:4,5 264:17
m 251:2	England 64:21	estoppel 45:15	23:14 34:16,19,20	267:19,24
r-K-I-N 92:21	English 1:16 2:2 4:2	et 6:4,4 39:18,19 41:1,2	61:22 62:1 118:14	expertise 27:2 47:5
[7 2:8 6:20	6:3,23 7:6 9:19 11:21	EU 75:4,9	119:6,8 121:19,21	65:14 67:13 116:5
__13:22 19:17 27:1	Europe 75:1	123:16,24 124:20	117:5 165:1,18
_E__34:18 35:4,9 36:16	European 74:21	146:23 167:5,13	170:15 176:17 192:1^
5:1 6:1,1 273:1	44:2 59:3 64:21,23	Europeans 30:9	168:21,22 169:4,8,9	192:24 256:3 266:13
[,1 274:1,1,1	71:11 73:13,22 87:15	evaluate43:10	194:16 200:6 216:19	268:18
24:7 31:6 98:16	88:9 91:3 92:20	evaluated 48:15	221:11 262:9,12,13	experts 14:16 42:23
[197:2 207:4	109:18 110:19,23	evaluating 100:15	exist 192:23 260:22	116:7 170:22 186:1
[8 218:12 220:19	111:8,9 112:2,13 211:4	existed 148:22	expires 272:19
>2 256:10 261:12	113:22 114:22 118:20	event 107:19	existence 44:7 135:23	explain 21:1 126:4
1,17	119:1123:17 125:24	everybody 24:20 71:13	exists 143:22 144:1	184:2
25:17245:5	127:14 129:19 130:22 71:17	151:16 227:12 247:20	explained61:3 244:14
[5	131:4 132:22 135:10	everyday 137:11 138:6	expect 128:16 256:19	explaining 259:4
'51:1	140:23 141:4 144:7	evidence 36:20 48:4	expectations 228:9	explanation 98:18,20
168:14,15 178:3	146:21 148:3 149:1 54:13 94:9 102:12	expected 228:7,9,12	260:23
1,5,10	194:22	157:11 165:22 167:8 108:8 112:3 126:17	experience 66:3 232:11	explanatory 136:23
24:4	167:11 169:1,13 127:3 135:13,19	experienced 64:23	explicit 259:15
35:11 258:11	177:2 179:1 183:20 150:15 151:19 157:23	expert 4:14,20 7:8 27:2	explicitly 259:14
ion 8:3,22	184:13 185:12 187:6 196:11,14 199:2	27:21 31:5 33:24	explore 185:12
ional 77:12	192:8 193:21 195:7 234:18 258:24 263:22	34:10,17 35:2,5,7	exposure 254:3
5 82:19 116:17	200:10 202:10 207:9	evidentiary 135:12,13	37:15,22,22 38:21	express 147:21 173:4
13	209:17 210:11 215:16 135:17 136:10	39:5,8,11,14,16,24	expressed 151:11 172:*
d 237:8	216:12 221:6 223:7	evil 269:14	40:17,22 42:4 48:10	186:5
8:22 93:13	242:20 259:16 263:1	evolution 28:8,24	56:9,15,20 57:8,10,23	expression 17:3
[1 138:7 145:7	265:17 268:24 269:19 216:15	58:1,7,21 59:5,9,17	expressly 151:2152:11
[0 173:10 252:6	270:3,10 271:3	evolved29:14	59:22,24 60:7 63:10	152:13 153:20
ely 92:23	English's 114:21	exact 246:12	63:14,19 64:7,11 65:8	extend 44:22
>	father 50:14	finish 152:3 196:4 73:3 80:4 88:20	frequently 132:1 78:14 79:21,21	fault24:22 210:16 268:22,23 89:17 90:16 92:15	fresh 184:12
[0 124:22 127:21	FDA 75:17,18 213:10 269:15 93:15 94:20 95:18	friends 166:16
>215:18247:7	federal 86:13 96:14,21	finished 233:5 96:18 97:1999:3	front 37:13 62:4,9,10
145:10 97:5,16 107:14 185:9	firm 27:9,17 78:4 125:4 102:5,18 103:6 104:5	63:24 64:4 80:14
ely 170:16 191:8 193:9	firms 78:1 104:17 106:21 108:15	140:19 188:7 266:11
1	feed 133:11 134:2	first 6:24 9:18,23 11:3 109:6 110:9 111:17	fructose 229:12
__feel 9:21 107:24 139:14 11:7 14:13 20:5 21:9 112:22 113:15 115:2	frustrating 263:23
F_ 166:13,15 180:4 29:3 34:24 35:22 116:12 117:16 122:23	FTC 72:12 95:9 96:1,8
1:9 141:9 188:7211:4 43:19 61:21 62:2 128:12 129:11 131:11	96:11 97:14,22 98:4
us 141:9	feeling 218:2 86:17 87:1,2 104:20 142:13 143:6 145:13	98:10 100:21 101:16
217:24	fees 40:13 109:20 111:8 127:14 146:17 149:9 150:8	101:20 102:16 103:3
9	16:17 17:10	feet219:20 130:20 131:2 133:6 151:9 152:12 153:14	103:5,10,22,22
71:2,4.12,14	felt53:24 135:12,18 136:4 155:21 157:16 158:10	104:22,24 105:1,2,5
[ 101:24 108:9	fetal 68:22 137:24 138:3 140:4 160:15 162:19 163:14	105:18 106:1,15,16
>123:18,20,21	fever 49:7,9,11,17 147:19 151:11 152:4 165:12 169:24 173:13	106:17 109:13,13
i 1,22,22,22,23 50:13,20 153:18 159:8 164:14 174:12 175:10 176:12	136:2 137:9 138:4
>3 124:2,10,14	fewer 70:22 183:22 188:17 189:5 177:8,21 181:4,9	139:9,19,20 140:15
[5,23 125:7	field 54:17 57:10 165:1 203:4 204:13 219:4 182:13 184:9,15	142:3,14,17,20,22,23
>,2,5,8,10,13,14 165:18 176:16 249:9 233:13 237:7 244:11 185:16 187:15 191:14	143:8,19,19 144:7,11
[4,17 127:20 256:2 258:15 261:10 264:2 206:11 208:19,24	145:7,7,24,24 146:2,:
[9 130:19 132:17	fields50:21	firsthand 10:21 212:24 213:18 214:2	147:7 149:2,2,7,10,1]
>,19 136:15,20	Figueroa 3:8	first-year 163:19 216:24 222:21 223:14	149:17,18,23,24
>	140:8 143:21	figure 164:11	fit 203:12 223:24 225:3 226:2	150:15,22 151:3,17 [7 147:8 152:16	file 85:24 86:9,11 87:3	five 17:9 45:4 138:16 226:12 228:15,24	152:9 153:5,18,23 [6 155:13 177:2 219:7,9,14,17,19	fixed 242:1 259:2 229:7 230:10 231:4	154:13 168:18,19 [0213:22223:8 220:2	flesh224:13 240:24 247:8 248:12	179:5,6,12 180:24 >253:14 254:5	filed 38:21 39:14 46:3,4	flight269:8 249:19 253:2 257:13	181:2,2,11 182:8,9,11 [4 267:8 73:24	flip4:17,18,21 5:4,5,6 258:5,18 260:14	183:1,2,10,15 184:18 156:3,6	files 86:5,6 114:8 118:8,19 261:9 262:3 264:4,10	184:19 186:17,17,23 >6:16 127:1,10	fill 127:7 147:12 265:2266:8267:10	186:24 190:4,5,19,20 [164:1 257:18	filter67:l,4	floor 3:9 219:18,21 268:13	190:21 191:5 192:12
>	filtered 100:10 253:19	Florida42:12	format23:17	193:3,6,14,15,18,21 107:12,13 266:5	focus 80:24 89:1 119:1	formulate 88:8	194:3,4,18 195:12,13 [0 128:4	final 123:19 121:20 240:5	formulation 48:2	197:18 198:4,21 1066:6,16	finally 48:7 80:6	focused 57:13 82:18,21	forth 15:10 194:11	199:14,15,18 200:2 [109:17 113:21	financial 272:14 92:2 94:21 99:16 215:9 244:14 249:5	224:21 228:20 241: If >1 121:18 134:1	find 53:15 89:15 92:12 109:15 259:17	fortune 237:4 239:15	242:9 245:21 [156:22221:14 126:13 127:9 134:10	focusing32:1 51:5	forward29:19 103:19	FTC's 98:22 147:20
’ 269:21 177:5 183:14 255:23	follow 13:20 224:12	found 80:16 127:12	183:1 193:24
6:17 116:20 256:9 259:15 232:1 157:22 217:4	fueling 144:3
[ 1	finder 177:2,10	followed 26:5 57:11	foundation 88:21	full 24:9 78:21 127:21
20	finding 76:9 123:20,21	following 52:14 106:22 175:11 176:13	128:6 129:16 137:12
55:22 123:21,21,22.22,23	follows 7:1 47:18 49:24 208:24 258:6 261:9	138:10,13,15 143:12
106:18 123:23 124:2,10,13	follow-up 96:4 264:5	219:22
r 189:3 124:15,23 125:7	Food74:23	foundational 62:14	fully 26:13 181:13
73:17 126:2,5,8,17 127:20	footnote 248:1 250:22	founder 237:3 239:14	210:12
23:7 168:8 128:4,11 129:9,19 250:22	four 48:1 86:16	full-flavor 131:2
5 54:3 63:22 130:19 132:17 134:5	forefront 8:23	frame 52:4 93:19	152:22
[ 95:3 129:14 135:9,19 136:14,20	foregoing 271:5 272:7 104:21 189:5	full-flavored 137:18
i 179:1 232:17 139:5 152:16 154:16 272:8	framed 156:14 189:11	224:19229:16
[6 261:4 155:14 247:14	foreign 9:22	Frank 26:2,3,4,8	fundamental 105:14
ting 50:6,11	findings 4:19 94:2	forget 94:12 261:22 262:5,7	further 88:5 144:19
133:15 94:15 107:13,14 108:9	forgot 48:23	fraudulent 94:12	231:12269:3
>0 125:15 175:14 109:11 123:18 126:1	form 8:8 18:13 20:12	fraudulently 92:9	future 37:5 129:2
[8,21 179:15 126:13 127:16 135:6 20:22 23:2 25:14 93:10	_
[5 196:22 197:9 247:19	26:6 33:16 46:11,13	free 188:7	_G_
65:20224:4	260:17 265:18 271:6 264:13 268:22 269:9	237:16 260:21 261:13	156:15,17 157:5,12
k 27:10,11	gives 75:18 133:15 269:16	happens 16:5 31:24	157:20,23,24 158:2,7
>,20,21 30:19	giving 151:1 221:2	good 7:6,7 70:9,10,15	59:15	158:13,18 159:3,5,14
glad 247:24 74:11 166:23 225:4,5	happiness 53:6	159:16 160:11 163:2
ings 73:17	glamorous 255:23	Google 92:22,24 93:5,5	happy 52:19,24 53:16	167:15,22 168:20
110:19 11:23	glass 68:20 256:5	gosh 163:10	175:14 182:17 188:9	169:11,19 170:4
15:4 16:8,10	glasses 31:21,23 32:4,6	gotten241:4	haranguing 98:17	171:8,14,18,21 172:5
12,1238:11	221:16,16 222:8	government 77:2,3	harass 21:21	172:7,11 174:17,19
r 48:9,24 67:20	global 21:10 222:24 86:13 127:24	harassed 23:7	175:16,22,23 176:2
21 76:20 80:10	226:21 227:2,6,11	governmental 115:12	harassment 22:7	176:11 177:4 179:6
) 89:22 90:4	243:6	graduate 52:17	hard 14:4,21 15:17	191:18 193:7,11,14
99:23 101:11,12	go 9:1 23:23 27:4 28:4	graduated 12:22	16:2 60:13,14 69:2,3	193:15,18,19,21,22
1 111:18,24	29:18 43:7 47:5,23 221:20	130:12 140:16 254:20	194:1,3,7,19 195:14
>1 120:5 122:21	48:20 50:17 55:21	grandfather 239:17	254:24 255:5,7	195:22,23 197:18
’2 162:23 163:1	60:2 61:8,12 63:5	Granick27:9	257:12	198:3,4,15 199:5,14
[8 174:23 191:7	76:9 81:7,17 87:13	granular 132:22,23	harder 16:11 250:15	199:16,18,23 200:1,3
13	203:7,14	110:12 111:6 114:7	graph 123:7 178:2,3	harm 10:6	200:10,21201:17,24
[214:15 217:19	119:4 120:4 123:9 193:3	harmful 66:24 136:1	202:3203:13206:9
>1 223:8,23	130:1 141:16 148:2	graphic 179:1	176:10 229:11	207:11,21 208:8
[8 235:13 246:11	150:24 152:5 154:8	graphs 195:5	hate222:5	211:7,12,18 212:10
'251:19252:11	154:16 155:5 172:1	great 155:24 213:4	hazardous252:5	212:18,21,23 214:1
[8 253:8,11	182:18 183:9 189:4 238:14	hazards 77:20	214:19,22,24 222:18
[1,23 260:7	190:14,15 191:9	greater 129:2131:22	head 37:3,7 84:11	222:19 223:9,12,16
[5,19267:2,7	196:24 209:23 214:16 180:24 183:18 196:7	134:15 178:3	224:6,16 225:16
lize 139:3	217:3,12218:5,6	green 238:18,20,22,23	heading 244:17	226:8,14,20,22 227:8
[4	221:9 231:12 243:12	Greenwood 47:15,17	heads 61:9 163:20	230:9,12 231:8,16,17
lly 28:14 29:19	244:8 250:6 262:8	Greenwood's 47:6	168:12	232:1 233:24 234:18
i 48:8 50:24	266:4 269:3,18,18	grew 238:23 260:19	health 13:14 14:3,10,19	234:21 237:6,15,18
[75:4 90:13	God 93:2	group 8:2 14:16	15:2 16:3 17:18,20,24	237:22 240:2 241:1
>4 161:22 201:17 goes 11:6 45:8 119:12	gruesome 51:7,10	18:3,9 19:3,15 21:16	243:1,4,8,14 244:20
5 243:17 254:1	137:5 145:20 185:7 222:12	25:1 28:9,16 29:2,21	245:9,15,24 246:6
Is 174:23	194:10 209:12 216:1	guess 65:12 107:5	38:7,10 41:19 44:15	248:11,23 250:10,19
d's 14:14 29:3	216:13 219:16 114:2 132:16 162:21	47:11 48:14,15 51:16	252:13,24 253:9,12
4	159:18,23	going 9:19 13:21 20:1 183:6 245:4 267:13	51:21 56:11,16,21	253:14,22,24 254:6,7 [1,23 191:7	43:4 46:10 47:14,23	guy 266:16	57:15,21 58:3,9,23	254:17 255:6 259:24 >237:7,15,17	52:20,22 53:17 54:22	guys 178:7	59:18,2460:6,9,17	260:12,16,21 262:2
5	249:7 252:11	59:4 61:9 64:19	G-A-R-N-I-C-K 27:10	61:1,10 63:19,20,23	262:19 263:7,13,19 te 36:21	68:10 84:23 85:1,11	G-O-O-D 74:13	64:1,7,12 68:1,24	263:24 264:7,22
ted 76:14	86:11 93:4,6 95:18	__69:16,23 70:1,21,22	265:10,14,19 266:3,6
269:14	109:1,4 110:24,24	_H__71:2,3,11,17,23 74:6	267:22 268:7,7,12
43:1744:1	111:3 117:24 118:8	H4:9 273:1 274:1	75:23 76:7,22,24 77:4	healthier 154:23 155:9
ny 35:12	118:19 119:1 122:14	habit 15:9	77:4,7,20 81:2 82:16	hear 29:16 127:3
12:8 26:9 60:12	123:9 124:3 125:24	habits 151:4	84:13 85:22 86:2,20	136:17,18 184:24
) 121:12 140:24	126:4,9 127:14,15	habituation 15:1	87:9 89:2,14,21 90:6	heard 83:22 123:1
[164:13 165:17	128:15 129:18,21	Haines29:15	90:14 91:10,14 94:22	126:18 178:12 224:2(
[3,23 189:21	130:12,19 133:5	half 40:13 85:10 160:24	94:24 96:15 97:14,15	227:18 228:4 231:7
[1 224:17 232:17 135:16 136:18 141:7 188:17,18	98:9,11 99:17 100:4,8	hearing 161:14,16
i 260:15	141:16 145:23 150:5	Hamlet 125:14,17,21	100:14 101:7,15,17	166:2
:8,10 61:14,15	151:3 152:2,5 167:3	hampered 138:17	102:7 103:24 106:19	hearings 153:19
81:288:19 93:6	167:11 178:2 185:19	hand 123:17 145:22	109:23 111:5 113:5	heart 11:10 49:22 50:4
>,18 104:20	185:20 193:16 194:15 169:10272:17	113:11,18 115:4,20	77:7
>	140:17 149:17	194:18 195:9 199:7	handing 146:11	115:23 116:8,9,14,20	heavily 156:8
5,19	181:16	209:20 211:24 215:8	hands202:8 239:4.5,10	116:24 117:12 118:20	Hedges3:7
[1 208:1 227:14	215:21 218:1,6,7	hanging 243:21	119:2,16,23 120:20	held 2:3 87:12 153:19
>240:14 250:14	222:3 225:10 233:5	happen 164:13 178:9	121:1,10,24 122:19	161:14 251:21 252:15
>0	242:18 243:13 244:12 201:13 202:5	123:4 127:23 128:18	260:2,9
4:18 52:7 99:6	249:4 256:5 257:9,9	happened 30:19,20	134:17 144:23 145:17	help 31:20 48:4 96:5
>3	historians 21:21 23:8 22:24 34:19,20 61:22	139:19 157:4 158:17 108:12,20,23 110:12
; 118:2	23:15 60:11 84:3 118:14 119:8 121:21	168:18 179:4,12	112:4 115:15,17,19
igfield 133:14	108:17 164:11 123:24 146:23 167:5	180:23 194:17 198:3 116:9,14,16 118:22
1139:13	historic 36:6 167:13 168:22 200:6	262:24 263:20 268:10 119:16 120:23 122:1
igfield's 134:5	historical 11:14 13:17 216:17 262:13	inclusive 80:15	122:5,7,19 157:13
12	47:13,16,18 48:2	identified 78:15 80:18	incorporated 1:11 6:4 158:1 165:17 171:22
es92:24 93:1,6	51:24 52:4 53:1 105:22 204:10 206:5	225:24 174:7 186:16 190:18
9,17,21	94:12,13	55:13 57:11 63:9 217:22	incorrect 233:16	192:13,21 193:11
>	79:20 88:15 91:13,16	identify 6:12 38:7 42:7	incorrectly 36:8	195:15,21 206:8
19:23 23:1	99:24 107:16 108:4 48:11 60:16 85:23	increase 252:1,4	211:5 216:6,8 217:14
[ 61:23 118:15	108:13 148:18 157:3 87:2 111:4 145:23	increased 252:4	222:18,20,23 223:9
>2 124:1 146:24	189:6 191:21 192:11 157:2,4 158:6 189:22	increasing 206:10	223:22 224:7,9,24
) 168:23200:7	historically 50:8 239:1,2	increasingly 254:9	225:22 226:10,11
[4	history 13:13 14:11	identifying 76:10	independent 208:19	227:2 231:14 238:2
to 272:16	17:15 24:12 28:8 175:23	independently 9:6	263:8 264:16 268:15
5:15	38:6 49:1 50:24 51:1	idiosyncratic 232:10	65:14 66:4	268:17
ild 125:1	51:1,3,4,6 54:4,24	1135:23	indexes 76:18	informing 48:20
ing 81:23	208:6 234:15,20	illegal 9:11	indicate 16:23 96:20	infra 131:23,23
ic 92:22	235:15 236:24	Illinois 34:6 40:9	103:18 166:19 182:16	ingenuity 210:1
1:3 16:24 17:8	hold 213:22 217:23	illness 7:14 8:13 50:16	189:7 193:22 253:19	ingest 130:24
[0 105:6229:12	243:19	illnesses9:4	indicated 190:17 192:2	ingredients 240:14
[1 256:10 257:8	holding 144:17	illuminate 136:11	indicating 150:1	inhalation 252:2,5
15:22 100:22,23	home 269:17	illustrate 114:10	197:20	inhale 137:16
[,17 102:11	homicides 9:11	illustrates 224:22	indignant 267:1	inhaled 11:2 137:17
n 05:23 113:6	hope 36:23 117:20	imagination 193:4,17	individual 42:11,17	inhaling 144:18
[9 142:9 143:3	228:17	imagine53:23 72:2	60:5,7,18 72:4 106:2	inherent 75:21 246:1
[1 146:7 149:17	Hopkins 84:9,16.17,20	immature 255:16 257:8	149:13 225:1,5,23	inherently 76:3,6 121 :S
i 156:18 167:17	horizon205:14	immune50:2	individually 1:6 3:4	151:21 152:9 245:6
[2,20 171:1,16	hospital 77:16,17	impact 51:16 94:18	273:3 274:3	initial 108:10 248:17
[4 241:11,14	hospitals 41:5,9,24 172:4,10	individuals 137:10	input 108:2 126:12
[8 245:20 246:15	hot 71:6	implication 147:20,21	138:6 184:20
[6 249:22 256:12	hotel269:14	implied90:3	industry 27:15,21	inputs268:16
[5	hour 199:7	implies 147:2,14	90:11,1391:995:8	inquiry 52:4 79:21
96:23	hours 234:4 259:10 151:14	96:8 97:18 99:1	99:16 107:16 108:4
icotine 247:18	housed 219:22	important 14:23 17:19	157:4,21 159:1.15,22 108:13 189:6,11
;ht 36:5	hugger 125:14 17:24 18:3 50:4	160:2,3 174:10	191:21 192:14,15
in 7:9,13,17,19	human 102:3,6 210:1 54:17 59:22 68:15	186:23 189:7 195:13 215:12
2,14	9:12,14	253:16,21 115:8 182:3 186:15	200:13 201:3 202:13	inserted 203:4
), 12 13:23 16:15	humans 14:10 93:3,8 190:18 192:13 195:14	203:18 206:18 207:12	inside 125:10
121:12,12,19	hundred91:18 92:5 237:2248:17	207:16 261:6 267:20	insight61:15 120:22,24
>25:8 27:21	166:2	imprecise 261:16	268:10 230:7
14	47:4,9 50:7	hundreds 172:16 185:1	impression 70:22	industry’s 51:21	instance 125:6 133:6
152:15,17 53:19	hungry 37:8	improperly 227:24	157:15	instances 56:24 121:5
1,18,23	55:10	hypotheses 249:4	inaccurate 103:23	inexperienced 255:17	Institute 32:19 58:7,8
) 59:16 60:5,16	hypothesis 48:6 251:20	inaccurately 227:15	infection 49:24	58:12 84:12 86:22
12	67:13 75:9	hypothetical 52:14	inadequate 131:8	infections 49:24	87:5,6,17 88:10,13,It
) 91:8 100:3	53:19 54:11,21,23	inception 94:17	inferentially 113:7,12 89:1,6,14,23 90:8,12
5 107:12,12,15	55:2,10 93:6 163:13	incident 85:20	113:16,17.18 114:24 90:17,18 172:5 261:7
[7,21,24 108:4	163:21,22,23.24	include 14:24 88:16	116:6 262:24 263:21 264:9
[1,13,24 110:6	164:8,15 91:16 130:22 139:7	inferred 17:22	264:20 266:2 267:1,7
H19:15 120:18	_ 157:14,21 158:8	influence 109:2 117:13 267:21 268:10
J 131:19 132:4	_I_ 268:17	influenced 172:20	Institute's 58:24
[3 174:9 179:9	idea 53:4 70:9 72:23	included40:12 78:16	information 8:7 38:13	institution 53:11
[1 182:6,23	134:15 143:12,14 79:23 102:21 127:18	38:15 43:6 47:10	instruct 215:24
H92:8 197:13	150:16 164:17 210:21 158:23	59:18,23 60:17,20	intake 144:13 147:10
>200:18201:9	226:18234:9	includes 140:18 151:22	61:16 62:16 63:8,9 250:14,15
[8 207:10 223:21	ideas 255:19,21	including 25:19 28:23	67:1,5,18 76:1088:17	intakes 139:11,23
;d 161:11	111:7,10 112:15,15	Judicial 1:2 6:6	169:11,19 170:24	170:7,10 171:24
ly 132:1 137:15	112:16 113:12 166:19	July 272:19	171:15 172:11 175:24	172:15,17,20 173:18
ye 148:16	171:7,10,13,17 173:7	jump 152:16	177:4 184:16,16	174:1,5,9,14,15
yely 249:22	184:18 185:8 187:20	jurisprudential 92:19	186:15 187:13,14	175:14 177:9 178:9
>0:12,13 98:4,10	189:8 193:9 195:11	juror 127:4	189:8,8 190:18	180:3 181:11,17
r 134:23 150:14	198:5 203:7,15 230:8	jury 126:11 127:4,5,8	191:18 196:17,18	182:16 183:11 185:2
>1,22 266:10	244:4 246:6	177:12,13,15 222:4,5	197:3,4 200:11,12,13	186:7 187:22 189:15
mally 188:14	issued 240:21266:21	222:12	200:14,22.23 201:3,4	189:17 190:15 191:1(
tion 182:8	issues 18:9 24:24 25:8	Justice 33:11	202:3,14,15 203:13	191:10,20 196:9
tions 182:24	28:22,23 33:22 80:21	__203:18,19 206:19,20	197:9,17,18,19
1 101:5 212:15	82:14 108:8 158:19 _K__207:11,12,13,16,17	201:20 203:12 205:6
[4	159:5,16 160:11	keep 105:9 114:7	207:21,22 208:20,21	207:20 208:11,17
ted8:3 77:1,9	169:5 188:22 208:1	180:10243:16	220:22 221:2 228:10	209:1,2,11 210:19
96:3 99:24	218:15 224:4 262:2	kept 98:16 151:17,18	230:8,8,8 241:2 263:7	211:1,7 212:13,17,17
’,14 101:6 106:2	264:23	Kessler 33:10 93:21,23	263:14,15	213:8,9,14 214:22
[5 175:23 259:4	issuing 267:3,3	94:2 123:19 125:9	know 7:13,16 8:14,19	217:9,14 223:16,18
[2,14	italicized 24:2	127:3 128:20 129:3,6	8:21,22,23 9:7,16	224:5,10 225:5,8,9
ting 50:12 257:1	italics 122:1	131:6,6 132:19 133:7	10:12 15:20,21 16:16	226:20,23229:19
ediary 120:10	iterations 216:14	179:21 180:17	16:23 17:2 18:7 19:5	230:19,20 232:1,1
1182:22 83:1	i.e 70:21 135:13 252:24	Kessler's 91:19 109:10	19:7 21:15 23:12,18	233:5,23 237:13,14
[9 142:5 152:18	__126:6 128:15 134:15	25:3 26:14,16 27:3	237:21,22 239:3,13
>0 184:7,23 _J__134:23	29:10,17 31:17 33:5,8	240:6,20 241:12,18
[,6 186:18,21	J4:13	key 24:12 111:9	33:12 35:8 39:3 41:7	241:22,24 242:1,4,6,'
[2 189:6 190:16	James 3:16 6:16 43:17	kids 45:18 178:13,17	42:3,10,10 44:17,24	245:9 246:7 247:10
[0 198:13 199:20	239:16	256:9	45:17 51:10 54:6,14	248:14 250:1,2,4,11
1209:8,9 210:2	Jared 178:11,12	kill 67:6,16 88:19	54:15,16,18 55:15,17	251:2,5,12 252:8,17
>3	JASON 1:5 3:3 273:2	264:23	55:19,21,23 56:3	254:14,24 255:2,23
illy 106:17	274:2	killed 175:8,8 266:22	60:1361:6,6,965:1	256:1,1,13257:2,14
it 83:16	Jersey 31:8 39:17	killing 267:9	65:11,23 66:9,23 67:6	257:18 258:15 259:2(
et 65:11 136:9	Jewish56:7	kills 9:9 11:2448:17	67:9,15,16 68:22,23	260:15,20 261:18,22
etations 38:17	Jews 56:1	kind 9:20 13:20 24:2	70:8 71:3,22 72:3,6,9	262:6 264:10,21,22
eted 190:9	job 1:21 186:4,7,10	43:6 52:16 63:6	72:10,13 73:5 75:1,13	264:23 265:5,6,8
eting 36:3	Joe 256:22 257:2	67:12 74:16 80:21	77:15 78:7,7,11 79:2	266:10 268:5 269:10
gatory 127:8	John 84:16,18,20	82:21 92:22 109:20	80:12 81:12 83:19,20	knowing 80:15 96:3,13
pt 191:19	Johns 84:9,16	124:6 132:12,12,22	83:24 85:3 88:6	257:24 269:13
iced 189:19	Johnson 104:12,13	135:8 150:19 156:12	89:18,18,20,23 90:3,6	knowledge 28:8,15
>3	joined 125:3	169:14 172:1,19	90:8 93:1,3,8,16,18	29:1 41:20 48:16
iction 127:13	joint 4:14 32:9,13	179:3 185:12 206:13	94:9,13,21 95:21,24	127:22 130:23 135:2]
227:21,24	34:17	212:10 215:7,8,9,22	97:2,23,24 98:1,3,5,7	135:22 139:8,20
ibly 150:4,11	Jon23:15	216:11 218:21 219:13	98:9,15 99:5,11 102:3	145:8 156:15 158:6
205:3	journal 77:12 80:19,20	226:6 232:4	102:15 103:2,8,18,20	173:24 180:24 181:1
id 92:22	80:22 88:3 248:2,10	kinds 37:2,2 75:6 80:23	105:11,15.16 106:14	195:20,23,24 196:2,7
id 25:4 27:11,14	251:1 258:12	97:4 140:9 181:23	106:24 108:17,18	201:16,24 203:14
42:12 111:20	journals 76:22 77:15	Kinkade 1:23 2:14 6:10	109:22 111:18,22	204:3,4 205:24
>	77:16,17,17,18	272:3	115:11,21,21 116:16	224:18 226:1 231:14
ng 93:6 159:5,16	judge 33:10 91:18	Kirkland 219:3,3	117:24 120:3 121:7	234:16237:6241:8
;rable 17:1	93:20,23 94:2 107:14	knew 24:20 56:10	121:10,12 125:3	245:15
ial255:16	107:19,22 108:8,8	65:18 69:9,10 71:12	127:8,17 128:19,24	knowledgeable 27:19
ant 90:1	109:10 123:19 125:9	71:13 72:7,11 82:16	132:10,13.15,16,17	known 28:2 71:8 96:10
ctive 53:9 95:1	126:6,9,10,10,11,18	86:2,2 91:15,17 102:7	133:8 134:2,7,7,18,22	113:4,11 144:23
[5	127:2,2,2,9,11 128:15	102:24 103:3,4,9,12	135:2,2,4,17 137:3,23	150:7 152:19 206:8
22:4	128:19 129:3,6 131:5	103:14 105:18 106:4	137:24 138:9,12,18	248:10259:24
168:14,15 178:4	131:6 132:19 133:6	106:5 109:12 117:8	140:2,12 143:19	knows 71:2 93:1,2
5,10	194:22	134:15,22 140:13	117:12 119:3 128:2	148:4 150:15 151:13	225:2 257:15
3:14 52:1,21	179:21 180:9,17	131:21 132:14 133:2	151:19 153:16 155:12	Koop 266:17,18 267:7
68:22 80:20	judge’s 209:12	142:4,14 144:15	155:22 158:1,16	Kyriakoudes 22:9,11
87:8 91:2 103:9	judgment 40:7,8	149:2,2,10,14,24	159:17 160:16 161:1	22:14
4*2 256 17	lengthy 20:4 88:22 169:22 171:3,9,19	long-held 139:8,20	63:15 64:13 76:5
•21 106-21	Leo 49:10 176:21 177:6,23	look 9:1 23:20,21 28:24	101:9,16,24 104:2
ge9'2235-2022	lessen 28:11 41:22 213:15,15,23,23	31:22 52:20 53:7,17	110:3,4 112:19 113:6
[15 63*1 74-10	letter 258:11 230:18,21 231:1,1,15	54:1 60:12 63:1 81:8	113:14 114:14,19
5’ ' '	letterhead 35:13 263:17	82:4,15 102:22	116:11 119:18 145:1(
7-725-1271-24	letters 152:19	likelihood 89:12 263:23	157:18,22 173:21	146:6 148:7 156:17
{1 ' '	let’s 11:22 27:3 31:10	limitations 181:12	175:15,15 176:3	167:16,20 169:11,20
14	6 46 5 20 21	31:20 52:16 53:13	Linda 1:23 2:14 6:10	181:15 182:17 183:11	169:22 171:3,15
, ' ’	61:1 79:7 89:22 272:3	188:7 202:9 209:13	175:24 177:4 211:13
76.20	99:15 137:7 148:2,2	line 18:23 20:19 99:15	217:11 221:7 242:15	246:14 253:10 263:8
1.5	3.4 273-2	150:24 152:16 155:2 122:12 133:15 173:2	262:6 265:4,7 266:12	265:22
>	' ’ '	155:5 182:2 189:4 199:18 216:1 218:6	267:11 268:16	lowered-tar 76:3
54.16	214:16 223:2 247:24 273:7 274:7	looked 14:18 17:17	111:13 117:1
1 30-2268-20	250:6 251:18 270:1	linear219:20	41:14 85:7,13 88:24	lowering 251:23
[4 264-20 266-21	level 88:1 104:2 105:6,6	lines 184:6 199:20	95:14 162:13 189:14	lower-tar 244:22
3.24	* ‘	132:2 146:5 148:3,14 214:15 215:12	189:18 214:12,14,17	252:12
31-23 136-22	156:22 199:1 234:5,6	link8:12	218:15 230:14,23	lower-yield 243:18
[2 ‘ ’	234:11 249:11,12,18	linked 148:23 152:10	262:5	low-delivery 131:1,24
ed 230-20	249:21,23 250:13 152:11,13	looking 44:14 55:18	low-nicotine 152:21
ina 230-18	251:13,17,20,23	linking234:19	63:11 80:9 124:13	247:16250:14
35-9 10 74-22	252:3 258:22 259:9	list 30:12 80:10,13,17	125:6 128:21 134:24	low-tar 18:24 19:3,15
f 78*1 107*13	260:19 217:15 221:11 237:20	141:15 157:23 158:11	21:16 28:14 33:22
[5 127-10 13	levels 142:8 143:2 238:5,6	164:19 230:11 246:16	44:16 48:15,18,21
[9 205-16 213-8	147:15 148:16 149:6	literature 82:19 158:21	246:21 247:10,11	61:13 82:17 94:23
j ' '	150:6 151:7 241:16	litigation 23:9 27:12	267:13	102:10 115:5 136:1
.s 174-22	243:17 244:24 245:20 40:18 81:19 108:6	looks 10:12 119:5	137:15 152:20 170:7
9:2027:8 52:11	246:12,14 247:1 204:11,14 205:21	124:8 168:11 178:6	212:10,18 215:2,6
>94-8 135-11	Lewis 84:9,10 206:7	Lorillard 32:14,16,17	224:8,15237:24
s23-7 25 20	librarian 82:11	litigations42:13	42:20	253:1,13 254:6 264:8
7 42-20 24 83’10	libraries 79:12	little 13:16 24:7 30:4	Lorsen 180:6	264:12 265:11,21
[4 169-2 192-2	library 104:10 217:8 61:20 63:5 68:4	Los3:1079:24	low-yield239:24
[7 216*9 23 ’	life 10:6 69:6 74:19 77:5 95:19	losing 138:23	240:21,22 242:24
>424227-17	lifestyles 154:23 155:9 103:7 127:13 138:23	lot8:17 27:18 55:657:7	lunch 110:16 114:10,11
'q '	light 33:14 45:4 56:11 143:14 146:10 165:14	65:10 83:23 89:5,20	118:9,10 218:4
,19 176.6	56:17 57:21 58:3,9,23 174:8 178:9 191:8	134:17 135:3 166:9	lung 49:4 77:7 173:8
•15 15 18 19 21	59:6,6,6,10 61:11,13 218:11 222:5 224:13	178:18 181:11 185:3	234:19 240:1 243:1
9	51-269-6 ’	62:3,3,5,7,10,24 237:1,23 258:19	187:17 197:18 224:4	L.A 161:14
>	165.g ‘	63:11 64:8,10 69:13	lives 54:6	227:1,10 245:17	_
251.8	69:17,19,23 70:20,23	LLP2:63:7,17	lots 120:14 155:22 _M_
*	7-14 17 18-5	72:6,10 75:3,9,10,11	lobbying 8:4,23	189:18 196:22 208:2	M3:16
130-167-17	75:16,21 76:4 88:18	local 77:8	Louis 1:3 6:6 40:23	machine 100:24 101:21
) ' '	90:15,23 91:12 92:3,9	located 106:14	41:12,16 76:13,15	101:23 105:16,20,21
259.14	94:4,16 97:15 98:24	logic 149:1,23 165:6	77:2,18 79:5,8 80:1,2	106:3,6 138:10 140:9
jq-16	99:18,19 100:5,9,12 263:18 264:1 265:13	84:2285:8,14	143:9,20 149:16,24
il95;8	106:18 109:24 111:11	logical 184:13,13	love59:14	150:1
236-45 23	112:17 113:12 116:24	logically 207:9	loved 125:21	machines 239:18
li	95-10	117:14 124:20 150:2	Lombardi 43:17,22	low 100:10 105:6	Machine-rolled 30:6
*•9 167-15 168*9	150:5 212:22,22 44:1,10	115:11 121:14 211:19	made-up 204:23 205:1
Jo 262-18 269-13 213:3 214:8,13,14.18	London250:19	212:1,5 241:13	Madison 34:6
id 114-20 169-7	224:18 225:15 229:4	long 11:14 13:13 14:5	252:16 264:14	magazine 23:18
>15 21 25-7 10	229:5,15,19 231:7,15 14:11 33:20 47:24	lower 15:22 100:18,23	magazines 120:14
94-7 12 97-6	242:5,8 246:23 49:16 59:4 80:13	105:24 119:18 133:13	maintain 181:2 234:6
, '	264:24 84:24 108:12 232:19	134:16 142:10 143:4	234:11 250:13 252:3
59-1064-12	Lights 62:12 63:12,21 233:6 241:11 255:10	148:16 149:18 150:1	258:22 259:9 260:18
111-13 113-14	63:21 64:9 93:11 262:5 269:4	151:5 154:21 155:7	maintaining 190:5,21
i419 '	94:15 109:23 111:13	longer 12:10 130:14	171:1 241:5,14,23	maintenance 68:1
175-7 222-10	112:19 113:13 114:13 141:15 144:18 180:12	242:2 244:24 249:21	183:2
ty 17:1078:23	mastered 9:22	240:10 242:9,10	123:3 160:13 167:19 205:9 208:16 209:8
1,22	masterpiece 184:6	243:6 245:7 249:12 167:21 169:22 170:3	mind 20:8 28:6 42:8
*	13:22 54:23	material 53:7 83:23	250:24 264:10 268:14 171:8,18 176:2,10	65:18 74:15 88:5
99:9,23 121:16	208:7 216:21 217:4,8	269:7 193:24 194:18 199:5 98:3,4 145:18 173:6
[6 134:5 140:18	materially 94:16 103:3	meaning 114:2,7 140:6 199:23 200:1 212:20 180:10 181:22
i2	263:21	211:6	188:16 227:3 253:24	mischaracterizes 183:4
date 182:11	materials 54:20 55:15	meanings 46:17 249:15	memo 105:8	mislead 106:18 150:17
dated 95:9 96:8	74:4,5,6 76:14,19	249:16	memoranda 152:18	160:13 182:11
[ 184:18 192:12	77:11,12 78:15,16,24	means 38:5 47:20 55:8	memories 225:9	misleading 135:23
dating 168:18	79:1,17 82:19,20 88:6	68:9 107:21 131:23	memory 225:9 267:5 139:9,21 140:6 146:1
>	183:10 185:8	98:8 217:6,10	138:12 160:21 168:20	mention 45:20 103:12 149:8 150:7,14
[0 194:17 196:10	mathematics 168:10	185:21 227:20,24	143:21 174:16 258:16 160:12,24 161:9,10
dation 187:1	matter 6:3 13:7 16:8,10	234:23241:3	mentioned 42:16 74:18 168:2 176:21 177:7
>0 199:2	62:14 88:15 101:12	meant 21:1 52:8	82:3 86:15,16 180:17 186:17212:22
dative 181:21	109:20 121:6 149:1	measure 44:22 228:20 185:7 220:19 231:24	misled 97:17 99:1
r 245:22	149:23 172:17 184:13	240:6,6	merely 246:21	109:13 111:12,12
icture 257:24	184:14 223:8 246:11	measured 101:16	Merit 2:16 272:4	112:18 140:9 142:2
jctured 62:18	261:5 263:18 264:1	153:21 240:13,17,23	Merits224:15	160:20 161:2,8
)	265:13	241:19 245:21	message 26:2 115:23 163:13 164:8 190:20
icturer 18:5	mature 257:10 258:2	measurements 105:15 116:20,20,24 123:1,5 191:7 195:13,13
>	Mayan 168:12	149:18,18	170:9,11 209:15	mispronounce 22:8 24:4	MD 35:4,13	measuring 106:4 211:23 264:12 265:11 49:20
9:17 34:16,19	mean 9:17 11:17 13:12	149:12 153:5,8	267:20	misread 155:2
L9 123:15 145:22	14:2,20 15:18 16:15	media 120:14	messages 231:2 266:13	missing 55:24 155:18
>1 194:8	21:23 23:17 28:4,7	medical 7:9,13,19 8:5	method 47:13,16,18,19 184:20
1 19:22 20:9	30:21 38:4 41:17	8:11,14 9:12 10:10 48:2 53:2 57:12	mission58:19
[ 23:14 34:20	45:22 46:8,17,24	13:23 15:14 22:21	72:12 95:11 96:2,10	missions8:22
>	118:14 119:6,7	50:15 51:17 52:6	27:21 38:1,6 47:4	96:11,23 100:21	Missouri 1:1 6:5 41:6 ’1 123:24 146:23	53:21 60:23,24 63:7	54:4 56:9 59:16 60:4 101:1,16,20 103:22 41:20 42:1 45:3 72:7 ), 13 168:22	63:12 64:8,13 65:9,19	60:16 66:2,12 67:13 103:23 104:22 105:1 72:11 74:3 76:22,24 >216:16 262:13	66:11 67:8 68:7,8,18	75:8 76:19,21 77:15 105:5,9,12 106:8,16 77:9,14 84:22 111:11 118:6,7 69:19	71:3,13 73:18 75:13	82:11 89:2 91:8 106:17 107:4,5 136:2 111:24 112:18 113:1 >4	78:18 86:12 87:9	94:22 100:1,2 101:5 137:9 138:5 139:9,21 113:13,18 115:17 ted33:14 70:20	89:5,19,24,24 93:16	107:11,12,15 108:4 140:15 142:3,23 116:21 180:13,16
) 92:9 93:11	96:21 97:5 100:7,12	108:11 111:4 119:15 143:19 145:7,24	220:13,14 263:16
15	168:2 176:20	102:20 103:10,11,17	120:18 131:19 132:4 146:3 149:7,11,24	Missouri-specific 74:3
>231:15	104:14 105:11,20	157:3,19 159:13	150:22 151:17 153:5 74:5 76:10 85:15,17
ting 66:19 94:17	107:1 108:19,20,20	174:9 179:9,11 182:5 153:8,18,21,23	misspeak 159:10
171:11 177:23	113:16 116:15 120:12	182:23 189:4 192:8 154:15 181:2 182:9	misspoke 159:8
1230:24 258:7	120:12 125:6 128:7	192:10 197:13 198:1 183:2 184:19 186:24	mistake 52:16,16 53:1
ig 62:1	128:15,20 132:7,9.12	200:18 201:8 206:17 190:5,21 195:12	53:19 54:24 55:10
270:2	134:15,23 135:3	207:10 208:5 223:21 224:21 241:18 245:21	mis-graphed 193:4
>ro45:4 59:5,6	138:8,15,17,21 140:7	231:22 233:19,23	methods 144:11	mode47:19
) 62:2,3,5,5,8,10	145:15,16 147:15,24	235:15,20 236:24	Michael 15:23 86:21	modification 193:16
[,12,24 63:11,21	148:19,20 150:17	248:2,9 251:1 258:12 143:15 234:3 249:6	modifications 46:14
10	72:6,10 75:10	162:11,21 163:6	267:18 250:7	modify 65:3,4 247:22
[94:15,16 99:18	164:19,23 165:14	Medically 232:4	Mickey 256:22	250:12
>3 111:10 112:17	167:21 169:23 171:4	medicine 7:17 25:8	mid 27:23 260:12	moment 16:3,4 21:4
[2 114:13,18	171:20 172:13 177:9	50:24 51:18 235:12	middle 44:17 122:12	119:9 121:20 145:18
[4 150:2,3,4	181:17,18,21 183:13	235:18 236:8	125:8 210:13 257:8 200:10
’0,22,23 168:2	183:14 184:24 188:21	meet 236:10,13	midmorning 218:4	monies 41:9
>2 171:3,9,9,19	190:8 191:5,15,19	meetings 210:23	Miles 18:19,20 34:1	Monograph 101:13
[9 176:20 177:6	194:2,20 195:17	member 60:5,8,10,18 37:15 40:2,4,7	159:23 211:11,18
>3 212:22213:15	198:24 202:4 204:3,3	71:12,20,22,23 72:4	Miles-Price44:14,20 212:1213:2 224:21
!3 214:1,8,9,12	204:4,24 205:8	171:2 193:6 200:3	203:10	258:12
[8,21 231:1,1,15	212:14 217:3 223:3,4	223:11 225:1,23	milligram 240:7,17	month21:24
1,5,8,8	263:17	223:10 224:1,4 225:5	members 114:13,17	milligrams 240:16,23	months 85:2 224:17
263:4	muscle 31:24 120:12 180:4 199:8	non-FTC 198:4	106:21 108:15 109:6
1:10,113:15	M.D 1:16 2:2 4:2 6:23 200:4203:1	non-historian 54:22	110:9 111:17 113:15
7 7:8 18:4,11	270:10 271:3	news 143:11	non-Light 91:12100:6 115:2 116:12 117:16
8,11	25:19 26:17	__newspaper 26:11 89:5	224:16 229:16	122:23 128:5,12
1231:12,12 _N_ 90:7 173:20	noon 268:23 269:8,15 129:11 131:11 132:6
), 14,22 34:1,4,18	N4:15:16:l	newspapers 164:23	normal 69:6 166:16	133:23 136:7 137:22
37:13,16 38:19	name 6:9 20:6 22:8	Nice209:10	normally 81:20 128:16 139:24 141:9 142:13
>39:6,23 40:1,1	82:7 84:17 168:10	nicotine 13:8,14,18,24	northwest 6:19	143:6 145:13 147:22
),21 57:2,15,20	204:23 266:16 14:5,10,22 15:10,12	nos 161:23 148:10 149:9 150:8
69:9,13,23 70:19	named 27:9 92:24 15:15,22,24 16:13	notarial 272:6,17	151:9 152:12 153:1
>	83:11 87:17	239:17 59:11 62:12 63:15	Notary 2:17 272:1,21 153:14 154:4,7
19	92:8 93:10	names 42:11 64:13 76:3,6 95:11	note 107:18	155:21 157:7,16
14	95:2,3,9	narratives 54:5,7 101:10,16,18,24	noted 136:21 137:8	158:10 160:15 162:6 r 97:3 102:15,24	narrow 38:12,15 54:12 102:10 103:13 104:2	notes 218:17,22 236:4,6 162:19 163:14 164:9
1,8,14,21	104:21	206:15 104:3,4 105:23 110:4	notice 7:19,21 188:10 165:12 169:24 170: 1* >4 105:4,7	Nation 21:23 22:18 111:13 112:20 113:6	noticed 7:11 47:12 173:13,17 174:12 [5,17 107:1	23:18,23 24:4 113:7,14 114:15,19	noting 137:4 175:10 176:12 177:8 >0 127:18 128:2	national 77:10 84:12 115:12 116:11 117:1	notion 61:9 67:6 177:14,21 179:14
[4 130:22 131:13	86:22 87:6 119:18,19 131:1	108:18 151:22 234:3 181:4,9 182:13 183:4
>139:8,19 142:1	nationally 41:24 132:2 137:12,14,16	249:10260:18	184:21 185:16 187:1^
[5 153:16 157:5	nature 38:9 41:4 62:18 137:17 138:7,9	number 6:6 7:21 9:19 189:13 190:6 191:14
[5 160:7,10	76:20 77:20 117:5 139:10,11,21,23	11:19,23,23 12:15	191:23 192:4,17
[7 164:4 168:1	140:17 182:23 198:12 142:6,8,9,10,24 143:3	13:4 17:8 20:7 31:13 195:16 196:19 197:7
[8 169:3 172:7	254:18 143:4,4,13 144:2,2	31:17,19 42:5 46:4	197:16 198:7,18
>175:5 176:1,20	Nazi55:4 145:9,10,11,16,19	48:10 61:19 77:16,24 201:10 202:17 203:2:
) 179:5,13	Nazis 55:8,24 146:4,6,6 147:2,8,9	78:2 80:20 81:7	206:21 207:18 208:2^
>3 183:15,21	near42:4 147:10,14,15 148:5,7	130:19 135:11 149:16 210:5 211:15 212:24
[6,18,23 185:8	nearly 247:17 148:8,14,17,23 149:2	165:22 185:2 206:10 213:18 214:2 222:21
[4 186:15 187:12	necessarily 54:15 56:7 149:6 150:2,6 151:5,8	216:13,14 219:19	223:14,24 225:3
[3 189:16 190:17	107:19,21 212:9 151:22 152:10 153:6	238:1,1,2 239:12	226:2,12 228:24
[1 194:17 196:8	216:3 222:19 223:11 153:6,9 156:17,18	241:13 251:3 252:1,2 229:7 230:10 231:4
[7 197:3 198:21	241:5 264:24 163:2 164:5 167:16	numbers 9:15 11:15,16 235:9 240:24 245:2
>2200:12201:2	necessary 66:13 141:9 167:17,21 169:12,13	17:13 130:1 184:24 248:12 253:2 257:13
[5,21 202:13	necessity 36:2 37:20 169:20,21,23 171:1,2	238:3 257:19 258:5,18
[1,11,18 204:16	38:2 171:4,16,16 176:1,9	numerous 137:10	260:14 261:9 262:3
[8 207:12,15,22	need 24:10 26:19 31:21 177:5 193:12 194:5	138:5 267:10268:13
t,20 213:14,22	31:23 60:10 65:2 211:13,14,20 212:6	nursing 76:22 77:16	objections 161:7
[7 220:23 228:10	81:8,10 96:20 115:10 215:2 231:23 232:3,5	N.W 2:73:18	229:18
[0 230:1,6,8,13	146:14 193:2 208:3 232:11 234:5,11,22	__objectivity 88:1
[7,20,24 231:2	251:22 266:4	240:17,23 241:24 _Q__obligated 107:21
15	256:19,20	needed 113:23 157:14 243:15,17 244:24	0 6:1	observations 72:20 r,15 261:23	needs 65:7 245:1,7,11,21 246:4	oath 18:21 163:11 73:16
1274:4	negating 252:6 246:10,13,14,15,22	obesity 17:19 51:5	observe 216:12
's 18:7 69:19	negative 159:21 247:1,18,21 248:16	object 43:2 46:10 88:20	obstetrician 69:5
[7 133:19 142:16	neither 60:18 140:19 249:6,18,21,23 250:3	89:17 90:16 95:18	obstetricians 69:1
>0 177:23 195:20	272:12 250:13,16 251:6,9,13	104:17 112:22 124:19	obtain 62:23 132:1
•68:14	neurodevelopment 251:17,21,23,24	124:22 141:7 146:15 139:11,22 142:8
:ycle 36:24	255:18 253:10 254:12 255:2	146:17 184:9 187:2 146:5 147:10 148:8
256:22	neuron 36:21 92:20 255:8 258:16,22	194:20 215:23 216:24 149:5 245:20 247:23
,247:17	neurons 36:17 37:2,3,3 259:9,23 260:19,24	227:15 228:15 247:8 247:23 261:5
7:3 114:10	37:4,5 263:8 265:15,16,22	264:2,4 265:2 266:8	obtainable 251:1
15:3,4 162:24	never 19:5,9 29:8,13 266:5	objection 8:8 18:13	obtained 153:21 217:1^
15:22 50:8	51:16,18,20 83:14.21	nine 17:11 31:1	20:12,22 23:2,10	220:10
;253:21	87:15 89:8 147:21	nine-month 107:14	25:14 26:6 33:16	obvious 225:15
r 125:15	151:10,12 198:24	nonexpert 116:2	60:2262:1471:15,18	obviously 30:8 42:22
le 135:20 184:24	204:19 224:20 227:18	nonfiltered 100:11	72:22 73:3 80:4 91:3 94:7 97:1 144:15
'■stem 49:23	228:4 235:3 236:5	nongraphic 123:10	92:15 93:15 94:20	195:4 266:4
160:18 166:12 173:18 174:3,8 175:5 103:13,16 109:10	overall 19:11	partially 62:9
>255:15 176:19 177:1 178:2 110:2 112:21 113:1,3	overbroad 79:16	participants 158:8
ins 31:14 236:17 178:24 179:20,22 117:8 120:19 122:18	overly 259:17	particular 11:15,16
[3:18 180:2,17,21,21 182:2 123:19 126:6 128:3	over reaction 50:2	14:15 21:14 26:10
ad 64:2 88:10 184:12 185:11,21,23 128:10,15 129:8,10	owners 52:21,23 53:5,7	28:6 54:16 61:7 66:5
ing 74:2 141:11 186:4,8 187:7,24 129:15 131:9,14,18 53:10,18,23	66:14 68:11 80:19,22
65:2,6 81:4 188:23 190:7,14 132:3 133:2,20 136:5	__81:1 82:5 91:10
r 19:18 191:1 193:2,16 194:8 137:1,19 138:15	_P__96:23 98:16 99:9
35:14 194:15 199:6,13 139:14,16 142:12,18	P6:l	100:16 107:2 111:24
6:1,7,9 202:9 203:4,16 204:2 152:24 153:12,22	pack 59:11 62:17	119:9 135:4 137:3
272:6 204:7 206:13 207:6,7 156:7 163:16 164:18 114:14,19	162:10 188:20 193:9
2:3 208:15 209:23 210:17 165:3 171:14 172:19	packaging 231:1	202:3,23 203:11
s 17:18 71:3 214:16 215:8 216:4 176:6 177:16,24	page 4:2,11 5:3 20:5,8	208:6 214:12 217:16
mes 81:6 217:20 219:2,13,17 181:16,24 182:4,12 20:9,23 21:18 24:9	218:9 222:23 234:5
i32:5 40:4 49:14 220:1,14,17,20 184:17 187:11 190:12 35:23 133:15 204:8	239:20 258:21 264:1:
[92:20 108:1 221:15 222:15 224:12 196:16 197:3,20 247:4 273:7 274:7	267:21
[0 123:13 130:9 226:6 228:20 230:23 198:1 201:2,15,22	pages 1:22 33:21 34:24	particularly 44:15
’4 178:14 196:6 233:8,18 234:12 202:2 207:15 208:20 91:18 92:5 166:2	78:24 80:24 191:5
’1 233:8,18 238:8 240:9,20 244:3 211:10 213:22 214:5 209:8	203:9 210:20 234:1
i 250:17 244:12,17 245:19 225:7 229:13 231:20	paint 51:2	253:17
5,24	11:8,21 247:4,10,24 248:5,8 231:21 255:3 260:5,6	painted 238:21	parties 126:12 215:11
10,23	13:20 248:19 250:6 251:5 261:21 264:17 267:19	pall25:l	215:12272:13
’ 18:9 19:17 251:18 254:11 255:14	opinions 21 :3 35:23	pamphlet 86:15	partly 237:12
>	23:14 27:1,8 255:22 256:24 261:2 56:15,20 57:8,8,9,10	pamphlets 86:14,16	partner 68:10
j 30:1,18 31:1,11 261:19 262:8 263:12 57:23 59:17 113:10	paper 30:13 114:17,20	parts 51:7 87:13
) 32:9,21 33:8 264:19 266:1,15 121:8 132:24 134:19 118:4 123:18	102:21 153:24 235:1:
>	36:22 37:11 267:17 268:20 269:21 135:17 138:20 176:22	papers 135:3	Pasetta39:6 16,2442:21	old 105:9 107:4 256:5 184:15 185:14 186:5	parachute9:20	pass 12:21 124:24
i 45:10,24 47:3	older 36:12 59:15 188:21 197:14,15	paragraph 24:9 36:1	passed 74:22 213:8
[,23 48:22 52:10	oldest 49:9,10 200:16 201:8 216:7 37:20 138:20 188:24	passing 98:8
>53:8 54:21	Oliver 3:7 227:11 228:11 237:14 202:19,24 203:1,2,21	path 172:2
[61:18 62:19	omniscient 93:2	opportunity 210:12 204:5,9,13 205:20	patience 169:2 269:22
18	64:11,15 65:8	once 209:17 244:24	opposed 44:6 47:11 206:4 207:3 234:13	patient 12:21 67:22
68:7,20 72:6	ones 17:5 50:5 97:22 152:21 262:21 239:24 242:23 244:13	patients 16:17 41:10
21 78:482:6 172:13 217:22,23	opposite 24:19 247:13 250:6 251:18	67:15,21 73:1
>85:20 92:2	one’s 83:13	optimum 247:21 258:10 261:16	patterns 247:22
[95:23 97:12	ongoing 29:16,17 42:10	option 65:5	paragraphs 243:11,11	pause 242:14
i 99:15,24 101:3 174:6	oral 118:1 244:13	pay 24:15 174:19
[2 103:7,20	onward 30:7 100:4	order 51:23 132:1	paragraph-long 264:3	paying 85:3
[3 107:13 108:1 101:7 148:13 143:1 157:11 201:21	paralegals 77:24 78:4	pays 222:5
>,17 111:3	open 25:11,20,22,23 230:6 252:3 78:14 79:11 80:3,9	pediatric 12:16 67:14
[6 117:22 118:6 26:5,12 173:9 262:10	organization 8:21 84:21 220:11,15	pediatrician 12:9 13:1£
[,13,22 120:2,11 264:21 14:19 15:3 58:16	parcel 147:16	14:1 16:16 27:6
17,20	121:6,18	open-ended 29:20 60:10 65:19,20,22	parent204:18	68:11 231:22 233:19
[9,24 122:10,15	open-question 173:1,5 66:1080:22 121:11	parents68:12	255:9,10,12
15	125:2,24 173:16 212:18	parsing 165:2	pediatrics 51:4
>0,23 127:20	opine 60:5,20 170:16	organizations 38:8	part 10:24 36:1 54:11	peer-reviewed 88:2
[0 129:4,5,18 183:19254:23 61:11 77:4 241:19 67:24 68:2,3 73:22	pencil256:6
>,17 131:16	opinion 11:17 12:3	organs50:3.7 85:1 86:7 90:2,5 91:4	pending 243:21
[,4 135:1,6 15:8 16:14,19 17:12	original 86:14 124:12 97:6,23 117:10	people 9:3 15:6.8,9,19
[7 137:6 139:1 21:3,6,8,9 23:11 25:7 125:9 150:24 151:15 132:16 133:1 135:24	15:20,23 17:3 36:19
>2 141:4,13,17 33:18 56:9 58:1,7,22 154:9 219:14 137:1 138:3 147:16	54:6 56:7 66:24
>0,24 144:15,22 59:5,9,23 60:1 63:10	originally 24:3 96:9 149:4,5 157:15	105:15 115:21 120:4
t,6 148:2 149:22 63:14,20 64:7,11 69:8 180:8 216:22 158:22 159:2 160:2	121:8,11 148:18
>4 151:24 152:5 69:12,15 73:9 75:8	orphan 193:4,17 174:24 175:3 193:15	170:5 175:8 212:14
[6 154:12 156:11 76:1,2,8 87:20 90:10	ostensibly 227:3 195:8 202:15 209:7	220:10 225:8,11
[,10 160:9 165:5 90:19 91:19 92:14,17	outcome 33:8 272:15 218:22 219:1 234:20	227:5 229:11 231:17
5,10,11,17,17	158:20 160:7,10	plan 136:17	151:13 155:17 177:1	previously 183:24
>3 254:21,22	161:17 164:4 168:1	plans210:9	189:22 201:20 234:23 218:23
[258:1,24	168:18 169:3 172:7	platform 265:18	257:17	pre-existing 86:6
>3 266:23 267:9	174:9 175:5 176:1,20	played 69:18 103:5	possibly 250:16	pre-teens 255:22
tage 217:10	177:6,23 179:5,12	plays259:13	potential 75:22 76:4	Price40:l
tages 153:7	180:23 183:15,21	please 6:12,21 24:9	99:11 137:10 138:5	Price-Miles 189:17
tion 58:22 73:7	184:15,18,23 185:8 43:2 138:2 215:22	163:9 164:3 165:6,16 191:5
98:11 111:23	185:14 186:14 187:12 233:4	173:6	primarily 39:22 41:18
>4 115:22 150:21	187:13 189:16 190:16	plural 84:18,19	potentially 252:6	43:23 82:18 158:12
>4 256:2	192:11 194:17 195:20	Plus 77:14	PowerPoint 236:4,5	primary 54:7 68:1 84::
tions 53:5 90:14	196:8,17 197:3	PM 184:7 199:20	practice 12:16 16:16 139:9,20 211:23
I	163:16 226:4	198:21,22 200:12	pocket209:13	22:12 43:12 54:24	249:8
ly 104:15 114:4	201:2,15,21 202:13	point 16:18 17:6 37:19	67:1488:15	principally 30:10 160:(
ned 87:24	203:11,11,18 204:16 55:14 63:10 65:1	practicing 12:11 27:6	principle 226:18
45:4,8 47:2	206:18 207:12,15,22 90:1 99:9 100:20	47:5	prior 30:8 53:15 88:10
>75:2 87:12	208:3,20 213:14,22 102:9 106:1 112:5	preceding 134:11	133:17 134:20 137:2^
>	115:6 142:22	215:17 220:23 228:10 134:23 139:3 140:11	precise 16:3,4 57:16 185:7 224:16 230:17
7	233:15	228:10 229:24 230:6 141:14 147:13 148:9	188:15	private83:l
>	103:21 261:3	230:7,13,17,20,23 166:24 179:2 194:6	precisely 15:18 104:9	probably 16:18 30:12 ted 75:6	231:2,14 256:19,20 202:4,10,16 211:23	143:24 35:6 37:7 54:9 56:3 ire 221:24	257:7,14 261:23 212:8,16 217:21	predicate 70:4 65:17,21 75:13 78:23 221:23	273:4 274:4 221:9 241:4,10	predictable 256:10 80:16 87:4 90:1 60:9 71:2,6 72:3	phone210:7 247:11 251:21 252:19 predictors 103:24 120:15 166:4 172:15 '2 205:3	photograph 62:2,4 252:23 253:17 255:4	preface 24:2 88:22 181:21,24 192:21,24 ally 10:8 81:23	164:21 256:8 259:16 260:12	264:3 255:20268:15
[1	photographed 62:17 260:16	prefer 238:16	problem 12:23,24
ctive 13:17	photographs 4:16 62:2	pointed 147:12	pregnancy 68:21 69:2 17:20 18:1,3 222:3
19	phrase 46:18 64:9,10	points 10:4 167:19	pregnant 68:9	problematic 132:17
de 268:11	112:15 125:21 151:20 200:5 222:16	prekindergarten67:23	problems42:l 55:17
ded 102:11	205:15 216:3 231:11	poisoning 27:16 28:1,9	preliminary 62:13	135:8 137:6 266:6
5 194:4	253:15 51:2	premise 266:2	Procedure 2:14
:162:2 4:26:3	phrasing 140:18 254:5	Poland 55:4,6,7,9	prenatal 12:20 67:21	proceed 47:14 114:4
34:17 35:3	physical 67:23	policy 25:12	68:7,8 125:14 129:23 130:1:
>0270:10271:3	physically 217:23	Polish56:l	preparation 31:7 166:7 130:17 137:7 161:12
22:1 168:19	physician 7:1612:11	politely 98:19	prepare 29:10 41:12 259:19 262:9 269:5
[4	12:22 13:10	poll 66:10,14	85:7 269:2	proceedings 26:22
nenon30:3	physicians 14:2 120:9	polling 66:8	prepared 29:8,10 32:21 64:1897:6 110:21
>2 153:11	120:10 158:16	polls 66:9,11 224:5	39:8 46:4,21 87:23 118:13 141:2 167:4
1:10,10 3:15 6:4	Ph.D 1:16 2:3 4:2 6:23	poor 40:13 163:21	125:1 181:14 200:4 199:11 242:18 250: If
7:8 18:4,7,11	35:4,13 52:17 55:2,16	population 102:12	preparing 87:23	251:3 270:6 272:7,9
7,11	25:19 26:17	270:10 271:3 105:18 151:14	215:19 272:10
12	31:12,12	picked 120:14,14	populations 110:7	presence 209:12	process 61:15 86:10
),14,22 34:1,3,18	piece 114:17 195:21	Porter 2:6 3:17 6:19	present 46:6,20,23	88:4 90:7 99:12
37:12,15 38:18	222:23 219:3	129:7216:12220:6 116:16264:16
>39:6,23 40:1,1	pieces 123:18	portion 124:16 187:20	presented 160:18	processes 266:12
),20 57:2,15,20	pin 16:2	portions 126:7	presenting 108:7	268:15
69:9,13,18,22	pipes 30:10,14	portray 135:24	president 266:18	processing 98:5
>82:2283:11	place 6:18 11:3 97:1	posed 101:17	press62:19	Proctor22:8
>91:9,19 92:8	203:24	poses 226:22 227:4	presumably 79:12	procurement 217:24
94:2,14 95:2,2,9	places 166:11,14	position 19:10 21:10	126:24 128:13	produce 19:3
7	97:3 102:15,17	plaintiff 3:3 180:12 103:9 134:12 162:17	pretending 256:6	produced 103:23
>4 103:2,8,14,21	plaintiffs 6:15 28:2 162:24 194:5	pretrial 108:6	producing 66:10
>1,23 105:4,6	141:18 160:19 179:16	positions 29:22 158:17	pretty 96:22 154:9	product 20:21 30:9
[5,17 107:1	180:22 182:21 183:7 158:18 160:2	237:21 261:2	69:24 70:21 229:4
>0 127:18 128:2	185:5 186:14 187:17	possibilities 192:23	prevalence 135:24	231:9,16
L4 130:22 131:12	189:19 195:19 196:13	possibility 29:18	prevent 69:24	production 19:14
5 133:19 139:7	201:5,23 204:10 247:20	previous 29:12 65:4,6	products 20:15 131:2
90:19 131:14	123:4 127:23 128:18	publishing 261:11	161:5,10 165:20	reach 51:23 55:20
i 272:3	134:17 144:23 145:16	puff 247:16 250:13,15	170:13 173:9 183:10	57:12 59:17 66:4,13
ionally 89:16	147:16 148:11 149:8	puffs 144:17 214:10,21	183:12 184:10,12	111:4 120:18 121:8
;or 22:3,7,7,8,22	150:17,21 151:17	252:3	185:7 188:14 193:3	126:12,15 142:17
[ 25:1 27:547:6	155:24 156:8,15	pull238:13	195:8,9 198:9,11	179:10 189:10 200:1(
i,17	127:14	157:5,12,23,24 158:2	pulling86:l	206:23 207:20 208:5	200:20 202:12 206:1:
[1,11	158:7,12,17,18,18	purchased 45:3	210:15 211:5 214:16	207:9 238:12,12
:ors 163:20	159:3,14 160:13,13	purports 181:15	214:23 216:1,5,12	246:12 248:23 251:2;
m 84:12 89:15	162:21 163:2 166:11	purpose 106:6,9 133:13	217:16 227:13 233:4	258:3 267:19
>	116:17	166:14,20 167:15	154:14	233:7 243:21 244:2	reached 55:21 61:3
ms 41:21 80:13	168:20 169:10,19	purposefully 79:16	244:11 246:18,19	93:13,17 94:14,19,23
it 75:9	170:4,24 171:14,21	purposes 129:7	247:7,7253:6254:21	114:23 119:14,22
ited 75:3,16	172:5,7,11,19 173:6	Pursuant2:13	257:3 261:15 264:4,5	122:20 181:7 182:4
[*ed 214:10	174:14,17,18,19	pursue 99:15 174:8	264:6,21 267:7	reaches 189:4
png 109:19	175:6,13,16,22,23	pursuing 108:14	questioning 18:23	reaching 48:7 59:22,24
ed 64:15	176:2,7,10 177:3	push 14:23 110:15	62:15 119:12 173:3	94:7 109:4 215:20
ting 8:3	179:6 191:18 193:6	put 15:17 37:6,7 74:3	questions 10:2 43:4	216:7
iciation 155:6	193:11,12,14,15,18	82:21 93:20 103:19	48:12 124:22 126:1	reaction 232:10
62:1 263:21	193:19,21,22 194:1,3	117:22 119:20 124:6	127:15 156:2,3 172:2	read 21:24 22:16,20
tionately 242:2	194:7,19 195:14,22	143:22 144:6 161:9	181:23 194:21,23	23:16,18 24:5,9 25:2
ed 107:7 150:21	195:23 197:18 198:3	169:4 171:7 175:1	203:10 208:1 242:15	33:17,21 36:8,13
ing 245:10	198:4,15 199:5,14.16	176:19 183:6 184:7	243:11,20.20,23	37:11 38:5 41:11
ctive 213:16,24	199:18,23 200:1,3,10	185:19 186:1 187:5	question-by-question	47:6 52:22 65:10,13
268:12	200:21 201:17,24	193:18,21 194:9	43:8	66:9 70:5,7,11 75:14
e.48:4 61:15	202:3 203:12 206:9	195:9 199:17,20	quibble259:l	82:3 89:5,20 90:4
) 143:2 171:5	207:11,21 208:8	207:2 218:22224:2	quibbling 258:19	91:18,22 92:2 97:10
[7220:24	209:8 211:7,12,18	230:13 233:7 265:23	quickly43:10	104:8,11 106:24
ed 48:19 196:14 I 212:18,21,23 214:22	I putting 35:6 37:20,21 I Quinn 3:7	107:2 108:20 117:2
>2	214:23 222:18,19	83:16 114:21	quit 14:4,21 16:12 17:9	118:1,3 126:6,7
es 76:19	223:9,12,16,23 224:3	p.m 167:3 218:7 270:11	70:2 212:19 231:18	129:20,21 130:20
ing 112:3 244:5	224:6,9,23 225:1,20	__231:19 254:20 255:1	131:17 133:17,21
>108:3	225:22,23 226:8,14 _Q__255:1,5,8 269:1	134:10 135:3,7,18
logical 61:8	226:20,22 227:4,8	Quaker84:18	quite 9:22 51:7 97:6	136:12,12 138:2
2:18 8:2,3 13:14	230:12 231:3 232:1	qualified 19:7	129:1 159:10 172:15	139:1 148:18 159:9
10	16:3 17:18,19	233:24 234:18,21	qualities 13:15	185:4 189:3211:16	166:3,5,8 167:14 H8:3 19:3,15	237:18,21 240:1	quality 10:6 105:15	227:10241:12	181:18 210:18 224:4 >24:24 28:9,16	241:1 243:1,3,8,14	quest259:8	quotation 86:21 125:11	228:11 229:24 251: If
21	38:7,9 41:19	244:20 245:8,15,23	question 10:13 14:15	quote 20:9 24:10,16,17	271:4
5 47:11,11 48:14	246:6 248:11,23	20:10,14,16 21:18	24:19,20 36:2 88:9	reader 51:9 124:16
1.20	56:15,21	253:12,22,24 254:6	25:12,22,23 26:5,12	124:9 167:19,20	readers 261:24
5.20	58:2,9,17,22	254:17 255:6 259:24	47:3,24 48:3,5,12,19	240:2,2 247:15.19	Reader’s 241:20
18,24	60:6,9,16	260:12,16,21 261:20	52:5,7,13 53:4,5,9	250:10258:21	reading 31:21,23 32:4 1063:19,20,23	262:18,19 263:7,9.13	55:15 57:16 58:6	quoted 137:20 248:13	32:5 109:10 133:16 7,12 68:24 69:16	263:15,19,23.24	59:4 63:5,18 64:6	249:7	134:1,1 221:16
3,11,17,23	74:6	264:7,8,13,15 265:10	66:7 67:8,10 68:2	quotes 86:24	222:11
>,24 77:3,7 82:16	265:13,19,19 266:12	70:3 71:6,11 73:22	quote/unquote 224:24	reads36:l
! 85:21 86:2	267:22 268:1,6,11,15	79:3 88:8,21 90:2,3	quoting 131:21 133:11	ready 60:2 141:5
189:2,14,20 90:5	272:1,21	91:4,13,16 94:1 96:4	136:21 152:17	220:22
7,13,22	91:10,14 publication 29:3 35:11	97:9,13 98:12,21 99:6	__reaffirmed 240:3
',24 96:15 97:14	101:13211:11	106:13 107:23 108:10	_E__Reagan 266:20
11	99:17 100:4,8 publications 50:23	112:12 114:1,12,17	R 6:1 237:8 273:1,1	real 166:19 205:3 230:^ [4 101:7,14,15 publicists 25:20	114:22 115:1 116:5,6	274:1,1	238:11
1 110:3 111:5 publicly 28:2 136:2	118:1 121:17 130:13	raise 239:3,4	realize 46:16 113:23
t,11,18 115:4,16 public’s 173:6	132:13,18 136:14	raising239:9	195:7
[9,23 116:8,9,14 publish 158:20	138:22 140:17 143:23	ran92:5 160:9	realized 111:6 193:2
'0,24 117:12 published 21:20 49:1,4	145:1 146:9,13,18	rankings 107:3	really 9:14 15:5,7 16:U
'0 119:2,16,23	49:6 50:19,22 51:15	148:19 149:22,23	rate250:13	17:1 19:6,10 25:5,9
] 53:14 57:12	record26:21,23 36:11	225:16229:6	46:3,13,20,2147:1,6	52:5 53:22 62:23
73:20 81:8 88:5 51:12,13 64:17,19.21	regulators 127:24	47:10 48:10 57:2,4	63:6 75:12 81:24
99:8 105:10 70:11,15,16 97:10	relate 42:17 47:2	71:22 73:24 74:17	82:6 84:6 128:8
f 154:1 159:19 104:11 110:19,24,24	218:14	76:11,13 78:17 79:2	152:18 157:3 192:11
>0,23 164:21 112:7,8,9,10 118:12	related 88:12 103:12	79:23 82:2,3 85:7,8	197:22 201:20 220:1^
[8 173:9 178:6 118:16,17 119:5	113:8 158:19 272:13	85:13 86:15 87:23	220:17 235:6,13,15
[4 201:23 221:1 123:16 141:1,3	relates 206:13	88:12 96:3 97:23	248:16 250:24 258: K
[229:12 158:22 159:9 167:3,8	relating 9:4 130:2	141:6 145:22,23	researched 24:24
ne 2:16 272:5 178:19,20,21,22	186:22	151:1 152:1,8 156:7	234:15 235:2
e 153:9 183:23 199:10,12	relation 268:1	159:18,24 162:11,23	researchers 247:14,19
13:12 61:14 209:17 210:1,18	relationship 14:9 169:7	181:19187:6,19	249:8 250:1
4	70:1993:24 242:18,21 269:11,12	169:18 234:17 241:3	188:6,12 189:1 191:8	reservations 105:11
139:9,20 145:15 270:5 272:9	relative 91:11 98:23	191:15 192:3 193:23	reserve 185:24
[9 148:4 149:7	recover 41:9	99:18 100:5,22 106:6	202:9,11,15 203:1,5	resource 84:3
[158:5,5 180:13	recreate 76:23	107:3 108:2 113:5	203:24 206:1,16	respect 19:5 21:6 42:22
[8 188:13 245:11	Red 62:5,8,11,11 242:5	117:14 119:17 156:16	207:3 211:17 215:19	52:3 63:18 66:7
r 274:7 242:8	relatively 68:6 139:11	216:8,13,16 217:4	111:5 131:5,13
able 122:24	Reds 167:23 171:10,19	139:22 142:8 143:2	218:5,20 221:10	175:21 182:9 186:23
ably25:2 214:1,9266:7	147:10 148:8 149:6	224:7 228:12 234:12	221:10224:23 225:2(
ing 20:19	reduce 240:1	222:8 255:17	237:7,16,17 240:2,4	225:22 226:8 250:21
s 61:14 83:8	reduced 48:19 242:24	release 143:11	240:21 243:2,12,22	respectable 8:21
5,3	143:10 146:3 272:11	relevance 213:21	244:8 247:3 248:9	respects 155:2
[5 269:16	reducing 234:23 252:6	relevant 78:15 79:20	249:7 250:21,22	respond 19:1,2 43:9
il	186:1	reduction 155:10 241:9	79:22 107:16 108:3	251:19 252:11 253:7	136:13
9:1 26:13 33:23	reductions 234:22	108:13 110:7 169:5	254:16 266:21 267:3	responded 21:4134:16
140:20 63:22,23	Redwelds 219:24 220:1	200:20	267:4	responding 19:13 50:9
73:13 89:21	refer 95:2 162:22 180:9	reliability 22:22 23:3,3	reported 1:23 253:8	response 48:16 74:11
>4 173:1 203:4 204:15 205:2	94:1	reporter 2:15,15,16,17	115:24 148:16 209:2;
>3	reference 47:17 82:11	reliable 8:6,9,13 65:15	2:17 6:10,21 70:13	234:18251:22
77:22 100:20 105:24 140:18	65:22 66:5,15 154:10	97:8 138:2 272:1,4,4	responses 28:10
d98:19	referred 96:9,9 165:22	reliance 79:3,4 164:6	272:5,5,6	responsible 14:7
on 116:19 161:1 215:10 218:13 231:8	217:15	Reporting 6:11	162:17 267:6
[1 260:7	relied 43:1 78:16 80:2,5	reports 8:16 9:2 11:9	responsive 79:20,22
d 26:22 64:18	referring 18:14 22:2	83:9 156:8 215:18	35:21 81:4 102:21	restricted 256:15
>1 118:13 141:2 38:11 95:15,16	216:4,6	143:18 152:18 203:2	result 252:1,4
H99:ll 242:18 132:11 134:2,4	reluctant 170:16 172:1	203:3 213:6 240:5	resulted58:24
>	164:20 180:11 187:23	rely 82:12 89:23 109:4	241:20	results 95:12 103:23
ition 256:22 188:1,3,4,24	117:24	repository 220:4,21	144:11 150:1 174:21
ction20:18	refers 135:4	relying38:12,15 130:3	221:13	retained7:8 27:20
1203:6	refine 63:7	157:24 164:15	represent 6:13	28:18 29:13,19 31:5
ctions54:8	reflect 155:13 199:14	remained 96:24	representation 11:18	31:10,11,18 32:9
nend 116:17 199:19209:17	remarkable 55:3	23:22 37:10,18	33:24 34:3,10 38:18
[3 122:2211:19	reflected21:3	remember 18:22 20:3	122:11 125:8 210:20	39:5,11,24 40:17,22
nendation 95:1	reflection 20:24	22:1 37:17 38:24	265:9	42:3,19 43:5,16 85:1:
i,8	211:21	reflects 206:8	40:21 73:20 78:6	representations 118:3	160:5,6 185:13
i2,16	254:8	refresh20:18	87:10 152:14 166:22	160:1	229:23 235:7
liendations	refuse 212:19	173:2,23 191:4	representative 105:17	retaining 136:2
5,4,6,8,13,23	regard 8:6,11 86:21	205:10 221:12 225:7	representing 6:15,16	retention 43:18 86:8
[9,20 157:20 107:12 183:1	251:14 256:4	39:23 42:20	219:4
>264:7	regarded 159:4,14	reorient 109:21	represents 72:1 201:16	retired 12:13 82:11
nended28:16	regarding 234:16	repartee 233:8	reproduced 155:14	255:12
j 117:12 118:22	regardless 154:24	repeated 46:22	request 217:5 221:1	return 61:18 111:3
5,24	122:20 155:10	repeatedly 106:5	requested 180:9	136:18 156:11 273:5
[6 169:11,19	regime55:4	report4:20 7:11,21	required91:8 122:16	274:5
>4 171:15 175:24	Registered 2:15,16,17	14:1429:4,8,9,10	127:6,7	returning 109:17
[ 272:3,4,6	32:21 35:2,5,7,20,23	reread 97:9	reunion 35:10 238:9
nends 212:18	regular 70:23 75:23	37:12,13,15,22,22	research 8:3,23 15:20	reveal 190:19
48:5 52:1	RMR 1:23	189:13 190:6 191:14	207:8 213:9 232:15 130:13,18 135:10
>1	road 244:6	191:23 192:4,17	235:14 241:11 248:9 137:7 139:3 142:20
ed 15:6,11 18:10	Robbins 84:9,11	194:20 195:16 196:4	250:11 253:23 259:17 146:20 159:8,18,24
204:9 206:5	role 9:14 69:18,18	196:19 197:7,16	264:20,24 266:22	173:22 175:15 181:2(
ing 54:12 93:21 103:4 243:15	198:7,18 199:7,22	says 9:8,9 11:18 45:15 199:2 213:5,11,12
s 143:18 246:3 259:13	201:10 202:17,20	55:3 107:20 116:5	222:16 232:21 236:7
16:19	roll 238:10 239:18	203:22 204:21,24	118:20 121:24 125:14 237:8 239:23 245:4
46:5	rollers 238:10	205:5,11 206:21	125:18 145:24 146:8 245:14 248:21 253:3
ds32:14 34:11	romantic49:17	207:18 208:24 209:10	151:2 167:15 175:16 254:15 267:12
1	Ronald 92:21	209:20 210:5,11,17	194:16 204:13	seeing 174:4
57:18 64:6 159:7	room 112:3 269:14	211:15 212:24 213:18	scenario 108:10	seek 237:14
1159:8 210:15	ropes 141:5 209:18	214:2 215:23 216:18	school 13:3 16:24 17:8	seen 96:19 103:17
[5	Rosenthal 3:16 6:16,16	216:24 219:10 221:18	35:9,10 205:16 238:9 105:3,8,8 128:7
antic 49:7 8:8 18:13 19:20,21	222:21 223:14,24	256:10 257:8,8	148:17 158:21 160:1:
atic 49:8,9,10 20:12,22 22:9,12 23:2	225:3 226:2,12	Schwab38:19	162:1 172:13,15
5,20	23:10 25:14 26:6	227:14,18 228:1,4,15	science 157:18	173:19 179:16 181:1^
3:5 18:227:12 32:3,7 33:16 34:22	228:24 229:7,18	scientific 24:16 36:8	182:15 183:9,9 185:4
55:23 56:5,7 36:7,11 39:3 40:3,15	230:10231:4 232:13	38:7 41:19 47:19	185:6 187:16 189:16
168:18,21 74:18 43:2,7,13,17,21,23	232:21,23 235:9	76:21 82:16,19 91:15 190:8,12 195:18,21
1,18	87:15 90:10 44:2,6,11 45:7,9,14	240:24 242:14 243:19	143:14 157:19,23	196:9,10,22 197:19
L 102:2 107:11 45:19,22 46:10 51:9	244:3 245:2 246:17	158:12,21,22 192:21 198:24 199:1 201:4
>0 124:10 126:19 60:22 62:13,21 70:5	247:6 248:12 253:2	210:22,23 230:12	208:2 212:13 215:4
>129:3 130:3 70:13 71:15,18 72:22	257:13,19 258:5,18	234:16,21 249:14,16 237:12 256:23 260:2:
U8 150:7 152:6 73:3 78:9,12 80:4	260:14 261:9 262:3	259:3 268:2	264:9,14 265:3,5,8
il	163:19 165:11 88:20 89:17 90:16	262:11,21 264:2	scientists 158:20	segue 13:21
>1 175:20 177:7 92:15 93:15 94:20	265:2 266:8 267:10	scoop 37:5	selection 79:16 86:10
[9 180:21 182:20 95:18 96:18 97:19	268:13,21 269:6	scope27:2 44:23 47:9	Sell 123:12
>1 185:24 187:22 99:3 102:5,18 103:6	Rosenthal's 209:18	76:20 101:4	semantics 121:7,12
1 196:12 197:6 104:5,16 106:21	rough 234:10	screen 242:16	semester 112:4 236:9
>, 19 205:15 108:15 109:6 110:9	roughly 29:24 33:22	seal272:17	seminar 112:4
[6 218:1 222:9 110:17 111:17 112:22	44:17 45:5	search 83:16 89:9	send 217:6,10
>2 252:21 253:23 113:15 115:2 116:12	rule 35:2,5,7,8 67:20	183:13 197:11,14	sense 8:9 19:2 23:4
[1,13 257:4,6 117:16 119:5 122:4,7	217:21	264:11 38:9 61:5 68:4,5
[7 268:5 122:9,23 123:11	rules 2:13 244:6	searched 83:3	80:21 88:6 100:24
and 167:18 124:3,8,13,21 125:2,5	run 109:9 133:5 137:6	searching48:3	134:18 138:13 148:2:
1,8	125:12,16 126:21	257:5 269:8	second 17:19 35:24,24 158:23 170:4 192:20
8:1 91:8 157:3 128:5,12 129:11	Russell 15:23 86:21	43:10 53:14 62:3,4	233:13
[9 130:5,11 131:11	234:3 249:6 250:7	86:19 90:5 115:9	sensitive 12:5 53:24
192:10 132:6 133:23 136:7	251:5 258:11 260:8	133:22 171:7 180:5	sent 221:5
9:10 137:22 139:24 141:8	261:11	188:18 242:14 243:19	sentence 24:2 47:22
:19 58:3 69:17 142:13 143:6 145:13	Russell's 143:15 259:21	250:9,18 128:22 129:21,22
191:11 98:23 146:9,13,17 147:22	RJ 32:13 34:11,14	secondhand 10:20,21 130:20 131:3,5,16,19
5 101:8,17 113:5 148:10 149:9 150:8	__10:24 11:1,10,24 12:6 131:20 132:12 133:5
14	119:17 154:21 151:9 152:3,12 153:1	S	68:17 166:13,14,17 133:11,16,17,21,22
>3 155:10 156:17 153:14 154:4,7,18	S 1:23 2:14 4:9 6:1	166:19 134:10,11,21 136:4,6
[9227:4 234:23 155:1,12,17,21 157:7	84:15,19,19 167:24	second-guess 132:19	138:4 139:2,5 140:2
[ 243:1 253:19 157:16 158:10 160:15	272:3 273:1 274:1	secretary 209:19 210:9 153:13 165:11 204:9
),7 161:22 162:6,19	safer211:13	section41:23 47:12	204:13
214:9,19 163:14 164:9 165:12	safety 110:3	51:17 74:20 81:4,6	sentences 74:20 104:14
17	28:15 41:22 166:23 167:24 168:4	Samuel 104:12,13	136:21,23 137:8	135:12,18 136:11
[,1658:9,23 168:7,11,14,16	satisfies 192:10 233:20	138:1 199:8 244:7,9	separate 123:18 134:5
>75:23 76:7 169:24 170:18 173:11	satisfy 137:15	245:4 247:2,12	series 4:16 42:9,16 43:-
>97:15 100:5,15 173:13,17 174:12	satisfying 152:10	252:10 62:1 117:22 194:21
[7 103:24 106:19 175:10 176:12 177:8	saw 67:24164:16,17,17	Security 20:7	serious 234:17
>4 155:7 156:2 177:14,21 178:6	164:20,23	see 11:22 20:23 21:1,18	service 35:1 84:13
>0 167:22 171:9 179:14 180:7 181:4,9	saying 89:8 95:13	23:17 26:12 40:4	240:2
[8 172:20,21 182:13 183:4,22	116:19 127:15 129:6	46:2 54:1 69:8,8 78:8	Services 243:2
[6 158:3 196:9 208:22	115:10 127:23 131:22 144:12,12,17,17,18	spatial 118:3
lent 174:22	single 71:24 88:7 89:22	132:9,11 137:13 147:15 148:13,16	speaking 9:21 180:4
[,4 209:7 143:23 145:17 201:22	138:11,14 139:12,23 151:4,22 152:20	250:9 254:2
7:1149:10	singular 220:15	143:9,20 144:13,16 158:17,19 162:4,14	speaks 188:12
10 212:13	sister 37:1 50:15 72:15	145:9 147:11 148:4 163:12 164:6 165:8	special 127:7
rear-old 166:8 73:18	148:13,20 149:3,12 165:10 166:11,14,20	specific 11:23 25:15
peare 125:20	sisters 72:16,18	149:13,15 150:4 170:6 172:22 173:6,6	29:13 36:3,9 54:15
>3:1168:10	sit78:6 182:3	151:3,12,13,14,14 173:8 174:10,18	71:9 84:22 96:21
8:6,8	site 83:16	153:9,11 163:9,10 175:8 214:1 215:5	122:21 144:24 174:5
243:3259:20	sitting 63:22 180:14	164:3,14 165:6 230:9 234:17,19,24	188:21 243:23
21:19 271:8	situated 1:7 3:5 273:4	213:16,16,24,24 235:11,24 236:2,3,20	specifically 22:6 27:3
219:18,18 274:4	214:11,20 224:13 237:6,10,11,15,20,23	37:20 47:2 73:23
31:8 39:17	six 77:15 85:1,11	233:20 234:4 244:21 239:2 245:8,10	76:12 90:12,12
124:19 138:16 164:5 212:13	245:20 246:2,2,13,23 247:22 249:3,5,20	234:20263:16
6:20 205:5 256:21	259:8 250:10,18 251:22	specificity 60:11
md 2:15 46:18	skepticism 159:5,16	smokers 12:2 13:2 252:4 253:1 254:12	spectrum 16:5
L4 169:14 272:1	sketched 118:18	16:17 17:8,8,11 24:14 254:19,20 255:5,7,23	speculate 117:17,21
5	Skip 135:8 206:4	26:2 42:17 59:6,10 256:2,7 257:11 262:1	122:16
75:15	slant 38:16	67:4,10,18 69:24 72:7 263:20 265:19 266:3	speculating 107:6
:4	slate 238:17	72:10 73:10,14 75:22 266:7,22 267:9,22	117:6,9
4:23	slave 52:21,22 53:5,7	94:16 95:12 100:15 268:7,8	speculation 117:10
28:15,17 161:1 53:10,18,23 54:5,6	100:17 102:3,6,8,9	smoking-related 41:10	spend 54:6 182:2 205:9
[5,22 182:16	slavery 53:16 54:8	105:18 106:3,10,10	snippets90:7	spent41:9 108:7
1184:6 187:12	slaves 52:18,19,20,23	109:23 111:11 112:17	social 15:8 20:7	spoken43:24
[0200:9203:13 53:6,10,15,24 54:8	113:13 115:6,17	socially 239:12	spokeswoman 266:24
r,9 259:6 262:16	slightly 128:21 269:4	116:21 120:6 130:24	Society 7:23 8:1,6,20	spring 17:14
',3 265:7	slog 227:22,23	131:24 132:10,11 9:2,8 10:4 11:8 12:5	St 1:3 6:6 40:23 41:12
g 135:20	slogan 205:16	133:12 134:15 137:13 12:8 77:6 82:20	41:16 76:13,15 77:2
128:14 179:17	slow95:19	137:17 139:10,22 115:13 198:23	77:18 79:5,8 80:1,2
>1 183:24 185:5	slowly 138:2	142:6 145:15,19	Society's 8:15 10:16	84:2285:8,14
[7 195:19 197:10	small217:9 262:21	146:3 147:9 149:17	soda229:10	stable 139:11,23 142:8
5,14	202:1 207:1	smart 31:22	150:12,13 153:21	solely 236:20	143:2 147:10 148:8
>,7 211:4 228:13	smoke 10:20,21,22,24	154:21,22 155:7,8	solve 222:3	149:6
[8 231:11 249:20 11:1,11,24 12:6 67:7	170:5 175:9 211:20	somebody 98:16	stage87:ll
[2 264:11 67:15,17 68:15,17	212:7,19 215:1,5	somewhat 20:4 26:9	standard 67:24 145:16
198:11 72:15,17 73:10	225:6 239:2,7 243:16 27:23 40:10 49:19	223:18
nd-tell 61:20 100:16 115:9,11	246:9 247:14,15,18 129:20	standards 182:4
>49:7 131:24 137:14 142:6	247:22 248:5 250:12	sorry 6:11 31:19 140:1	start 36:13 79:7 99:12
6:13,17 143:1 144:18 146:4	251:12,16,20 252:14 159:6 161:24 191:19	155:2 165:10 172:23
:7,8,864:2,4 148:6 149:3 150:1,5	253:14 254:3 263:16 196:6 219:11 261:10	204:12 223:2 261:11
>0 150:20 167:18 151:6 166:13,14,17	265:14	sort 11:1414:11 15:7	261:16
1,8,8	166:19 211:23,24	smoker's 10:6 134:3 41:23 50:2,17 64:4	started 164:6 219:2
3:10 212:1 232:16 233:22	142:24 80:6,24 84:13 99:8	240:1 243:1
34:12,13215:13 234:7,9 239:13	smokes 246:3 138:22 183:7 203:15	starts 16:8,11 20:8
[0 243:16 244:22 249:17	smoking 7:14 8:13,18 222:23223:17234:11 state 6:13 20:6 41:5,20
21:16 249:22 252:5 256:11	9:4,9,17 10:5 12:23 237:18 249:15 255:2	41:22,24 45:3 74:3
ire 270:9 271:13 257:9 258:2 264:13	12:24 13:3,9,24 14:4	sought 234:4 251:20	76:24 77:1,8,14 101:^
>4274:24 264:13 265:20,21	14:10,17,21 16:11	sound 9:11 11:1151:24	112:24234:14
271:8	smoked 45:4 68:4	17:10,20,24 18:10 106:1 162:8 165:23	stated 133:13 144:11
ant 195:21 72:19,19 73:2,15	24:17,20,21,24 28:15	sounds 13:5	259:21
antly 10:6 138:9 154:24 155:11	28:23 29:1,22,23 30:3	source 8:7 53:6,17 54:1	statement 21:10 26:3,4
2:20 206:10 224:14 238:3	30:5 41:21 42:1 55:15 81:1 217:3,3	26:8 38:1 74:22
10:144:1366:1 245:22 249:11 251:12	48:16 51:21 67:6,21	sources 48:3,5,7 53:11	99:23 103:10 164:7
88:14 135:8 251:16 252:2	70:1 73:16 77:21 54:5,8,18 85:23 87:2	175:15 176:3 222:24
>3	smoker 10:7,22,23 11:3	78:20 80:11,12 81:3,4 200:20	246:17 259:15 261:2;
ly 1:7 3:5273:4 11:7 15:22 16:7,11,12	81:6,10 86:20 87:18	South3:8	262:5,7 265:4,6,7
I 16:20 42:11 63:11	88:11,18,18 90:14,15	space 219:16 238:14	266:11,11 267:6
L4 174:15 175:13 257:8 238:1 252:5	82:20 89:22 159:18	182:19 183:17 184:2
'	studied 19:5,9,13 21:11	substantial 108:5	159:23 162:11,23,23	184:5,11 185:10,18
:15 9:3 18:6 24:23 26:16 69:22	substantially 107:4	163:1 164:18 191:6,7	187:4,21 188:11,17
),22 34:18 35:3 90:18 92:17 94:6 165:24 193:23	198:22 206:1 213:6	188:23 189:2 190:1
>	75:16 91:19 97:21 99:7 102:17,19	substantive 30:23	237:7,15,17 240:3	190:13 191:16,24
10	143:19 174:24 104:23 105:2 112:23	suddenly 37:7	249:2,7 251:19	192:6 193:1 194:24 [0 251:11 117:7 123:2,2 131:12	sued 24:14	252:10,11,18 253:8	195:3 196:1,5 197:1 260:8 133:19 140:5 142:16	sufficient 56:9,14,15,20	254:11,23 260:7	197:12,23 198:10 eal 173:7 160:17 170:10,20 57:22 62:16 184:15	266:15,18 267:2,7	199:6,9,13,24 200:8 cs 7:22 171:22 172:4 174:13 198:1 200:16,19,20	surgery 51:1,6	202:7,21 204:1,23 52:19,20 53:16 175:13,18,21 176:15 202:12215:23	Surprenant 3:64:3	205:2,7,15,19 207:5 •aphically 177:23 181:3 183:20	suggest 124:15	6:14,14 7:3,7 8:10	208:10 209:4,11,16 [0 184:23 186:18 200:15	suggesting 88:17	18:17 19:24 21:5	209:22 210:8,14 :12 88:5 89:20 200:19 211:3 214:4,7	suicide9:10	22:10,14,15 23:5,13	211:9 212:3 213:13 [5 233:3 253:22 214:8 225:12 226:3	suing41:6 42:17	25:17 26:19,24 32:5,8	213:20 214:6 216:19 ig 43:3 233:1 226:24 234:1 257:20	sum 146:8 147:8 172:8	33:19 34:16,23 36:10	216:20 217:18 219:1: 8:1 261:20 266:9 186:13 203:16,20	36:12,15 40:4,6,16	221:19,21 222:1,14 int 232:7,9	studies 36:4 38:7 142:5 221:6244:20	43:11,14,15 44:5,8	223:1,20 224:11
[2 143:15 154:20 155:6	summarize 46:3 137:5	45:7,10,12,17,20,24	225:13 226:5,15
ites 233:13 155:23 156:1,9 236:22	46:1,15 51:12,14	227:20,23 228:3,6,19
te45:8 192:21 210:21,23	summary 25:1 156:22	61:17,24 62:19,22	229:3,14,21 230:15
h 37:4,6 234:2 249:9 250:11 221:14 244:14	64:15,22 70:7,15,17	231:6 232:20 233:1
E 1:5 3:3 273:2 253:16,16,18,22	sun71:6	71:16 72:5,24 73:8	233:10 235:17 241:1<
1 256:23 268:2,14	superfluous 107:8	78:9,13 80:7 89:10	242:22244:1,5,10
:20 37:19 99:8	study 52:1,18 56:8,14	superior 195:24 196:2	90:9,20 92:18 93:22	245:12 246:19,20
L0 170:5 211:23 56:19 57:22 59:17 201:24 203:14	95:6,22 97:8,11 98:14	247:9 248:18 249:24
[2 265:21,21 115:22 119:2 128:1	supervision 80:3	99:14 102:14 103:1	253:5 257:16,22
[9,20 129:14 132:8 156:6 220:11	103:15 104:6,8,12,18	258:9 259:11,17
1 16:17,18 31:2 158:16,24 172:14	supplied 216:8	106:12 107:10 108:22	261:1,14 262:8,12,15
137:21 179:18 181:13 182:7	support 61:11 198:1	109:8 110:10,14	262:22 263:3,5
56:1 186:21 187:8 188:20 204:10 206:6	111:2 112:1,7,11	264:18 265:12 266:1^
1 180:10 189:9 190:11 192:10	supported 44:16	113:2,20 116:1,22	267:16 268:19,21
t-up 15:9 195:10 197:24 198:16	supporting 94:23	117:18 118:17,18,24	269:9,12,21 270:1
ically 83:11 198:20 199:4 201:7	supports69:3	119:7,11 121:23	survey 16:22 17:7
ies 25:6,10 203:12 206:8 212:14	suppose 226:17	122:6,8,10,13 123:6	65:11,13,15,19,20
y 24:13 25:7,12 225:8,11 230:5	supposed 62:17	123:13,14 124:2,5,11	66:5
),22,23 26:5,15 247:14 248:5,17	supra 136:22 137:8	124:18,24 125:3,10	surveys 65:8,9,10,12
1 173:1,5,16,19 250:2 253:18	Supreme 40:9 74:11	125:13,17.23 126:22	256:21
1	studying 29:21	sure 11:13,16,19 12:3,7	128:9,23 129:17	susceptible 176:7
1:7 3:8,18 6:19	stuff 79:13 229:5,16 13:4,11 17:2 27:18	130:8,16 131:15	suspect 54:12 71:7
hs 155:23	stupid 17:1 41:8 46:8 47:20 52:2	132:20 134:9 136:16	115:20 160:8 165:15
0:1,1,10	subject 110:7 217:15 54:4 57:7 59:3 62:21	138:24 140:21 141:4	202:5 232:9 238:21
r: 12,20 9:17 13:7 257:15 65:1 69:3 71:10	141:12 142:19 144:5	239:12
60:1,181:12	subjective 121:9 228:9 75:13 79:6 82:4 96:6	145:21 146:11,16,19	swear6:21
[110:13 113:8	subjects 211:8 96:6 105:3 113:19	147:3 148:1,24	swearing 164:22
[7 139:14 145:4	submission 35:12 105:8 121:15 126:7 133:24	149:21 150:23 151:23	switch 151:4 222:9,10
[ 171:13 172:23 107:2 153:17 154:9 134:12 136:13 138:12	152:7,15 153:3 154:2	265:14,21
13	200:17 204:12	submissions 97:4 105:3 138:21 143:24 152:2	154:5,11,19 155:4,16	switched 142:9 145:12
>256:20265:16	submitted 57:2 167:1 168:6 175:3	155:19 156:10 157:9	146:7 243:18 244:24
>18:21	subscribe 196:9 180:18 186:7 187:6	158:4,14 159:10,12	246:16
36:23	subset 48:17 192:19 199:9 207:19	161:6 162:2,15 163:4	switching 104:4 143:3
; 192:5	substance 14:6 16:1 213:12 217:12,20	163:18 165:4,21	215:8221:15
;st 183:8 27:24 41:15 44:3 219:20 221:8 223:4	167:1,10 168:1,6,8,13	sworn 6:24 164:22
re 21:13 48:24 81:11 146:8 225:8 227:10 229:9	168:15,17,24 170:12	165:7
135:11 52:17 147:9 163:3 172:9 230:3 232:16 243:21	170:21 173:12,14	syndrome68:23
>	186:13 203:17,20 247:6 251:2 264:3	174:2,20 175:19	synopsis 17:17 ts 163:21 235:20 221:6 236:23 244:20	surface55:18	176:18 177:11,18	syrup229:12
atic 52:1 56:8,19 99:21 113:17 119:10 68:14,14 69:4 70:9	theoretical 223:8	205:17 208:3 211:16
22	87:16 89:8,13 140:8 180:13,19,19 73:23 76:18 83:3,4	theoretically 170:23	211:17 212:1,8,9,11
'0,23 103:19 192:20,22 203:7 93:9 95:3 104:12,20	theory 126:21 251:9	212:12,15 213:1,3,5
[,8 133:20 157:2 206:3,14 216:14 115:18 134:24 160:22	Therefor 35:24	214:24 216:2,3,4
'4 172:14 175:14 222:22 226:13 227:6 217:13 218:1 237:19	thesis55:3	218:13 221:14 222:U
18,21	179:9,15 227:8 232:24 243:8 248:22267:14	thing 30:1 107:20	223:15 225:4,20
[8 181:13 182:7 252:12 254:19 258:21	telling 37:1 263:24	115:9 129:21 148:3,6	227:13,16 229:4
[4 183:13,13 261:16 265:14	151:20 162:20 176:19	230:2 231:10,23,24
[4,23 186:20	talks 47:13 187:20	tend 10:15 250:12,15	things 10:13 17:1 26:9	232:1,9233:11 239:6
i, 18 188:20	Tape 6:3 64:20 110:18	tendency 43:9 75:22	28:1 33:1347:1	239:8,9,11 241:21
>,15,21 190:3 110:22 167:2,7 165:10	55:12 59:14 62:18	249:9,16 251:11,14
[0 195:18 196:22 242:17,19 270:2	tens 12:1	78:20 80:11,12,18,23	251:15 253:11,11,22
>,11,14,22,22,24	tar 59:11 62:12 63:15	Tenth3:9	83:4 89:7 111:3	253:23 255:20 257:11
[6,20 199:3,4 64:13 76:5 95:11	term 35:7 64:8 75:16	125:17 129:24 134:17	258:23 259:2,6,14,24
[5 201:7 202:11 100:10,10,18,22,23 100:9,14 114:13,18	138:19,20 140:2,10	260:18 261:2,15
[6,24 230:4 101:9,16,17,24 144:19 147:23 148:12	144:6 150:9 157:1	264:8 265:23
[1 102:10,11 104:2,4 213:3 231:7 241:5	166:10 178:10 183:22	thinking 71:9 168:16
ic 190:8 105:23 110:4,4 249:13,14,14 250:5	183:24 215:15 218:4	203:9 229:10 234:1
_ 112:19 113:6,7,14 251:15 254:15,22	240:15 243:12 263:1	253:17
_I_ 114:14,19 115:11 255:4	263:6268:9	thinks 37:4 215:24
73:1,1 274:1,1 116:11 119:18,19	termed 116:4	think 7:5 8:20 9:15	255:6
12:2 121:14 131:1137:12	termidity 267:8	10:14 11:13 13:18	third 133:11,21 211:24
18	137:16 138:7 142:9	terminology 52:12	14:2,4,20 15:8,17,18	212:1
181:1 142:10 143:3,4 101:4	15:23 16:2,5,23 17:17	third-party's 140:18
7	11:17 13:20 145:10 146:6 148:7	terms 75:18 111:16	17:22 18:14,22,24	third-tier 94:24 115:7
' 24:7 26:20 150:2 151:5 153:5,6,9 213:7,9 220:20	19:4 20:24 21:2 24:6	211:20
137:9,17,24 42:2 154:21 155:7 156:17 254:22 259:1	25:5 26:8 29:9,15,17	Thomas6:ll
51:6,15 53:18 156:18 167:16,17,20	test 70:9 149:24 150:7	30:23 31:6,8 36:13,19	Thompson6:ll
1,24	58:21 61:8 169:12,12,20,20,22 228:20230:17	39:1 40:10,19 41:9	thought 14:5,16 15:9
[64:16 65:9,12 171:1,2,3,15,16	tested 101:20 106:7	43:19 45:5,7 52:9	15:12,24 16:24 17:2
11	67:1278:14 175:24 177:5 193:12	testified 6:24 23:8 34:8	53:3,10,17 54:7,17	24:6 49:16 59:3 60:6
83:14,15 85:4 194:5 211:13,14,19 161:16,20 162:4	55:20 56:3 57:17	68:19 79:20,22 90:3
[4,15 120:21 212:1,5 215:2 234:22 163:11 164:5 166:9	59:20 61:5,10,14,19	96:22,24 107:2,6
[9 139:16 153:10 240:6,23 241:4,6,16	testify 21:22 33:2,5	62:14 65:10,21 66:6	109:2,23 161:8
[7 160:5 162:17 241:21 244:24 245:20 177:3 182:6 185:20	66:16 67:8,10 68:23	163:10 174:17,18
>1 182:17 186:9 246:14,15 250:16 186:1	71:5,19 72:3 73:21	178:3 198:8 224:18
1195:5 207:6 252:16 253:10 263:8	testifying 73:13 164:5	74:8 75:4 78:10 81:5	225:6 232:23 249:17
[0 218:6 221:7 264:14 265:15,15,22 185:13	83:5 86:14,15 87:5,7	261:18 267:2,18
'2 226:9 229:22 266:5,5	testimonial 135:14	87:13 89:21,24 93:20	thousands 12:1,1
>244:13 250:16	target 50:7 56:1	testimony 20:6 27:24	98:15,18,21 104:9,15	thread 138:23
[1267:17	tars 104:2 29:12 65:4,6 120:21	105:7,18 106:4.4,9	three 8:22 68:19 84:23
9:18 28:13 62:4	task 28:7,12 82:15 130:4 133:7,8,9	107:18 108:18 109:14	86:16 136:11 167:18
'2 153:22 206:11 157:17 230:11 267:19 139:17 142:21 164:16	114:8 118:10 119:14	221:22222:1
i 272:7,10	taste 228:20,22 165:7,24 166:1,18	120:9,15 121:4.15	three-tier 265:18
:18 214:11	teach 178:16 235:12,18 169:14,18 183:5	122:24 123:3 124:11	threshold 109:20
:15 25:5,7,10 236:7,15 186:12,13 191:13	130:2,4 132:13,18	throat50:l
) 68:10 71:20	teaching 17:14 92:23 196:16 197:5 199:15	133:17 137:5 138:10	thrust 21:17,20 132:13
76:14 100:8,10 235:13 199:19 200:2 215:12	140:6 141:8 143:17	Thursday 1:18
>3 121:2 147:1,5	technical 144:19 240:2 229:24 246:1,4	143:24 144:3 145:15	tic222:12
5 178:12 181:14 240:5,21 243:2 265:17 271:5,6	145:17 147:15,23	tickets 123:12
[,5,6,16,17,23,24	technically 36:7 122:4	testing 72:12 95:11	150:10 154:8,10	tics 222:5
[ 204:21 99:21 101:24 106:16	159:3,21 162:7,11,14	tie 134:20
31:2 43:21,23	technique 78:18 142:3 145:24 181:12	162:18,20 163:2,5,6,7	tier 211:24 212:2
77:5,5 91:2	teenagers 12:19 17:4 182:9 183:2 184:19	163:9 165:13 166:6	time 6:9 7:5 10:13 14:5
5 144:23 207:4 255:15,22 190:5,21 195:12	168:10 170:3,8 172:9	16:20 20:19 27:11
[8 210:9	telegraph 169:14 224:21	179:16 187:19 188:12	30:8,24 35:21 36:5
9:13 10:8,9	Telephone 3:11,20	text78:21	191:5 193:5,8,9,14	37:8 49:16 50:16
>1 104:21 105:1	209:9 210:2 216:9,9	transcript 4:10166:1,3	twisting 188:16	57:1765:2478:8
1125:20 129:22	216:22 217:6 218:15	166:5 272:8	two 11:3 29:6 30:18	79:10 102:24 104:16
[4 137:9 138:4	220:23,24 230:6	transcription 271:6	33:21 36:21 40:12	114:1,3,13,18 118:5
’2 143:11 145:7	235:8,8,11 239:15,21	transcripts 87:14	43:24 48:3 72:16	127:11 142:21 147:4
1163:8 167:3	239:22 242:1,4,5	transferring 74:23	84:20,23 135:12,18 151:3 156:5 165:6
>	175:7,17	261:6,6,20,24 262:20	travel 210:9 136:11 174:4 183:22 169:6 175:20 176:4,4 [7,17 182:2	262:21,23,24 263:20	treated 12:18 184:5,5 188:1 199:20 176:15 179:8 186:6 >207:14 215:23	263:20 264:9,9,19	trench 227:20,24 228:5 219:18,21 220:5	186:14 207:8,20 >,9,10 219:16	266:1,2 267:1,7,20,21	trenches 227:15 225:7 236:18 242:15 209:5 218:12 224:3 [5,20 221:9	268:10,10	trenching 78:10 227:17 250:11 233:11 257:7 259:16 [4 232:19 233:15	tobaccodocuments.org	227:19	two-tier 107:5 268:9
[0,11 238:4	81:13,21 82:13 83:1	trial 33:2,6,9 34:8	tying 11:22	understanding 29:11
>4 251:6 254:10	83:10,15,20 186:20	107:14 108:5,17	type 29:20 100:16,18 30:1741:2344:11
[0261:3262:6	187:9 208:15,23	126:10,12 127:1,2	154:24 155:10	45:16,22 58:18 69:16
[8 270:4	209:6,24	128:16 195:4,5	typed 123:17	71:6 74:7 75:17
:22 22:1343:24	today 9:1 17:23 28:13	trials203:8	typewriting 272:12	77:20 79:2 81:15
1111:22 120:13	63:22 78:6 180:14	trick46:17	typically 73:1,10 84:2 85:22 100:13 101:14
i 165:23 178:13	182:3 196:15 197:2	tried 20:24 77:19	233:20	107:1 121:3,15
1236:10,12,13	217:13 218:2 226:8	206:22 207:24 221:16	typing36:13	127:22 137:13 138:1]
[5	233:2 240:13 268:23	222:4 224:2,6 234:5	_ 147:17 156:13 158:7
:24	269:22	245:4	_U_ 160:20 172:6 176:6
22:2	today's 6:8 270:4	trier 126:10	UCLA 178:16	180:7 182:22 185:12
249:11	told 56:21 80:8 83:11	tries 237:13	ugly 222:8	208:8,17 210:3 212:4
n 143:13 144:2	83:13 140:22 141:13	trivial 261:5	Uh-huh 22:5 32:7	212:5 222:20 230:16
>	149:7 170:14 175:22	trouble60:ll 49:15 73:19 80:8 231:13 233:18 246:5 ) 18:11 20:10,20	180:3 182:20 191:20	true 155:16 164:1 126:24 135:15 145:2 254:10 259:7 260:1 21 23:7,8,15	192:7 197:2 210:10	271:5 272:8	161:15,18,21 178:15	understands 225:24
5 25:5,12,18	238:8	True-Focus222:8	188:3 218:16 219:8	understood 14:3 30:2
>28:21 30:8,9,15	tomorrow 218:3,7	truth 205:12	225:19 250:8 256:16 43:13 56:16 59:6,10
>	31:12,13 32:15	268:23 269:4,8,15	try 10:2 13:21 31:20 256:18 258:14	60:20,24 61:6 63:9,1: U8,18,19 39:17	tone 209:10 267:2	38:5 44:9 47:3 52:10	UK 75:1,2 63:15,20 64:8,12
i,2441:6 42:13	tonight 269:14	59:13 60:15 62:23,24	ultimately 120:9	78:12 82:17 102:8
r 49:251:16,20	tools 38:6	63:6 68:17 88:17	130:24263:12	103:11 106:9 111:16
8,12,24	67:6	top 62:5 118:20 200:9	91:5 97:12 99:15	unable 183:19 258:1	113:13 116:10 117:2
[81:19 82:14	topic 52:7 57:21,23	101:4 109:19 114:11	unaware 89:7 97:20	118:21 119:3 120:20
84:7 86:8 87:17	59:1 61:7,19 87:21	119:12 121:18 135:6 206:7	121:1 122:2,20 124:8
),13,16 89:1,6,13	91:5 92:14 102:16	136:18,19 139:3	uncertainty 176:9	124:21 125:16 142:2;
5 90:8,11,12,13	111:15 112:21 116:10	141:13 143:7 156:13	unclear 104:14	143:8 148:19 150:21
U8 91:9 92:8	117:4,19,20,21	161:12 164:1,11	unconscious 143:1	151:16 156:15,20
95:8 96:7,16	119:24 136:18 142:11	179:7 183:14 207:2	unconsciously 104:1	157:14 167:19,21
17,2298:3 99:1	156:11 160:11 169:21	217:20 218:11 224:12 142:7 149:4,5 244:23 169:22 170:3 171:3,8
109:12 139:18	170:15 176:21 177:20	233:3 246:24 247:22 259:9 171:18 172:11 200:1]
1153:17,19	181:3,7 183:19	trying 19:1 38:9 52:10	uncovered 78:24	200:13,22 201:3
k 14,21 158:2,8	186:11 201:7,8	70:2 76:23 88:8,13	underage 257:9	202:14 203:19 206:1<
[,5,15,15,16,22	202:13 203:17 215:22	98:11 132:18,21	underaged 12:24 17:8 207:11,16,21 223:11
1,3,5,10,11	226:6 247:11 260:17	134:20 146:14 150:16 258:1	223:12 224:3,15
[9 165:8,9	topics 88:12 171:12	162:9 179:2 189:22	underestimate 73:1,10 260:21 263:7,14,15
[7 172:3,5	191:12,22 192:1	231:2 234:11	154:21 155:7	268:6
[0,24 175:6	215:9 235:2,3	turn 61:1 167:14	underestimated 72:19	undertaking 76:17
’,8 179:4,12	torture218:7	209:16 234:12 258:10 73:15	77:13,19,23
’3 182:8,10,24	tossing 125:18,22	Turner 34:11	undergraduate 232:18	undertook 268:11
[5,18,23 187:8	totality 203:20	turns 77:10 233:15	undergraduates	unfailingly 93:7 94:13
1 190:4,17 192:1	totally 89:7 153:8	TV 237:9 235:20,21	unfavored 239:12
[2 193:8 194:17	154:3	Twelfth 2:7 3:18	undermine 88:13,17	unfiltered 241:17
[1,12 198:2,13	tracked 144:12	Twenty 31:18	265:10	ungainly 198:12
[4 199:4 200:13	Trade 96:14,21 97:5,16	Twenty-eight 236:12	underscore 36:2	Union 74:21
5	202:13 203:18	185:9 191:9 193:10	Twenty-five 31:18	understand 10:18	United 7:15 9:3 18:6
[9 223:10 251:11	version 73:24 84:18	walk 179:3 142:1 144:16 195:23 witness 6:22 8:9 18:14
*al 243:6	versus 34:1,11 37:15	want 25:9 42:22 43:11 195:24 249:13	20:13,23 23:3,11
sally 71:8	38:19 39:6,17 40:1,23	53:15 54:14 55:21	weaknesses 155:24	25:15 26:7 33:17
se 223:4	91:12 99:19 100:5,10	76:13 98:18 106:1	wear 31:21 32:3,5	45:11 46:12 51:10
jity 22:4 237:3	100:23 101:9 105:6	111:7 112:6 114:7	website 8:24 10:14	60:23 64:24 70:12
[6	113:6 119:18 156:18	117:22 123:7 134:14 11:18 82:5 83:24	71:19 72:23 73:4
Stic 17:5	167:17,23 169:12,20	146:14 165:19,19	174:16 175:2 188:20	80:5 88:24 89:18
ible 65:15 66:5	171:1,9,16,19 174:24	168:4 169:6 175:17	weeded219:15	90:17 92:16 93:16
i 154:3	176:10 200:12 214:1	188:8 192:9 199:8	week236:18	94:21 95:20 96:19
tantiated 261:8	victims 36:24	210:11 217:11,16	weeks 221:22 222:2	97:20 99:5 102:6,19
12	video 162:1 164:17	218:5 239:13 242:15 236:18	103:7 106:23 108:16 1 148:15	184:1 237:8 267:14	244:8 254:16 257:21	well-founded 93:12	109:7 111:18 112:23 art3:7	videographer 1:24 6:2	258:2 259:1 263:2	well-known 251:11	113:16,24 115:3 156:17 123:20	6:18 26:21,23 64:17	265:7 268:9 269:1,4	WENDI 1:5 3:4 273:2	116:13 117:17 119:9 15:17	64:19 110:18,22	269:18 274:2	122:11,24 127:17
3	38:680:16	112:8,10 118:12,16	wanted 52:18 78:18,21	went 35:10 76:23 79:11	128:6,13 129:13 93:4,23 100:9	140:24 141:3 167:2,7	80:14 82:3 166:10 79:12 210:13 238:8	130:7,10,12 131:12 >2 118:19 147:23	178:20,22 184:7	170:4,6 180:18 192:2 254:10	132:7 133:14,24
5,21	196:10	199:10,12 242:17,19	208:19268:5	weren't 29:12 85:4	136:8 137:23 138:3
[7,18228:1	262:17 263:2 270:2	wants 237:22	106:2	140:1 141:7 142:14
i 238:15 251:15	Videotaped 1:16 2:2	warming 226:21 227:3	west 40:18 161:14	143:7 145:14 146:12
1,14,15,21,22	view 10:10,16 13:23	227:6,11	we'll 119:4 130:17,17	147:1,23 148:11
1258:20	18:11 22:21 24:23	warning 62:7,8 64:2	174:8 244:12	149:10 150:9 151:10
142:4	25:8 52:15 55:14	256:17	we're 10:8 93:19	152:5,13 153:2,15
less 136:3	62:7 63:10 69:3 72:2	Washington 1:17 2:8 118:17 128:21,24	154:8 155:22 157:8
73:681:17	75:20 90:1 138:14,16	3:19 6:20 266:23	132:18 133:5 140:8	157:17 158:11 160:1(
13	127:8 201:22	151:21 189:15 208:3	wasn't 14:20 39:4 85:5 141:15,16 167:3	161:24 162:7,20
[8 241:24	241:10 243:3 245:6	107:23 112:12,13	178:2 180:12,20	163:15 164:10 165:1;
13	87:5	251:16,21 252:8,9,14	149:22 154:14 163:11 188:23 194:6 203:7	167:14 170:1,19
__252:18,19,23 253:8	165:9 213:2 243:6	206:3 215:21 225:10	173:18 174:13 175:1:
V__253:11 259:23 260:3	water256:6	227:6 258:19 260:15	176:14 177:9,15,22
4	32:10,22	260:4,9	Waxman 161:13	262:16 263:13,14	179:15 181:5,10
i 35:3 37:12	viewed 13:1419:15	way 9:6,7 10:14,19	269:12	182:14 183:6 184:22
>123:20 273:4	21:17 22:7 44:15	19:13 21:13 23:12	we've 18:10 91:2	185:13,17,20 187:16
i	52:23 79:16 246:6	44:10 53:13 60:15	109:18 112:20 120:17	188:5,8,24 189:14
>7:19 132:12	254:18 258:15 259:23	70:14,18 87:5 89:13 196:14 199:7 200:5	190:7 191:15 192:5
25:9	views 14:1 62:9,10 67:4	91:7,13 94:5,10 95:9 212:12 261:3,7	192:18 195:17 196:2]
f 213:11	140:14 259:21	95:19 96:13 98:9	wheel 202:8	197:8,17 198:8,19
le 84:3	vino 205:16,18	99:5 100:22 105:10	WHEREOF 272:16	201:11 202:18 203:2;
2:17 105:21	Virginia 40:18	105:16 106:7 107:22	whiskey 256:7	205:14 206:22 207: H
106:6	virtually 83:5 88:9	128:3 129:23 132:22	white238:15	209:1,15 210:6,19
mis 137:10	145:6 153:22	132:23 133:20 142:7	wide48:3	211:16 213:1,19
>	visit 12:20 67:21 68:1	143:8 145:5 148:7,11	widely 248:10,10,13	214:3217:2219:11
48:3 50:3 109:2	visits 68:6 78:2	148:14,17 149:17	258:15 259:20,23	221:20,23 222:22
5	120:16 144:16	visual 122:11	150:5 151:6,7,11	Wiener 4:13 22:3,7	223:15 224:1 225:4 [6	vital 184:20	153:15 157:2 161:22 23:15 24:11	226:3,13 227:22 *41:21 120:15	Volume 1:22 6:3 64:20	163:23 168:3 171:20	Wiener's 22:22 25:1	228:17 229:1,9,19,23 >4	110:23 242:20 270:3	176:21 177:7 179:9	wil*e26:19	230:11 231:5 232:15 W:13	voluminous 78:19	181:10 184:14,23	wife's69:5	235:7,10 241:1 244:7 1247:15	voluntary 8:2 77:4	188:15 190:8,20	Williamson 32:14	245:3 248:13 253:3 :1078:23 217:3	vulnerabilities 17:4	192:9 194:9,14	willing 183:11 269:3	257:14,20 258:7,19
12	V(E)(l)(c) 136:21,24	199:20 200:15 202:4	wine 68:20	260:15 261:10 262:4 17:17,19	137:8	202:11 203:15 206:16	winnowed 79:19	264:6 265:3 266:9
im 153:23	__206:22 208:7 216:3	wiped 55:5	267:11 268:14 269:7
17:23 118:7 _W__217:5 218:10 223:12	withdraw 141:5 253:6	269:11,20,24 272:16
127:9	wait 123:11 152:3	224:2 234:10 240:6	withheld 139:8,19	witnesses 233:3
ig9:6	waived270:9	241:11 243:16 249:12 181:1	woman68:9
4:24 15:1 46:8 124:5 128:24 146:11	12:04118:12	249:3 264:19	25 160:4 229:22
78:20 150:11	146:16 162:12 167:1	12:30110:16	1990220:6	25th 35:10238:8
'1 228:1 248:19 185:22 209:11 219:1	12:38118:16	1990's 106:15 136:3	26 35:2,5,7
’1 254:4 258:20 221:21 227:7 233:8	1214:18	1994 161:14 162:4,17	2625:6
>,18	236:11,16,18 244:5	1234:19	163:10 164:3	2627 123:23 152:16
g 138:21,22	259:12 260:10 261:22	13 101:13 159:23	1995 45:5,13 72:7,11	28 204:8 236:13,15,17
r	year 12:2 19:8,8 45:6 211:11,18 212:1	111:11 112:18	236:19,19
20:23 21:18	49:12 62:16 67:22	213:2 224:21	1997 105:5	29 1:18
130:4 36:13	85:9,9 266:23	14 236:18 272:19	1998 174:22 209:7	29th6:8
>57:9,14 71:21	years 8:16 9:20 12:15	1464:20	1999 25:21 26:4 31:10	_
[ 93:7 116:23	12:17 17:9,11 19:19	1524:4	174:11,16 175:7	_3_
[9,21 120:7	24:18 29:6 30:19	1500's 30:10	__3 4:14 34:17,19,20
1 138:17 164:16 31:2 44:21 45:5 81:7	159 20:9	_2_ 110:23 167:2
[2 194:21,22	86:7 89:4 108:5	1674:21	2 4:13 22:24 23:14 24:9	3:49242:18
[4,19211:22	119:20 172:14 212:13	1685:4	64:20 110:18	3:59 242:21
1233:21 234:7 216:13 219:6 220:5	17 258:12	2:01 167:9	3012:17
7:1973:23 80:3 255:10256:4	18247:5	2:15 178:20	30033:21
>82:10,13 84:7	yeses 161:23	1880’s 30:7	2:16 178:22	3202 1:21
1 85:18 109:16	yield 139:9,21	194:12	2:41 199:10	34 4:14 247:14 248:5
1 114:11 117:4	yielding 140:9	1939 55:4,8	2:51 199:12	_
[9 177:19 220:10	yields 137:12 138:7,9	1940254:20	2042:4 132:11 160:4	_4_
>1 251:10,16	234:23	1945 55:4,6	229:22	4 4:16 61:22 62:1 167:8
[4	York 31:8 42:9,16	1950 254:19 261:16	20th 29:24 44:17 51:17 242:17
129:5 30:18	120:12	1950’s 100:4 101:7	235:11,18 236:8,23	4,600 11:9
>	78:1 193:10	young 12:18 70:8	237:9,13 254:5 261:4	2005:5	4:35 268:22
)	266:24	1954 25:21 26:1 175:6	2000 45:5 138:15 220:6	4:37 270:4,11
ig31:2 48:6 51:4	younger 16:7,11,20	261:23	20004 3:19	40's241:22
>219:2	72:14,14,16 73:14	1955 237:15 265:20	200131:1,5,9 211:11	400,000 266:22
[4:19 15:230:9 238:24	195784:13	265:20	4331:24
>87:9,9,11 205:3	youths 12:23	196049:14 254:20	2002 19:19 47:2 94:18	443,6009:3
>,18 251:2,3	__1960’s 50:17 87:12	2003 45:8,23 72:7,11	46,000 11:9
108:12	_$_ 241:16	111:11 112:18	47261:17
rhile 267:18	$1040:7	1964 14:16 29:4,23	2005 12:13 85:11	48247:13
i’19:14 65:14	_ 57:2 162:10,24	2009 43:20 74:22	49250:6
>0 134:14 164:7	_0_ 254:24	225:17	_
>	265:23 267:14	002-00406-021:6 6:7	1966194:6 240:3,10.15	2010 1:18 6:8 9:13,15	_5_
id 30:13,15	_ 240:20 241:2,7	10:14,16 13:18 24:4	5 4:17 13:2 118:14
18:17	_1__1966-1967 95:15	47:2 225:18 255:5	119:6,8 234:13
92:19	14:12 6:3 13:2 19:18	1967 138:14 143:12	272:18	242:20 243:11 256:1(
; 4:17,18,21 5:4 19:22 256:10 257:24	1970 248:9 249:1 250:2	2012272:19	258:1 270:2
88:2 125:21	1st 224:14 272:17	261:4	202.942.54913:20	5:00 269:18,18
>2 183:23	1-274 1:22	1970’s 74:6 86:17 87:12	2027 123:20 126:3	50251:18
l22:3 51:2	1:11 141:1	143:16 148:12 205:24 127:20	50s254:l
16	118:7 121:2	1:12 141:3	234:2 248:16 249:10	2066 123:21 129:19	50-year 119:10
i,7,9	133:7,8,14	1:47 167:3	259:4 260:17 261:11 130:19	51258:10
>	139:13 218:23	10 5:4 168:21,22 193:3	1971 230:22 250:10	2080 123:21 125:7	55 248:1 250:22 265:23 31:9 140:2 194:16	1972 251:19 252:17	21st 19:19 30:5	5552:73:186:19
1	10-21-024:12	253:7,9,17 254:11	2110 124:2 154:16	56250:22
15:17 79:2 251:6	10:2164:17	260:7	155:14	_
__10:30 64:21	1975 259:21	213.443.3000 3:11	_6_
_x__100% 230:2	1977 69:5 258:13	2174 123:22 124:14,16	64:18 121:19,21 218:7
5:1	115:5 200:6 244:14	259:22	224:13	244:13
__11:40 110:20	1979 15:7	22nd 6:5	60 8:16
_Y__11:50 111:1	1980's 74:8 87:13	22020:8	614:16
1:6 14:2 22:3,19	11:53 112:8	249:11 254:20	2346 123:22 135:9,19	64 162:22 164:19
30:11,21 39:19	11:54 112:10	1981 191:7 206:1 240:4 136:15	65 84:14 202:19
), 11,12 43:11	1184:17	198815:11,19 27:4,5	2349 123:22 136:20	66 265:23
7
) 123:16,24 [8 247:2,12
24	85:21 86:3 [8 224:14 246:7 [2
7	261:4
8	261:4
8
4
4
8
146:23 216:19 '4 242:23 243:11 21 159:19 246:7 >1
9
167:5,13 169:4,8 ) 244:13
19
i8:22
i:21
i:23
23	30:22 75:5 5:10
6
6,23
21
5