IN THE UNITED STATES FOR THE MIDDLE DIS1 JACKSONVILLE
IN RE: ENGLE CASES
CASE NO. 3:09-
THIS DOCUMENT RELATES TO:
Deshaies v. R.J. Reynolds Tc 3:09cvll080-WGY-JBT Elkins v. R.J. Reynolds Toba 3:09cvll595-WGY-JBT Harford v. R.J. Reynolds Tot 3:09cvl3631-WGY-JBT
3:09cvl2990-WGY-JBT Meeker v. R.J. Reynolds Tobc 3:09cvl2867-WGY-JBT Mogell v. R.J. Reynolds Tobc 3:09cvl2919-WGY-JBT Lydick v. R.J. Reynolds Tobc 3:09cvl2727-WGY-JBT
DEPOSITION OF LOUIS M.
Taken at the Marriott C 1600 East Beach Bouleve Mississippi, on Friday, beginning at 8:50 a.m.
Fage ±
IISTRICT COURT !CT OF FLORIDA iVISION
r-10 0 0 0 -WGY- JBT
lcco Co. , et al. ,
:o Co., et al. ,
:co Co . , et al. ,
:o Co., et al. ,
:o Co., et al. ,
:o Co., et al. ,
:RIAKOUDES, Ph.D.
irtyard Gulfport,
L, Biloxi, rovember 15, 2013,
APPEARANCES
DONALD A. MIGLIORI, ESQUIRE Motley Rice
312 S. Main Street, 2nd Floor Providence, Rhode Island 02903 Dmigliori @ motleyrice.com ATTORNEY FOR PLAINTIFFS
STEVEN N. GEISE, ESQUIRE Jones Day
12265 El Camino Real, Suite 200 San Diego, California 92130-4096 Sngeise@jonesday.com ATTORNEY FOR R J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY
GAY L. TEDDER, ESQUIRE Hughes, Hubbard & Reed 2345 Grand Boulevard Kansas City, Missouri 64108-2663 Tedder@hugheshubbard.com ATTORNEY FOR LORILLARD TOBACCO COMPANY
JENNIFER BROWN, ESQUIRE (VIA TELEPHONE)
Shook, Hardy & Bacon, LLP 2555 Grand Boulevard Kansas City, Missouri 64108 ATTORNEY FOR PHILIP MORRIS USA, INC.
JENNIFER ROSSEL, ESQUIRE (VIA TELEPHONE) Kasowitz, Benson, Torres & Friedman, LLP 1441 Brickell Avenue, Suite 1420 Miami, Florida 33131-3426 Kluther@kasowitz.com ATTORNEY FOR LIGGETT GROUP, LLC
REPORTED BY:
/lONICA SCHROEDER, RPR, CRR, CSR #1285 :OURT REPORTER & NOTARY PUBLIC
TABLE OF CONTENTS examination by:	Page
Mr. Geise	5
Ms. Tedder	184
Mr. Migliori	218
Mr. Geise	225
exhibits:
Exhibit 1, Historical Analysis of Public and Industry Knowledge of the Health Hazards of Smoking and Tobacco Industry Marketing and Promotion of Cigarettes in the United States - Expert Report and Appendices, by Dr. Kyriakoudes 6 Exhibit 2, Defendant's Notice of Taking Deposition Duces Tecum 11
Exhibit 3, Risks Associated with Smoking Cigarettes with Low Machine-Measured Yields of Tar and Nicotine - Monograph 13 (Pages 65 and 146)	89
Exhibit 4, The Effect of Advertising on the Level and Composition of Cigarette Consumption, 11/13/89 121
Exhibit 5, Letter to M.B. Scott, from C. Judge, dated 3/23/73 (LOR-003388)	205
Exhibit 6, Letter to C. Kemble, from G. Telford, dated 6/5/96 (LOR-003394)	209
Exhibit 7, Documents brought to deposition by Dr. Kyriakoudes 229
STIPULATION It is hereby stipulated and agreed by and between the parties hereto, through their respective attorneys of record, that this deposition may be taken at the time and place hereinbefore set forth, by Monica Schroeder, Court Reporter and Notaiy Public, pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended;
That the formality of READING AND SIGNING is specifically NOT WAIVED;
That all objections, except as to the form of the questions and the responsiveness of the answers, are reserved until such time as this deposition, or any part thereof, may be used or is sought to be used in evidence.
LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D. having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows: EXAMINATION BY MR. GEISE:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Kyriakoudes.
A. Good morning.
Q. Before we went on the record this morning, I introduced myself to you. My name is Steve Geise. I'm an attorney that represents the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. It's nice to meet you this morning.
I know that you have had your deposition taken a number of times; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I assume you are familiar with the rules that cover the procedure of a deposition, and asking the questions and answering them under oath, correct?
A. That's correct. I'm familiar with that.
Q. And I imagine you don't need me to go over those again; is that true?
A. That's correct. That's true.
Q. One admonition or provision I would point out, if at any point during the course of the
deposition today, you need to take a break, please let me know and we can accommodate you.
A. Thank you.
Q. Before we get started with the hard questioning, I was advised that you had requested a check for your appearance today in advance of the deposition beginning, so I'm going to hand you a check made out to you in the amount of $3,600. Okay?
A. Thank you.
(Exhibit 1 was marked.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I'm handing you what's been marked as Exhibit 1 to your deposition, which is an Expert Report and Appendices from Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D. Do you see that?
A. I do.
Q. And this report is signed and dated on October 31st, 2013; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you understand that this is your expert report that applies in these cases?
A. Yes. I submitted this report with its appendix materials.
Q. If you look at the second page of your
report, in particular, Footnote 1, you see that it says, "This expert report applies to all Wave 4 cases." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. How many cases does that include?
A. I haven't made a count. This was a footnote that the attorney asked me to include as part of a procedural aspect of this report.
MR. MIGLIORI:
And as reports are prepared by witnesses, experts and their attorneys, for the record, the Notice of Deposition, as the defendants have noticed it, lists seven cases that are subject -that are the current pared down numbers of the Wave 4 cases, in which he's being disclosed. One of them is Jolley, which has been stayed because of bankruptcy.
MR. GEISE:
Counsel, I think you are far beyond what the federal rules permit in terms of an objection or comment.
MR. MIGLIORI:
No. I think the federal rules allow me to clarify the record. So I will just clarify that Jolley is one case -
MR. GEISE:
Counsel, there's nothing that needs to be clarified. I asked him if he knew.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Counsel, I can make statements on the record. This isn't an objection.
MR. GEISE:
Is it an objection to the form?
MR. MIGLIORI:
It's not an objection. This is a statement on the record about the disclosure that you made, and I'm mentioning that Jolley is a case that has been stayed. That's one of the seven Wave 4 cases for which he's here.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, at the time you signed your expert report on October 31st, 2013, what was your understanding as to the number of cases that were included in the Wave 4 cases?
A. I hadn't — I had no — I had no number, so there was an understanding of no number. All I knew was that I was going to give generic testimony.
Q. And when were you retained to give the expert report that's marked as Exhibit 1?
A. I was contacted - the exact date, I believe, is in the e-mail correspondence I brought. But they telephoned me in about the middle of October and asked me to submit a report by the first of November.
Q. And you agreed to submit that report?
A. Yes. I put this report together.
Q. Before agreeing to submit that report, did you ask how many cases were covered in the Wave 4 cases?
A. No, I didn't. I didn't - no. I didn't ask that.
Q. Did you understand, by agreeing to submit an expert report, that you were agreeing to be an expert in each of the Wave 4 cases?
A. Well, I knew that when I submitted the report, I was agreeing to be an expert. What Wave 4 actually means is - I don't know what that means.
Q. You understand, from your experience as a testifying expert in tobacco litigation, that as an expert, you frequently will be required to give a deposition and/or testify at trial?
A. That's correct.
Q. Before agreeing to be an expert in the
Wave 4 cases, did you determine how many cases yoi were signing up for?
A. No. My discussions with the attorneys were along the lines of what happened at the beginning of the Engle process back in 2008, 2009; that, at some point, they would make a video of my testimony and use that for their purposes.
Q. Did you understand, with respect to the Wave 4 cases, that there would be a video of your testimony made to be used in future cases?
A. That was one of the possibilities that was mentioned by the attorney that I dealt with.
Q. Do you still understand that to be the case?
A. That's one of the possibilities out there, yes. That's what I understand.
Q. Do you know when that videotape might take place?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. I don't. I have not been informed of any particular date. I haven't done anything on that.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Before agreeing to be an expert in all of the Wave 4 cases, did you know the names of the
plaintiffs involved in the Wave 4 cases?
A. No. The discussion was that I would be asked to give what's called sometimes generic testimony about the history of the tobacco industry and the cigarette in American life, and those issues, and not give case-specific testimony.
(Exhibit 2 was marked.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I'm handing you what's been marked as Exhibit 2 to your deposition, and this is entitled Defendants' Notice of Taking Deposition Duces Tecum. Do you see that?
A. I do.
Q. Do you see "this document relates to," and it lists seven different cases? Do you see that?
A. I see that.
Q. Have you been retained in each of the seven cases listed on Exhibit 2?
A. I'm not sure what you mean by that.
Could you clarify?
Q. Typically, from reading your prior testimony, in cases in which you are retained, you require a $3,500 retainer; is that correct?
A. Yes. That's been my practice.
Q. Have you required a retainer in connection with your appearance here today?
A. No. I've not - I haven't made those arrangements yet. This — you know, I haven't made those arrangements with the attorneys.
Q. With regard to the expert report you prepared that's Exhibit 1, did you require a retainer before you prepared that report?
A. Not in this case because I was contacted, at least asked for a report. They contacted me in August. And I talked with them briefly in August and then didn't hear, really, anything from them for quite a while.
And when I was re-contacted in the middle of October, approximately, it was at a very busy time. I just kind of focused on this and thought I would work on that later.
Q. When you were contacted in August, what were you asked to do?
A. I was contacted by an attorney who telephoned me and said, you know, we're preparing for some litigation in federal court, and we're -you know, we're trying to determine who we might want to use as experts. Do you have an expert —
like, a - something to send me that I could look at to learn your opinions?
And I sent a draft of, you know, kind of this standard report. It's not exactly like this one, but something I had prepared for another case, and sent that through e-mail, my CV. And pretty much didn't really hear from them for a while.
Q. What was the name of the attorney who contacted you back in August?
A. Robert Nelson out in California somewhere, with Leiff, Cabraser.
Q. And then after talking with Mr. Nelson in August, the next time you were contacted was in the middle of October?
A. Yes. He may have — he may have contacted me in September. I can't remember. But nothing substantive. But, yes, the next major contact, I had not understood that this would be something that I had to concern myself with until the middle of October.
Q. At any point between August and October, did you ask how many cases were involved?
A. I didn't, no. No. He was saying that, you know, there was some universe of cases in
federal court, and that his interest was in a videotaped presentation that could be used. You know, that was — I don't know exactly what all those details are.
Q. The report that you prepared that's marked as Exhibit 1, that was a report that you submitted for all of the Wave 4 cases, correct?
A. Well, I submitted it to Mr. Nelson. He asked me to include that footnote. And, you know
—	but to be honest with you, I don't feel competent to interpret the meaning of that footnote. That seemed to me to be something that the attorneys wanted to include as part of the procedural issues in the litigation and I didn't think anything of it.
Q. Is it your understanding that that is the expert report that you have for the seven cases that are listed on the deposition notice that's Exhibit 2?
A. Well, it certainly would apply to these because I'm here today to talk about these, yes.
Q. You don't have any other report that you prepared with regard to those seven cases?
A. No. No. This is the only report I have, and I submitted that back on the 31st of October.
Q. I believe you were deposed earlier this week in another case, Bowden; is that correct?
A. Yes. In the state courts of Florida.
Q. And in your testimony on Monday, you talked about, I think, this report and indicated that it contained generic opinions; is that correct?
A. Yes. There's nothing in this report that refers to any particular plaintiff, for example, or specific case.
Q. And on Monday, you indicated that you had not prepared any new opinions since your trial testimony in the Haldeman case in September; is that correct?
A. Right. And when you are referring to Monday, perhaps you are referring to last Thursday? Are you referring to the prior deposition?
Q. Yes.
A. It was actually Thursday, just to clarify.
Q. The deposition in the Bowden case?
A. The Bowden case, yes. Yes. To answer your question, pardon me for interjecting that clarification, no, no new opinions from the
Haldeman/Mclnery case.
Q. And you haven't developed any new opinions since your last deposition?
A. No. That was last week.
Q. I think you said you did not include any information about any of the individual smokers in the seven cases at issue in the deposition notice in this expert report, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form of the question.
A. That's correct. There's nothing in this report that applies to the specific circumstances of the plaintiffs or smokers involved in these cases.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And with regard to the smokers involved in these cases, you haven't reviewed any case-specific information about those smokers; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Do you know the names of the individual smokers in each of the seven cases on the deposition notice?
A. I don't. Again, I have not reviewed any case-specific materials.
Q. And you are not offering any opinions unique to one plaintiff compared to a different plaintiff?
A. That's correct.
Q. I guess for record purposes, you mentioned that you did bring some documents that were responsive to Exhibit 2, the duces tecum; is that correct?
A. That's correct. Yes, I did bring them.
Q. Could I take a look at what you brought in response to the deposition notice?
A. Sure. It might be helpful if I kind of identify each item. It would save you some time.
Q. That would be great.
A. You had asked for my curriculum vitae.
It's current. I will say that that vitae also includes another item requested, which is a list of cases that I've testified in. It lacks one thing. I just didn't have time this weekend to update it for the Bowden case, so it's correct, current as of last week.
You had asked for presentations. I included presentations as appended to the expert report, but this is what I didn't append, and I'll share that with you now. Those are printed
PowerPoint slides.
Q. And this looks like it's PowerPoint slides from a presentation you gave in Finland in June of 2013; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
You had asked for financial information.
You had asked for my income tax. I did not bring that. That's private information. I'm concerned about the issue of privacy and identity theft.
But I did go and pull out previous invoices that I had in my possession, and these are the ones that I came up with, and these are invoices from cases going back a few years.
Q. We can look through the specific invoices during a break. Let me ask you, have you prepared any invoices specific to any of the seven cases listed on the deposition notice today?
A. No, I haven't. I haven't prepared any invoices.
Q. Have you prepared an invoice that covers the preparation of your expert report, which is Exhibit 1 to your deposition?
A. Not yet. I've not yet done that.
Q. What else have you brought?
A. Okay. This is just the — my printout of
the notice. You had asked for e-mails. These are e-mails that basically covers contacts I had with Mr. Nelson, that kind of thing.
Q. Okay.
A. This is under the theory that you probably wanted the earlier version of the expert report to review. That was what I sent to him back in August. It's referenced in an e-mail.
Q. So this is when you were initially contacted by Mr. Nelson in August and asked to be involved in the federal cases or the Wave 4 cases, you sent him a draft of kind of your generic opinions?
A. That's accurate, yes. This was actually prepared for another case, but it's — you know, it was there to give him, like, as you suggest, an idea of what I testify about and the bases for my opinions.
Q. Okay. What else did you bring?
A. Well, this is just — this is the expert report that I submitted. This is my copy.
Q. Is this the copy that you signed?
A. I didn't print out — I didn't bring the signature page with me.
Q. Since it's not signed, we'll keep this as
part of the production here, and if we can compare, there's a difference —
A. This is just for me to use in case you were going to refer to the report so I would have my own copy.
MR. MIGLIORI:
I would also like to say that under Rule 26 — I know there's no big deal about this, but just under Rule 26, whether or not that's protected or not protected as an iteration other than the final report is a concern of mine. I would like to look at it. I don't really have any major concerns about it.
I would also like to look at the correspondence again to just make sure it's not a Rule 26 protected exchange. We can do that at a break.
MR. GEISE:
That's fine. I'm not going to go through it line by line right now.
A. I just printed out these because I thought you all would want to talk about them. So they're not official in any way.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you did not produce any
records related to any of the plaintiffs in these seven cases; is that correct?
A. Yes. I did not produce those because I do not have any records of that nature.
Q. You haven't received any pleadings related to those cases?
A. No. No.
Q. You haven't received any depositions taken in those seven cases?
A. No, I have not.
Q. I want to ask you a series of case-specific questions that I imagine will get a series of similar responses, but just for the record, I'm going to run through these, so I ask you to bear with me and display some patience here.
A. I will bear with you.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you are not the biographer of any of the seven individuals involved in the cases at issue today, are you?
A. That's correct.
Q. You weren't retained to offer any opinions specific to those seven individual smokers?
A. That's correct.
Q. You haven't reviewed any of the depositions in those seven cases?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know the names of anyone who may have been deposed in those cases?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know any of the smokers' educational backgrounds?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know any of the smokers' residential history?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know if any of the smokers served in the military?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know when any of the individual smokers started smoking?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know why any of the individual smokers started smoking?
A. That's right. I haven't looked at the specifics of these cases.
Q. And you don't know how much any of the individuals smoked over the course of their lifetimes?
A. I don't know their smoking histories, including how much they smoked over their lifetimes.
Q. And you don't know what brands of cigarettes they smoked over the course of their lifetimes?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know if or when any of the individual smokers switched brands of cigarettes?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know why any of the individual smokers switched brands of cigarettes?
A. That's correct. I haven't looked into their individual situations.
Q. You don't know if any of the smokers ever sought a cigarette with lower tar or nicotine?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know if any of the individual smokers engaged in compensatory smoking behavior"
A. Again, I don't know their individual smoking histories, including that issue.
Q. You don't know how the tar and nicotine levels compared for the different brands the individual smokers may have smoked?
A. That's right, because I don't know what
they smoked.
Q. You don't know the specific diseases each of the plaintiffs is alleged to have suffered?
A. That's correct. I don't know their specific circumstances.
Q. And you are not going to offer any medical testimony about a plaintiff's medical condition?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't have any information about whether any of the individual smokers ever made an effort to quit smoking?
A. Again, I don't know their smoking histories, including that particular issue.
Q. And if an individual smoker did try to quit smoking, you don't know how many times they did?
A. Again, I haven't looked into their individual situation, so I don't know their quitting attempts or that aspect of their personal history.
Q. You don't know if any of the seven individual smokers actually quit smoking, do you?
A. No. I've been retained to give generic testimony and have not researched or reviewed
documents related to their individual situations.
Q. And if any of the smokers did quit smoking, you don't know when they quit, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And if they quit, you don't know how they quit, correct?
A. Again, I haven't researched their individual situations, so I don't know that.
Q. And you are not going to offer an opinion in any of these seven cases that the individual smoker was addicted, correct?
A. Right. I don't have the particulars of the individuals. Yes. I am not going to offer those opinions.
Q. And you are also not going to offer the opinion that addiction was a cause of their injury?
A. That's — I'm not going to give individualized testimony on these plaintiffs because I haven't reviewed their particular situations.
Q. And in not giving individualized testimony about these plaintiffs, you are not going to offer the opinion that addiction was the cause of any of these seven plaintiffs' injuries?
A. That will not be my role in this case. I will not offer that opinion.
Q. You don't know what any of the seven individual smokers knew about the danger of smoking at any point during their life, correct?
A. That's correct. I haven't looked into their personal life history.
Q. Because you haven't looked into their personal life history, you don't know the magazines or newspapers that the smokers read throughout their life?
A. I have not reviewed those materials, so I don't know that.
Q. And you don't know what the individual smokers' television viewing habits were during their lifetime?
A. I don't know that either.
Q. You don't know if any of the individual smokers believed that there was a controversy about the dangers of cigarette smoking, correct?
A. I haven't researched their individual situations, so I'm not going to make an opinion about the individual beliefs.
Q. And you don't have any evidence that the individual smokers were ever confused about the
health risks of smoking, correct?
A. I haven't researched their individual situation, so I'm not going to offer an opinion about their personal level of confusion. I will testify about that issue as it relates to the national debate over smoking and health, which confusion is a major role, but I have not researched the individual cases.
Q. And with respect to the seven individuals involved in these cases, you don't know if they were personally confused at all, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. I don't know their individual situations. MR. GEISE:
Q. You don't know what information the individual smokers received during the course ol their lifetime about the addictive nature of smoking, do you?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form.
A. Again, I don't know the individualized information they received. I will talk about that as a part of history, but I don't know the specific case record on that issue.
MR. GEISE:
Q. You don't have any specific information from the case record about what any of the individual smokers believed with regard to a controversy over whether cigarettes were addictive?
A. Again, I will discuss the controversy as a matter of history, but I have not reviewed the individualized documents on that issue.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, are you going to offer an opinion about what the individual smokers believed about the health risks or the addictive nature of smoking?
A. Not related to the individuals, no.
Q. Do you know what cigarette advertisements the individual smokers may have seen?
A. No. I will talk about the history of cigarette advertising, but I don't know their individual circumstances.
Q. You don't know whether any of the individual smokers ever contacted a cigarette manufacturer for any reason; is that correct?
A. I don't know that either way.
Q. Do you have any evidence that any of the individual smokers ever heard anything that was
said or written by R.J. Reynolds?
A. I will talk about R.J. Reynolds' statements and activities as a matter of history, but the individualized cases, I haven't reviewed those documents, so I will not offer an opinion on the individual basis.
Q. Similarly, you won't offer an opinion on an individual basis that any of these individual smokers heard anything said or written by Brown & Williamson, correct?
A. My answer would be the same as it applied to R.J. Reynolds. I will talk about Brown & Williamson as a matter of history, and their actions, statements and the like, but I have not reviewed the individualized elements of this case, so I won't offer an individual opinion.
Q. Would you give the same answer with respect to the American Tobacco Company?
A. Yes, I would.
Q. With respect to Philip Morris?
A. Yes, I would.
Q. With respect to Lorillard?
A. Yes, I would.
Q. With respect to The Tobacco Institute?
A. Yes. I'll talk about The Tobacco
Institute as their statements, actually, as a matter of history, and their role in fostering a climate of doubt and confusion, their role as a conspiracy organization, but the individual plaintiffs in this case, I've not reviewed those documents and will not offer an opinion about their individual situation.
Q. You are not aware of any evidence, as you sit here today, that any of the individual smokers ever heard anything said or written by the Tobacco Institute?
A. I have not reviewed their cases, so I would have no opinion about that.
Q. And that's the same answer with regard to CTR?
A. Yes.
Q. And TIRC?
A. Yes.
Q. And you haven't been retained in these cases to offer any opinion about whether the individual smokers ever saw, read or heard any specific statement by a specific tobacco company; is that correct?
A. That's correct. I'll talk about the history of the industry's statements, but I have
not looked at the individualized records in these cases, so I'm not offering an individual opinion.
Q. And you don't know whether the individual smokers in these cases, their decisions to start smoking or continue smoking or stop smoking were based on anything any tobacco company or industry group said; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form. Go ahead.
A. Well, I'll talk about the role of the tobacco industry in promoting smoking, persuading people, as a matter of history, not to quit, their youth marketing and role in influencing the promotion of certain anti— or nicotine replacement therapies. But I haven't looked at the individual record, and so will not make an individualized opinion on that.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Let me just follow up on that. So you do not have an individualized opinion as to whether any of the individual seven smokers decided to start smoking, decided to continue smoking or decided to stop smoking was based on anything any tobacco company or any industry group said or did, correct?
A. That's correct. I have not looked at the individual record and will not offer an opinion on that issue.
Q. You are not aware of any evidence that the individual smokers in these seven cases relied on any specific statement from a tobacco company or industry group, correct?
A. Again, I haven't looked at the individualized record, so I'm not going to offer an opinion on that issue.
Q. And you are not aware of any evidence that would support that, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Well, I wouldn't know either way because I haven't looked at any of the specific case material. The evidence may well be there. I just haven't looked at it because that's not my role in this particular action.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you intend to mention a specific smoker by name at all in your testimony in these cases?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form.
A. As I sit here, no.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, if I can ask you to look at what we marked as Exhibit 1 to the deposition, which is your expert report. And, in particular,
I want to ask you some questions about the reliance list or reliance lists that are attached to it. If you could start by looking at Appendix 1. Have you found that?
A. I am there.
Q. Appendix 1 says Reliance List Parts 1 through 3. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. What is the difference between the three parts? You are smiling. Is there a difference or have you not been asked that?
A. Yes. I'm smiling because the attorney asked me, Mr. Nelson, as part of my preparation of this report to provide a comprehensive bibliography. So this is a list of the documents which I have produced many times before. Typically, I have produced them on disks.
And there may well be a lot of duplication because I'm in transition from one database program to another, and I haven't really
completed that transition because the old database program is no longer supported by the manufacturer.
And so under a real time constraint, this was something that I erred on the side of what I called the kitchen sink strategy.
But these documents, you know, first of all, most of them are documents you have seen before because they're mostly industry documents. The ones that aren't, I've produced many times in the past. And so that's — there may be some overlap between these. I did not take the time to do that, simply because of the time pressure to get this in on time.
Q. Is there any significance then to the fact that if a document is in Part 1 versus a document that's in Part 3?
A. No. There's no significance at all. It just means that it's listed twice.
Q. And I take it then that you've had these three different parts may have been stored on different databases, and in an effort to be complete, you just put the three of them together for purposes of the reliance list?
A. That's exactly right, yes.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, did you collect all of the documents on your reliance list yourself?
A. Yes. Most of these are industry — the ones that aren't industry documents tend to be things like Reader's Digest stories, which I've looked at, you know, and I've read. I used to have a large collection of paper documents, and those were destroyed. They got wet. I'll just put — and muddy.
But I've looked at them, you know. So, like, Reader's Digest, there are things in here like "Bertha Johnson's Home Occupations For Boys and Girls." I supplied the digital copy to you for that. If there's a specific document —
Q. I guess it's a broader question. With regard to the documents that are on your reliance list, have you been the person that's gone out and found all of those documents to include them or have any of those documents been provided to you from somebody else?
A. Oh, I see. No. These are documents that I've collected, either through research in the industry, records, databases or through the library and other places like that. These are my materials that I've collected.
Q. Have you become aware of any materials on your reliance list because they were sent to you by attorneys?
A. No, because there's no case-specific materials here. The materials I get from attorneys are generally case-specific materials.
15 years ago, maybe, 14,1 forget, a long time ago, I was sent a couple of disks from Norwood Wilder, who is an attorney, but that was a collection of documents. And that was kind of early, I think, before they were available on line. But I've long since ceased relying on those, that particular set of documents, and have my own set, a long time ago, and I've testified to that, about that before.
Q. Have you received any documents on your reliance list from other witnesses involved in tobacco litigation?
A. No. No. These are documents I've researched myself. And there's many — there's many, many hundreds of documents here, so —
Q. What is the last date that you added documents to your reliance list, if you can recall?
A. Well, this summer, I — as part of my
preparation for a case that was held in September called the Haldeman/Mclnery, I did a — kind of went over my documents. And then, also, I just go over it as part of my general research. So it's been a very busy fall, with classes, so it would have been in the summertime that I really kind of did the spade work.
Q. And I can probably predict the answer to this based on what you said about how you put the reliance list together, but are there any documents on which you rely for your opinions in this case that, to your knowledge, are not on the reliance list?
A. This is a —
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Go ahead.
A. This is a difficult question because I've looked at, my estimate is over 15,000 documents. And when I find something and I want to keep that document, I tend to simply save it. And in the past, I've provided my PDF copies of that. And, you know, I scan and photograph things, as well, as a form of note-taking, so that also applies to documents that I encounter that are not generally from the industry databases.
For sure, because I rely on a lot of things. I mean, I can't remember if I have the — you know, the documents related to the Dow, the patch issue in here or not, to be honest with you. They may be in there. They may be not. But that's something that I've testified about. It's a well-known story.
So it's — you know, this is different than, say, for example, a case where a physician has a universe of medical records and that physician is kind of making a diagnosis. This is
—	you know, this is the history of it, and that's many, many thousands of documents that I've looked at over the years and that have shaped my thinking.
Q. So there may be documents that you will talk about at trial that are not listed on the reliance list?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. It's possible. I try to be as comprehensive as I could be. You know, I haven't really thought about what a direct exam would look like for this, so I haven't given that — I haven't reached that point in my thinking, so I'm
—	I really don't know. It's possible. If I'm allowed to. I know there's rules, and I'm not familiar with all those rules because I'm not an attorney.
MR. GEISE:
Q. In Part 1 of your reliance list, there are a number of documents that contain links to the UCSF Legacy website; is that correct?
A. That's correct. And I try to save those as much as I can just simply because that allows somebody to go to the document.
Q. Let me ask you a couple of questions about that. So do you save copies of the documents that you access on that website that interest you?
A. Yes. Yes. I do that. And then I've been trying to keep a list, also, because lists are helpful. And as part of that, I keep the link. That's also — you know, when you cite documents in an academic paper, or for that matter, this report, the standard now is that if it's an on-line document, you do include the link, so I save the links.
Q. Do you have documents that you have saved that are not on the reliance list?
A. Possibly, but I wouldn't be able to tell you which ones.
Q. Do you have a — you said as you do that, you try to keep a list.
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have a separate list that you did not include in your reliance list with your expert report?
A. You have all of my lists. This is what I have, and I've shared that with you.
Q. Your reliance list frequently lists the date that you — and it says accessed the — I assume the website; is that correct?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. What does that mean when you say you accessed on a particular date?
A. Well, that is something that's generated automatically by the program that I'm migrating to, which is called Zotero. And what I'm doing is, I've got the original document that I've collected over the years, and I'm looking up the citation. And Zotero is automated, so you can kind of click a button, it's not perfect, and it will store it in this list-making program or database. So you may find that a lot of these
have the same date. Because that was the date where I said, I've got to move them from the older system of storage to the newer system of storage.
Q. So the access date on your reliance list does not indicate the date that you first saw a particular document? It may or may not?
A. That's correct. That's correct.
Q. It's merely with the Zotero system indicates that that is a day that you accessed the system and found that document?
A. Through Zotero, which is the new system I'm migrating to to keep track of these materials.
I'm a sole practitioner on this one, and I don't have staff, so a lot to keep up with.
Q. Is it your practice now to save copies of documents electronically as opposed to printing them?
A. Yes. I try to save paper, and these are all in PDFs, which are a good way to keep track of these materials.
Q. If I could ask you to look at Page 6 of your reliance list.
A. Yes.
Q. The second entry indicates Legacy Tobacco Documents Library: Young Adult Smoker Lifestyles
and Attitudes.
A. Yes.
Q. And it indicates 2013, accessed October 28th. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recall, what was your research objective on October 28th, 2013, when you accessed that document?
A. That's — that's a case where I'm taking a document that I've long been familiar with and simply migrating it to this new database.
And here's an example, too, of where — the machine does a lot of things automatically.
So when you do it automatically, it includes Legacy Tobacco Documents Library as part of the title. And, really, what I need to do is go back to those and delete that because the correct title is, in this case, Young Adult Smoker Lifestyles and Attitudes. It's a well-known report that I've been familiar with many years and have testified about.
So this, again, is just an attempt to move the — use a new bibliographic technology that I'm hoping will be more efficient and allow me to provide you a better usable list.
Q. Now, it sounds to me that when you — at least in this instance, when you accessed the Legacy Tobacco website, you are trying to get kind of an automated link to a document you already have?
A. That's correct. That's right.
Q. When is the last time that you searched on the Legacy website for new documents?
A. Oh, yesterday. I mean, I look at it all the time. I'm always discovering new things. Not all of them necessarily are relevant to this environment of litigation, but they relate more broadly to my scholarly work as a historian of the cigarette industry.
Q. Do you keep a record of the searches you perform on the website?
A. No. No. I mean, I'm always kind of tooling around and discovering new things. A lot of them are serendipity. I search, but I also scroll because sometimes you find things that are contiguous. They photocopied a whole file. So there's a way to do that through the computer, web interface, to kind of look at the whole file.
Q. For purposes of efficiency in your research, do you keep track of the novel searches
you perform so you don't repeat those later?
A. No. No.
Q. From your description of how your reliance list was prepared and appended to your expert report, is it true that some collection of documents that you included do not pertain to the opinions that you offer in this particular expert report?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. Yes. It's certainly possible. I mean, I
—	if — when you say opinions, the specific things I'm going to testify, a lot of these documents are part of the context and the general knowledge that I've acquired through researching this subject.
I'll give you an example here. Carolyn
—	on Page 6, Carolyn Levy, the Archetype Studies, and the previous one called Rituals, that's part
of my interest in understanding the way in which the industry used social science methods to reverse and heal the mind of the smoker. If they ask me about that, I'll answer.
But it all relates to my knowledge and understanding and expertise in the history of the
tobacco industry. Whether it's a specific thing I might show the Jury, I don't know.
Q. It sounds like the preparation process for putting your reliance list together was to collect, in this case, I guess three separate lists or databases of documents?
A. That's correct. And I'm working towards getting those combined into one.
Q. In pulling those three lists together, though, you didn't necessarily do it with an eye toward the content that was in your report; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. That's correct. I mean, that's why I put this as kind of an appendix. You know, it's in addition to what's cited in the report.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Now, before choosing a document or listing a document on your list, do you consider whether that document is subject to a claim of privilege?
A. No. I simply look at these documents as a historian, as primary sources for understanding historical issues and research.
Q. I'm going to ask you to look at Page 10 of your reliance list. About seven entries down there's an entry for a document written by Richard G. Stuhan. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Who was Richard G. Stuhan?
A. I'm not exactly sure, as I sit here. I do - this is a document that I encountered and it seemed pretty interesting to me. If one were to do a history of tobacco litigation, this would be relevant. There's not much in that document. I don't plan to talk about post-Juror interviews in this case. I anticipate probably a mixed question.
Q. Is this an example then of a document that's on your reliance list but doesn't necessarily pertain to the generic opinions that you intend to offer in these cases?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. This would be an example because this is part of my broader research into the history of the tobacco industry.
MR. GEISE:
Q. How is this document relevant to your
broader research?
A. Well, litigation is one method by which the tobacco industry has shaped its method, shielded itself from the costs of having to — shield itself from the costs and the harms of the products that it sells and promotes to the public. And so it fits in with that.
It's also relevant to the kinds of stuff I published in my scholarly piece in Tobacco Control, December 2006, common knowledge testimony.
I don't recall that that document had a whole lot in it, as I sit here. I would have to review the document, but -
Q. Do you recall how large the document was, how long it was?
A. I'm not. I'm not. It's something I came across, thought it was interesting and saved it.
Q. Is it relevant to your opinions to know what jurors say when they talk to attorneys after a trial?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. Oh, as an expert witness?
MR. GEISE:
Q. Well, as part of your research.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Go ahead.
A. It's not something I rely on in giving my opinions in this area of expert witness testimony It's more an item that relates to the larger historical phenomena of litigation.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Have you asked the attorneys who have hired you in cases if they've talked to jurors after trials?
A. Oh, no. No. I've never done that.
Q. Have you ever tried to get information similar to the information that's contained in this document on your reliance list from the attorneys you've worked with?
A. No. No. I've never done that.
Q. Why not?
A. Why? I don't see the point to it.
Q. If information obtained from jurors following a trial is relevant to your research, wouldn't you seek to obtain that type of information from the folks you work with?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Go ahead.
A. No. This issue is more — I seem to recall this document did not shed any light on this. But I wrote about the way in which the tobacco industry developed a strategy for kind of contextualizing the history of the smoking and health debate and presented that through experts.
So I discovered through research a lot of preliminary material on that. And this document is something that I had hoped to discover that kind of dealt with the industry's own evaluation of that.
As far as my role in this, I have no interest and see no relevance to any actual case that I'm involved in and knowing what the jurors think or say or do. That's not something that I rely upon or even conduct primary source research on.
Q. So you don't conduct research or look for information about what jurors' attitudes are with regard to some of these topics?
A. No. My interest was a little bit more narrow than we described. You know, I wrote about the STIC story, the Special Trial Issues Committee, and I was hoping to find something where they did kind of a post follow-up. And my
recollection is that this document didn't supply that.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I think you've told us in recent depositions that you are now a full professor; is that correct?
A. Yes. I was promoted.
Q. Congratulations.
A. Thank you.
Q. Did that promotion come with a change in your responsibilities at the university?
A. No, the same job.
Q. And you are currently teaching courses at the University of Southern Mississippi?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Is USM on semesters?
A. It's a semester school, yes.
Q. What courses are you teaching this semester?
A. This semester, I am teaching my course on the Economic History of the United States, which is a standard course that I offer. And then I am teaching an honors seminar on world history called History 101, and that's the world to 1500.
And we start with Olduvai Gorge, and we actually go beyond Martin Luther. So it's more
kind of a close reading. It's an honor seminar.
So it's only a dozen students. We basically go through a series of books and readings.
Q. The cutoff time depends on where you are in the semester, whether it's a half a century or not, right?
A. Yes. That's right.
Q. Are those the two courses you are teaching this semester?
A. This semester.
Q. How many days a week do those courses meet?
A. They both meet on Mondays and Wednesdays.
Q. Now, in the spring semester, how many courses will you teach?
A. I'll be teaching one course, a graduate seminar on oral history methods.
Q. Now, how often does that course meet?
A. That will meet Mondays for three hours.
Q. So in the spring semester, then, you will have teaching obligations for three hours a week on Mondays?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you have other obligations with regard to the university?
A. Yes.
Q. What are those?
A. Well, I'm on a number of university committees this fall. I say jokingly, but I -just tongue and cheek, I drew the short straw, and for the second year, organized the University Research Awards celebration, which is actually something I love doing, but is a lot of work. So I'm on my College Research Committee, which involves reading grant applications for internal awards and alike.
But my biggest responsibility is I'm the director for the Center of Oral History and Cultural Heritage, which involves public outreach, management of staff, writing of grants and — it's a major collection of oral histories related to the history of Mississippi and the south. And as we come into the 50th anniversary of Freedom Summer, we're particularly busy in developing ways to share our collections with the public.
I have a reduction in my formal teaching load because of the administrative responsibilities running the center.
Q. What is that split? How much time do you devote to running the center versus the time you
spend on your teaching capacity?
A. This semester, pretty much Mondays and Wednesdays are completely devoted to meeting with my students and teaching the courses. Tuesdays and Thursdays, I spend on center work. I try to at least reserve Friday for writing, research, which, of course, is a part of my responsibilities, as well. So that's pretty much how my day goes. Two days teaching, two days doing the center work, and a day and the weekends for my own research.
Q. We looked at — I'll have more questions about your expert report in this case. Have you reviewed any expert reports from other experts that were submitted in the Wave 4 cases?
A. No. I have not looked at any of that.
Q. Have you looked at any expert reports submitted by any experts in any of these cases in the last six months?
A. No. I have not looked at anything like that.
Q. Have you looked at any testimony from other experts in any of the federal cases in Florida?
A. No, I have not.
Q. In the last six months, have you looked at any deposition testimony from any experts in tobacco litigation?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you looked at any trial testimony from any experts involved in tobacco litigation?
A. I have not.
Q. In 2013, have you had any communication with other expert witnesses involved in the tobacco litigation?
A. Not about litigation, no.
Q. Have you had communication with other individuals who are also involved as expert witnesses about outside research or other things you are doing?
A. Non-litigation, I occasionally speak with Robert Proctor. He's another historian. And we talk about historical issues and professional work related to history.
Q. How many times have you talked to Dr. Proctor about these historical issues in 2013?
A. I'm not exactly sure. Probably average about once a month.
Q. What kind of historical issues do you discuss with Dr. Proctor during those? Are they
conversations or e-mail exchanges?
A. Conversations. Well, like a couple of weeks ago, he called to ask my advice about handling a publication. He has published a large book on the history of tobacco, "Golden Holocaust," and he's coming out with an abridged version. And he was asking my view as to whether the abridged version should have the same title or a different title. And I said, well, you know —
I gave him my thoughts on that.
Q. What was your advice?
A. My advice was that in previous cases where historians have published very lengthy tomes and then have edited them down for a classroom or a more popular audience that they had given the book a different title.
My sense was, if you keep the same title, there might be confusion as to which book people are referring to. So I said, if it was me, I would give it another title.
Q. Did you discuss any potential title options?
A. No, I didn't. I gave him examples of what other scholars had done, and gave him some specific titles, specific previous examples of how
that had been done.
Q. Now, your discussions with Dr. Proctor, do you ever talk about the substance of your research, and, in particular, I guess with Dr. Proctor, the substance of his book or abridged version, the Golden Holocaust?
A. We've never really talked about the book. I've read it. It's a long book. It's a very good book.
Q. I agree on one of those two observations.
A. Fair enough. But I've never, like, really engaged in a conversation about the book with him.
Q. In your discussions with Dr. Proctor throughout 2013, have you talked about activities of the tobacco industry?
A. In history, as a historical phenomenon, sure.
Q. And with regard to those activities as a historical phenomenon, is there overlap between those discussions and also the subject matter of what you discuss as an expert in this case, these cases?
A. Not so much, because I tend to talk about, you know, things that really I'm thinking
about, at least in terms of scholarly research, which is a little bit different than the emphasis, sometimes quite different than the emphasis in the litigation, different kinds of questions.
Q. Do the two of you discuss certain internal documents or things you've found during your research?
A. Sometimes.
Q. Can you think of any specific examples from 2013 of documents you found doing your research that you and Dr. Proctor had discussed?
A. I really can't, no. No. Nothing comes to mind.
Q. In addition to Dr. Proctor, are there other individuals who are also expert witnesses in tobacco litigation that you've had communications with throughout the year on non-litigation issues?
A. No. No. Nobody else.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you mentioned that next year will be 50th anniversary of Freedom Summer, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Next year will also be the 50th anniversary of the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
A. That's correct, this January.
Q. And do you understand that there is in the works a 2014 Surgeon General's Report that is recognizing it as the 50th anniversary?
A. Just in a general way. When I attended the National Conference on Tobacco and Health, which was, in fact, in Kansas City in 2012, there was discussion of that among professionals.
Q. Have you ever served as a contributing editor on any Surgeon General's Report?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you been — have you had any involvement in the preparation of the 2014 Surgeon General's Report?
A. No. I haven't had a role in any of that process.
Q. Were you asked to be involved in the 2014 Surgeon General's Report?
A. No.
Q. You mentioned that there was discussion at the National Conference on Tobacco and Health in 2012 about the 2014 Surgeon General's Report.
A. That's correct.
Q. Were you involved in any of that discussion?
A. Oh, I'm talking about mentionings in the
hallway, you know, just that they're going to commemorate the 50th anniversary.
Q. Do you know any individuals who are involved in the preparation of the 2014 Surgeon General's Report?
A. I don't. I mean, I may know the individuals because I know a lot of people, but I don't know who is involved in that report or not.
Q. Has anybody asked you for comments or advice or any guidance with regard to any topics to be covered in the 2014 Surgeon General's Report?
A. No. I haven't been asked to do anything like that. I've had no contact with anybody writing that or preparing it or whatever they do to compile it.
Q. Did you offer to assist in any way in the preparation of the 2014 Surgeon General's Report?
A. No. I don't believe I've talked to anybody that was in a position to ask. It hasn't occurred to me.
MR. GEISE:
We've been going just about an hour. Why don't we take a break.
(Off the record.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, looking at Page 1 of Exhibit 1, your expert report, the last sentence, on the first paragraph, you write, "I've conducted extensive research into the history of the American tobacco and cigarette industries, including the history of cigarette manufacturing, marketing and use." And then you continue. Do you see that?
A. Yes. I see it.
Q. Have you conducted extensive research into the history of any other American industry?
A. Not to the extent that I've done for the tobacco industry. I've done that the most.
But, yes, the southern steel industry for my dissertation. I did a lot of research into the history of what you call iron goods manufacturer, cast iron pipe; the history of American agriculture as an industry, conducted extensive into that. I've published on economic development, generally, which included the textile industry.
So, yes, I've looked at other industries.
But to the extent that — the richness of the internal documents, the tobacco industry is the
one that I've gone the most, the finely grained, richly textured, kind of day-to-day.
Q. You mentioned the steel, iron, agriculture and textile industries. Have you conducted extensive research into the history of any other consumer product other than cigarettes?
A. Well, I've done a lot of work for my course in economic and business history on soft drinks. I do present a lot of information on the soft drink industry and the way the marketing shaped that industry. So that would be a consumer product.
I also talk about certain personal care products, what I've done a lot of work on, and the way that - the repurposing of technology from one venue to another. And in terms of feminine care products, there's a big story there, the Kotex Corporation. So I do have a lot of work on that, which I work with my students.
And then I don't know if you would consider the personal computer to be a consumer product or not, you know, depending upon how you want to go. But quite a bit on the role of Xerox and the way in which Xerox was, on one hand, a pioneer in computer development in the 1970s, yet,
was not able to capitalize on that. So that's a big part of my course, as well.
So those are some examples.
Q. With regard to your research into the soft drink industry, have you obtained access to internal company documents from the soft drink manufacturers?
A. No. No. I — no. I haven't had access to those.
Q. You said one of the things you look for in your research in the soft drink industry is how marketing helped shape the industry.
A. Right.
Q. Have you obtained marketing documents from the soft drink manufacturers?
A. No. No. Those — I don't have access to those. I — for that presentation, I rely on publicly available information. I normally talk about the New Coke. I take the story from Pemberton and Asia Chandler and the introduction of Coca-Cola in the late 19th Century, the way it legitimized itself as a normal consumer product, and then we take it to the Coke versus New Coke story of the 1980s.
Q. Have you contacted the soft drink
manufacturers and asked to get access to the internal documents?
A. No.
Q. Have you contacted the soft drink manufacturers and asked for access to their marketing documents?
A. No.
Q. The soft drink manufacturers don't have a public website where they put up their historical marketing documents?
A. Is that a question?
Q. It is.
A. Or is it an observation?
Q. I'm asking. Do they have a website publicly available where they put up their historical marketing documents?
A. I'm not aware of that, no. I've done research at Duke University on the papers of the J. Walter Thompson Company and their larger advertising collections, and there are — there are — there are topics that address that,
J. Walter Thompson, particularly in the '20s and '30s, produced quite a bit of kind of basic market research, so I have seen those materials.
The University of Wisconsin, I've
researched Nielsen industry papers, some work in the NBC papers. So there are those — you come across general materials relevant to those issues.
Q. Have you conducted any research into the role that caffeine in soft drinks plays in the market share of those drinks?
A. No.
Q. Have you looked for internal documents from the soft drink manufacturers as to the composition or makeup of their products?
A. The ingredients?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. Only to the extent that the reformulation of the flavor profile of New Coke had an impact on the market, but I wouldn't know the details of that. I mean, I don't go into the actual chemistry of that. I just deal with, you know, the fact that it had a different flavor profile, that Coca-Cola tested it in certain ways, and that the product was not successful.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, it's not unusual for a consumer product manufacturer to keep their marketing documents private; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. No. That's not unusual. That's one of the things, as a historian, that makes the tobacco industry such a — among many factors that make it such a rich subject to study is because of the litigation and other factors, we have the basic primary sources that allow us to ask some very fascinating historical questions. And, in essence, we have an industry that has gone from one of the most secretive to one of the most fully documented.
And historians, our method is to look at primary sources of documents, so this is a rich subject to study, on its own right.
Q. Those primary sources don't exist for historians to look at, for instance, regarding the soft drink manufacturers; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Don't exist? I just want to hear the question back.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Let me rephrase it. Primary sources are not available for historians to look at with regard to the soft drink industry as they are with the tobacco industry?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form.
A. Well, I've not done — Coca-Cola does maintain an archive. I have not done a systematic analysis of what is available in the Coca-Cola historical archives and compared that to the kinds of materials that are available in the tobacco industry. I'm a historian of the tobacco industry. It is common to have a specialty like that in my field. And so I haven't done that. I haven't done that research to evaluate the comparisons of basic primary retail available by Coke compared to the tobacco industry.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, one of the things you said a moment ago was the tobacco industry was a rich subject to study because the primary sources exist and are available for research.
A. That's correct.
Q. How does that compare to other consumer product industries, in particular, the soft drink industry?
A. Well, I'm not aware of the fact that the materials are available on line, and therefore, so easily accessible. And one of the things I do is I encourage my students to use these records as part of their own research, even for subjects that
don't directly touch upon the history of the cigarette because you can learn a great deal, for example, about the humor of Minnie Pearl from the Grand 'Ole Opry strips that are preserved in the files of the R.J. Reynolds Company.
My sense is, but I have not made an evaluative systematic study of this, but my sense is that this is now the most thoroughly documented industry category, and the documents are so readily available because of the internet technology by which they are disseminated.
They're a very rich source for historians.
Other industries are well documented. At the University of Wisconsin, they have a practice of records of advertising agencies, for example, gone through the — Bruce Barton's papers, who is a pioneer in advertising.
But I've never sat down and actually made a point-by-point evaluation, so I'm uncomfortable in offering a definitive opinion on this.
Q. Looking at your report, do you consider yourself a historian of entities that have manufactured cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Go ahead.
A. I consider myself a historian of the cigarette manufacturers, and also the tobacco-growing industry, of which I've done a lot of research, as well.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you consider yourself a historian of cigarette manufacturers beyond those who are defendants in tobacco litigation?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. If you know.
A. Sure. Yes. There's a whole 19th Century history to the cigarette that I've researched extensively.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Have you studied entities that have manufactured cigarettes in the south beyond those who are defendants in tobacco litigation?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. Yes, I have.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Have you studied entities that have manufactured cigarettes in the state of Florida as part of your research?
A. Well, I know that there are some
contemporary firms that manufacture cigarettes right now in Florida. I'm aware of those. I'm not remembering the names, but there are a few brands. And they're interesting. And Florida has its own rich tobacco manufacturing heritage, if you include cigars in that. But, you know, I'm not prepared to talk about the details of that. I haven't prepared that carefully.
Q. As part of your research, are you aware that the State of Florida, in the past, has operated a tobacco factory?
A. Owned by the State of Florida?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. No. That, I do not. I was not aware of
Q. Are you aware that the Florida Department of Agriculture grew and processed leaf tobacco for roll-your-own cigarettes?
A. You mean for an actual manufacturer?
Q. Yes.
A. No. I haven't discovered that fact.
It's interesting, but —
Q. I take it, then, you haven't conducted any research in the Florida State Archives for documents pertaining to the Department of
Agriculture's growth and processing of leaf tobacco?
A. I have not done that, no.
Q. Do you know what kind of leaf tobacco the Department of Agriculture grew?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. No. I know the types of tobacco that were prevalent in the Florida tobacco-growing industry, which is principally flute-cured tobacco in the southeastern quarter of the belt, south Georgia, north Florida. But I haven't looked at the Florida's Department of Agriculture.
MR. GEISE:
Q. I take it that you haven't looked at what the pH level of the leaf tobacco grown by the Florida Department of Agriculture would be?
A. No. That's not something I've researched.
Q. Or the level of nicotine in the leaf tobacco as grown by the Florida Department of Agriculture?
A. No. I haven't done that.
Q. In your research, are you aware of whether the Florida Department of Corrections ever
manufactured a Department of Corrections cigarette?
A. I haven't researched that, but it sounds like they used prisoners to make tobacco. That's interesting, or perhaps sold prisoners their own brand. That would be of kind of antiquated interest.
Q. I take it, then, you don't know the composition of the tobacco blend used in the Department of Corrections cigarettes?
A. I don't know about those cigarettes, so I don't know about their blend.
Q. You don't know about their tar and nicotine levels?
A. No. I'm not aware of that.
Q. I take it, then, you haven't researched the internal documents of the State of Florida in the Department of Corrections regarding its manufacture of cigarettes?
A. That's correct. I have not looked into that.
Q. To your knowledge, has the State of Florida made any documents relating to the manufacture of cigarettes publicly available?
A. I don't know either way.
Q. Do you know what the State of Florida's internal documents revealed about its knowledge about the health risks associated with smoking?
A. I've seen some published documents. I've not researched Florida's internal documents. I'm more interested in the history of the tobacco industry.
Q. Well, if the State of Florida, through its different departments, grew, processed and made - grew and processed tobacco and made cigarettes, wouldn't they be part of the tobacco industry?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Well, they would be a minor part of it.
I'd be interested to know the market share of those cigarettes and how widely they were sold and distributed.
You know, I focus on the main part of the story, which is the multi-billion marketing effort of the major cigarette manufacturers. The United States Government also supported the price of tobacco through a cooperative tobacco stabilization program. You know, so what?
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you know if the addictive qualities of nicotine were known to the State of Florida during the time it was growing and processing tobacco?
A. I haven't researched — when you say "the State of Florida," that's a pretty big entity, so I'm not sure what that means.
Q. Do you know if the addictive qualities of nicotine were known to the State of Florida's Department of Agriculture during the time it was growing and processing tobacco?
A. Well, I don't know where they were manufacturing this, if they had a prison work farm where they grew tobacco. I just don't know anything about this subject and I'm not anticipating offering an opinion on it.
Q. Do you know if the addictive qualities of nicotine were known to the State of Florida and the Department of Corrections during the time it was manufacturing a cigarette?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. I haven't researched this. I don't know either way.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you know if the State of Florida gave
free cigarettes to individuals under the age of 18?
A. I haven't researched this, so I don't know.
Q. I take it, then, you don't know what warnings the State of Florida provided on its roll-your-own processed tobacco?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. I have not researched this subject, so I don't know either way.
MR. GEISE:
Q. You don't know what warnings the Department of Corrections provided on the cigarettes it manufactured?
A. To distribute to prisoners, is that what you are asking? I'm not familiar with that.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, on your reliance list, you mentioned that you include documents from prior litigation against the tobacco companies; is that correct?
A. Well, when you say "prior litigation," these are historical documents that I've collected over the years.
Q. And some of the historical documents tha
you've collected over the years are documents that were prepared or submitted in litigation proceedings?
A. Yes. There are a few in there, some — there should be, like, a few industry depositions that are of interest, of industry officials. Is that not what you are referring to?
Q. Yes.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, do you know if the State of Florida has ever been sued over providing cigarettes to inmates or selling cigarettes to inmates?
A. I'm not aware either way. That's not something I've researched.
Q. So you haven't researched any litigation documents and lawsuits against the State of Florida for providing cigarettes to inmates?
A. No, I haven't. That's not an area that I hold myself out as an expert in and plan to testify about.
Q. And I take it then that you haven't conducted any research into the positions that the State of Florida or its representatives have taken in any of that litigation?
A. Again, I haven't looked into this. This is not something that's part of my analysis of the history of the tobacco industry, the cigarette manufacturers and their actions to manufacture, promote and market cigarettes to the American public.
Q. Maybe my question wasn't clear, but — so you have not conducted any research into the positions that the State of Florida or its representatives have taken in litigation against it?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. That's correct. I have not done research on Florida-related litigation.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you know if the State of Florida or its representatives has taken a position in litigation on whether inmates have a choice to buy and smoke cigarettes?
A. I'm not aware — I'm not an expert in the history of Florida corrections and penile policies, so I don't know either way.
Q. Do you know if the State of Florida and its representatives have taken a position in
litigation on whether a smoker who feels he is addicted to nicotine has ultimate control over his smoking behavior?
A. I have no knowledge of that either way.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, if I could ask you to look at Page 29 of your expert report, which is marked as Exhibit 1 in this case.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. In the first full paragraph on Page 29, your first sentence reads, "Filtered, low-tar and light cigarettes, in fact, conferred no reduced risk to the smoker." Do you see that?
A. That's correct.
Q. Previously, I believe you have testified that you, yourself, have not examined whether light cigarettes are less dangerous than full-flavored cigarettes; is that correct?
A. Well, I rely on the evaluation of experts, both within the tobacco industry and public health community. I have not conducted a scientific analyst.
Q. And you rely on others who do conduct the scientific analysis and publish on those issues, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. I believe you testified that this is not an area that you, yourself, are competent to speak in?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Go ahead.
A. When you say "this area," what are you talking about?
MR. GEISE:
Q. With regard to whether light cigarettes are less dangerous or less hazardous than full-flavored cigarettes, you, yourself, are not competent in the scientific research on that issue?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form. Go ahead.
A. It's true that I'm not a scientist and will not offer opinions on the science of that, but as a historian who talks about this as a matter of kind of historical statements and the way the debate, in this case, authoritative statements by governmental organizations in the 1950s, Congress, internal evaluations by the tobacco industry and then the National Cancer Institute, that's — you know, I can testify as to the debate and the statements.
MR. GEISE:
Q. You've researched what others have concluded or stated in a topic, but you, yourself, have not been involved in the research to draw your own conclusions on the topic?
A. I have not conducted a scientific analysis of these because I'm not an epidemiologist or health scientist. I'm a historian. So I discuss the historical record of the debate.
Q. Now, in your report, on Page 29, and in particular, your reference in Footnote 77, you reference subcommittee hearings in July of 1957, and I think it's 2001 Monograph 13 from the National Cancer Institute. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, between those two events, 1957 and the publication of Monograph 13 in 2001, in those 44 years, public health officials repeatedly concluded that there was a reduction in lung cancer from filtered cigarettes compared to non-filtered cigarettes, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Misstates -
A. My reading of the data is a little bit
different or the historical record. What they did was assumed that filtered and — or one might even say hoped that filtered light low-tar cigarettes would yield a health benefit.
But, of course, this would have to be based on epidemiological studies, and considering the history of the introduction of filters, then lights and low-tars and ultra lights and those types, of course, those studies take time to conduct. So that's my reading of it.
But the public health community - some in the public health community hoped that filters and changes even in smoking behavior, cutting your cigarettes in half, don't smoke down to the end, things like that might have an effect. But subsequent research has shown that not to be the case.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, in 1975, the Surgeon General concluded that there was a reduction in lung cancer for those who had smoked filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes?
A. Sure. But the Surgeon General's findings later addressed that and revised them.
Q. I'm just asking, at that moment in time, in 1975, that's what the Surgeon General
concluded, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, answer.
A. I'm not sure that that's the full flavor of the conclusion. I am thinking I would stick to what I said earlier, which was more based on the expectation that filters, lights, low-tars and ultra lights would have a protective effect. And, of course, the public believed that.
MR. GEISE:
Q. So is it your opinion, in 1975, the Surgeon General did not conclude that there would be a reduction in lung cancer from smoking filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, misstates the record.
A. My conclusion is or my statement is that in '75, and in the broader public health community, there were many that essentially hoped that this would be the case, and predicted that this might be the case based on the assumption that the filters actually worked.
Of course, the industry documents and the internal industry knowledge known reveals that, in
fact, the filters were not protective, that the — that smokers compensated for how they smoked, changed their smoking behavior, and that the reality is there was no protective benefit.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike your answer as nonresponsive.
MS. BROWN:
This is Jennifer Brown. Can we have an agreement that an objection by one defendant is an objection by all?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Absolutely.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, let me ask you again.
Is it your opinion that the Surgeon General did not conclude in 1975 that there would be a reduction in lung cancer from smoking filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered. Answer the way you want to answer.
A. I've answered the question. I would stand by the previous answer to that same question that you asked me.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, did the Surgeon General conclude in 1981 that there was a reduction in lung cancer risk for those who smoked filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form. Go ahead.
A. Again, my answer is the same, that this was, you know, part of the public health debate of the day, which included the Surgeon General, and that subsequent research has shown that this is not the case, and that industry internal documents reveal that industry knowledge was farther ahead than that in the public scientific debate.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, in 1981, based on the research that was available to the Surgeon General at that point, the Surgeon General concluded that there was a reduction in lung cancer for those who smoked filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. I've answered the question. I stand by
my prior answer.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Again, in 1990, the Surgeon General concluded that there was a reduction in lung cancer for those smokers who smoked filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes; is that correct?
A. I am not aware of the statements for that year either way, so I'm not sure.
Q. As a historian, in 1990, what was the Surgeon General's recommendation with regard to smoking filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes?
A. That year, I'm not — I'm not — I would have to check and remind myself of what — for that particular year the specific statements were.
Q. What about in 1981, what was the Surgeon General's recommendation as to whether smokers should smoke cigarettes that were filtered or unfiltered?
A. I'm not sure what their recommendations were to the public, so I'm just not sure what you are referring to.
Q. Have you researched, as part of your work in this area, the Surgeon General's statements
over time with regard to cigarettes and health risk?
A. Yes, I have. Yes. But, of course, the Surgeon General statements are voluminous, a couple of dozen and counting, so you would have to refresh my recollection on that.
Q. As you sit here today, you don't recall what the Surgeon General's position was on whether there was a reduction in risk in lung cancer for those smokers who smoked filtered cigarettes compared to unfiltered cigarettes in either 1981 or 1990?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. I would have to refresh my recollection from those reports, which, again, are voluminous. MR. GEISE:
Q. In looking at the same paragraph on Page 29 of your expert report, the last sentence, you write, "Later investigations by the National Cancer Institute found that lights and low-tar cigarettes also offered no health benefit." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And you have a footnote there, it's
Footnote 77. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And in Footnote 77, you have a cite to the National Cancer Institute's Monograph 13 in 2001. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. But you don't have a specific page citation for that footnote, correct?
A. That's true.
Q. Is there a particular page in Monograph 13 where the National Cancer Institute publishes a finding that lights and low-tar cigarettes offered no health benefit?
A. If you read the entire document. I mean, this is a case where there's no page because the entire document concerns this issue.
Q. So this statement in this sentence of your expert report is your synopsis, from reading Monograph 13, and what the NCI concluded?
A. Well, you can read the executive summary, which is at the beginning of the document. But by
—	the purpose of not putting a page number here is to direct the reader to the entire document, because I have read the entire document.
Q. Where you write that later
investigations, you used the investigations in a plural sense, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. How many separate investigations conducted by the National Cancer Institute have reached the conclusion that you set forth on Pagt 29?
A. Well, the Monograph 13 is, itself, derived from a large body of research. And so that's why it's plural.
Q. How many investigations did the National Cancer Institute conduct to support the statemeni you have on Page 29?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form.
A. I would have to — I would have to read their — you know, count of their bibliography. They draw upon a wide body of research.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Were there investigations conducted by the National Cancer Institute that concluded that switching from unfiltered or higher-yield cigarettes to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes probably did reduce lung cancer risk?
A. Again, that's part of the debate over
filters. Particularly in the late '60s and 1970s, you had the joint working group, between — you know, you had industry representatives and public health officials. You know, this was all part of the will of the wisp to develop a safer tobacco-based cigarette. I say the wisp because that's not possible, according to statements held now by scientific researchers.
But, yes, I think that's part of the debate. But, again, the industry, part of the light, low-tar filter fraud is that the industry was offering these products, presenting them as safer, happy to have other people speak out that they were safer but, in fact, they knew that they weren't safer.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, what is the latest investigation or review conducted by the National Cancer Institute that concluded that switching from unfiltered or higher-yield cigarettes to lower-yield or filtered cigarettes reduced the lung cancer risk?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. I'm not sure I can answer that.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Can you give me a decade?
A. No. I would have to — I would have to go back and review NCI statements on that. I can't — as I sit here, I don't remember. I can't recall.
Q. In your prior answer, I think you referred to the 1960s as a time where the National Cancer Institute may have reached that conclusion.
A. Well, no. What I was saying was, the public health community in the nineteen — late 1960s or after the Surgeon General's Report and the industry, itself, were hypothesizing, essentially, that perhaps filters would have a protective effect, and lights and low tars. The whole FTC method of testing cigarettes grows out of that.
But, of course, the whole point is the industry had knowledge of how smokers actually smoked, indicating that they didn't actually offer a real benefit in real humans.
(Exhibit 3 was marked.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I've handed you a couple
pages excerpted from Monograph 13 in 2001. Do you recognize the cover page?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. I believe you indicated before that you have reviewed the entire Monograph 13?
A. I've read through it. That's right.
Q. I want to ask you about a couple of statements that are included. If you could look first at Page 65, and the second paragraph in the middle of Page 65.
Do you see where Monograph 13 reports,
"Prior reviews (U.S. DHHS 1981; NCI 1996) of changes in disease risk with switching from unfiltered or higher-yield to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes concluded that switching probably reduced lung cancer risk somewhat, but only if smokers did not increase the number of cigarettes that they smoked per day when they switched to lower-yield cigarettes." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And that statement in NCI's Monograph 13 cites to reviews conducted in 1981 and 1996, correct?
A. That's the citation dates, yes.
Q. And, in particular, it cites to an NCI review conducted in 1996?
A. That's the date. The bibliography is lacking from your copy.
MR. MIGLIORI:
What exhibit number is this?
MR. GEISE:
This is Exhibit 3.
MR. MIGLIORI:
It's three pages of Monograph 13?
MR. GEISE:
That's correct.
Q. And from your research, Dr. Kyriakoudes, are you familiar with the NCI review in 1996 that's referenced in Monograph 13?
A. I'd have to see the full citation. Do you have that?
Q. I did not bring it with me. Dr.
Kyriakoudes, do you agree that as recently as 1996, the official conclusion of the NCI, based upon its own independent review and analysis, was that switching to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes offered a health benefit?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form of the question.
A. No.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you agree that prior reviews of changes in disease risks with switching from unfiltered or higher-yield to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes concluded that switching probably reduced lung cancer risk somewhat?
A. You've got to read what this says. I mean, this says, prior reviews of changes in disease risk of switching from unfiltered or higher-yield to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes concluded that switching probably reduced lung cancer risk somewhat, but only if smokers did not increase the number of cigarettes that they smoked per day when they switched to lower-yield cigarettes.
Of course, you know, this is so highly qualified and walked back that just on the face of it, you know - this statement does not support your evaluation of it.
Q. Let me ask you again. Do you agree that as recently as 1996, the National Cancer Institute concluded that changes in disease risk with switching from unfiltered or higher-yield to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes concluded that
switching probably reduced lung cancer risk somewhat, but only if smokers did not increase the number of cigarettes that they smoked per day when they switched to lower-yield cigarettes?
A. With those qualifications, yes, because that's what the document says. But we know that the ways that people actually smoked and the ways in which the industry, itself, studied the ways in which people actually smoked, that, of course, these benefits were not revealed.
I mean, if the industry had shared its behavioral research that it knew in the '70s and '80s and '90s with the public health community, the public health community would have been better informed and would have known how these cigarettes actually function when actually smoked by real people, and thus, supports the conclusion that is made on the last page of this document they've provided that there's no convincible evidence that change in cigarette design between 1950 and the mid 1980s have resulted in an important decrease in the disease burden caused by cigarettes either for smokers as a group or for the whole population.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, do you agree that as recently as 1996, the National Cancer Institute, in prior reviews of changes in disease risk of switching from unfiltered or higher-yield to filtered or lower-yield cigarettes concluded that switching probably reduced lung cancer risk somewhat, but only if smokers did not increase the number of cigarettes that they smoked per day when they switched to lower-yield cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. I answered that question and I stand by the answer that I gave.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Did NCI conclude that in 1996 or not?
Yes or no?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Answer the question as fully as you want.
A. I'd have to review the underlying report that's referenced here to really give a full statement about that. And I'm not recalling that particular citation in my mind, in terms of its contents. All I can say is to what this says
right here, which was provided by my previous answer.
Q. In your expert report, on Page 29, you talk about Congressional and Federal Trade Commission investigations and even later investigations by the National Cancer Institute. Is your reference to investigations on Page 29 of your expert report, does that include the NCI investigation in 1996 that's cited on Page 65 of Exhibit 3?
A. That and the larger body of evidence that is considered by this report that offers as one of its conclusions, again, that I read a moment ago, there's no evidence that these changes in cigarette design provided any reduction in the disease burden of cigarettes.
Q. So is the answer to my question yes, that you did review the NCI's review in 1996 with regard to a reduction in risk in filtered or lower-yield cigarettes?
A. As I sit here, presented with a seven-character citation, NCI, 1996, I'm not exactly sure what that reference references. So I would need a fuller sense of what that document was.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, do you know if the NCI's review in 1996 is included in your reliance list of materials?
A. I don't think it is. I think I include Monograph 13, and that as kind of a summary, and it's authoritative.
Q. And Monograph 13, indeed, cites this NCI review from 1996?
A. Whatever that document might be, there is reference to that, yes.
Q. Have you gone back to look at that document?
A. I'm not sure. I've looked at a lot of documents over the course of my research. I would need a fuller citation for that. It's a large body of material.
Q. In putting together your expert report and referring to later investigations conducted by the National Cancer Institute, you don't know if you've looked at the investigation conducted by the National Cancer Institute in 1996?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Asked and answered. He said he divulged that.
A. Yes. I'll stand by my prior answer.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Based on your historical research, can you recall any investigation by the National Cancer Institute in 1996 that you have reviewed?
A. Again, I can't think of — recall right now. There's very many.
Q. In Monograph 13, with regard to lung cancer, does it conclude that epidemiological studies have consistently found lesser risk among smokers of reduced yield cigarettes?
A. This is a very long report. I cite its conclusion on filter and low-tars. I haven't memorized the entire report, so I'd have to refresh my memory by looking at the report.
Q. I think what you said you did with regard to the conclusion that you have footnoted with Footnote 77 on Page 29, is that's kind of your synopsis of the overall conclusion of the report, correct?
A. Right. And then I refer the reader to the report.
Q. To the entire report?
A. That's right.
Q. If you could look at Page 146, which is the third page of Exhibit 3, which are some
excerpts from Monograph 13. You, I guess in earlier answers, you read me one of the conclusions, Conclusion Number 6; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. If I could ask you to look up to Conclusion Number 5. Do you see where it states, "Epidemiological studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes. Some studies have found lesser risk of lung cancer among smokers of reduced yield cigarettes." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. So with regard to lung cancer, do you agree that Monograph 13 concludes that epidemiological studies have consistently found less risk among smokers of reduced yield cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Well, they refer to some studies, but, of course, there's other studies that indicate otherwise. My focus here is focusing on the main conclusions of the document, as summarized in its executive findings and alike, that there
essentially is no safe cigarette, particularly lights and low-tars.
MR. GEISE:
Q. I believe you told us a moment ago, in referring to Conclusion Number 6 on Page 146 that the statement contained in Conclusion Number 6 was one of the main conclusions of the report, correct?
A. Yes, because there's no reduction of the disease burden.
Q. So would you agree that one of the main conclusions of the report is that epidemiological studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. I mean, you are asking me questions about essentially the medical matters, epidemiological matters which, you know, really are at the frontier of my expertise. Without having the entire document in front of me, you know, I'm really at a disadvantage to fully evaluate this one page taken from deep inside the document, Page 146.
So, you know, the main conclusion of the report is that lights, low-tars, filters, reduced-yield cigarettes do not — are not safer.
I mean, that's pretty obvious. But I'm not going to get into the medicine or the epidemiology of that because I'm not an epidemiologist or a doctor.
Q. Do you agree from your research, and you cite the entire Monograph 13 in your report, do you agree that one of the conclusions for Monograph 13 is that epidemiological studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation.
A. All I can do is say that you have read that correctly from Page 146. That's the extent that I'll go to.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And what I have read from Page 146 is one of the conclusions from Monograph 13?
MR. MIGLIORI:
I object to the form of the question.
Asked and answered.
A. I have just the title page and two pages pulled out from the - I'm not sure that this is a conclusion of the entire monograph or just that particular chapter. So, again, without the full document, I can't say.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Well, and the statement I'm reading is in an enumerated list Number 5 under a heading called Conclusions on Page 146; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
We can stipulate to the document. That's what the document -
A. You've read that correctly, but we don't know if this is the conclusions to the chapter, subchapter, entire document, so as to whether that pertains to the entire document or a more limited discussion with only one page from that section,
I'm not able to say.
MR. GEISE:
Q. From - you told us earlier that you've reviewed the whole Monograph 13. It's pretty voluminous, correct?
A. Yes. It's a very — a few hundred pages.
Q. Are you aware of any conclusions in the entirety of Monograph 13 that is contrary to the
statement that epidemiological studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes?
A. I would have to go back to the document and refresh my recollection on that particular point.
Q. So in your expert report on Page 29, where you state, "Later investigations by the National Cancer Institute found that lights and low-tar cigarettes also offered no health benefit," did you take this statement on 146 into account when you made that statement?
MR. MIGLIORI:
And the date of 146, as well? The date that you are referring to?
MR. GEISE:
It's from 2001, the same document that he cites in the sentence I read to him.
A. I took into account the conclusions of the entire report, and my presentation in that statement is consistent with the conclusions of the entire report.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you think the statement,
epidemiological studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes is consistent with the statement that the National Cancer Institute found that lights and low-tar cigarettes also offered no health benefits?
A. Well, you know, even — yes, because even on this document, Item Number 6 is, no convincing evidence that changes in cigarette design between the 1950s and mid '80s have resulted in an important decrease in the disease burden caused by cigarette use either for smokers as a group or for the whole population.
Q. What do the authors of Monograph 13 mean when they say "have resulted in an important decrease in the disease burden"?
A. My sense of — is that when you use terms like "significant," "important," you are meaning statistically significant results, which are not the product of statistical chance.
Q. So is it your understanding that the term "important decrease," is synonymous with "statistically significant decrease"?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Well, yeah, "important" meaning a meaningful increase. You know, that would be my guess. But, again, all of these questions you are asking me, I would have to refresh my understanding of the document. My conclusion is accurate in this, with the full import of the document. And when you cherry pick isolated pages out of a document that's something like 650 pages long, approximately, you know, you can play that game.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. My question is, do you interpret the term "important decrease" to be synonymous with the term "statistically significant decrease"?
A. Maybe not synonymous. But as I read this, when I read a work involving epidemiology and I see words like "important decrease" or "significant decrease," my sense is that those are being used in ways that mean these are the results of valid research, well-designed studies that yield statistically significant results that reflect reality. So that's how I interpret that term.
Q. Now, looking again at Number 5 on Page
146 in an excerpt from Monograph 13 that's part of Exhibit 3 to your deposition, the sentence starts by saying, "Epidemiological studies..." and it continues by saying,"... have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Are the epidemiological studies referred to there valid studies?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation. Go ahead.
A. Again, I would have to refresh my recollection of the document and review the document. Again, it's a huge document, and you've pulled one page out of the middle of it, and without the full document, it's hard for me to say.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Well, doctor, I may have pulled two pages from the whole document, but would you agree that the — your conclusion on Page 29 of your expert report, you don't cite any specific pages from the document, correct?
A. That's correct. I referred the reader to the entire document.
Q. So I've actually gone to the entire document and pulled out a couple specific pages to ask you about specific conclusions within the document, correct?
A. You have pulled out a couple of pages, that's true, and you are asking me questions on that.
Q. Now, with regard to Number 5 on Page 146, the epidemiological studies mentioned there, do you know if those epidemiological studies yielded statistically significant results?
A. I'd have to refresh myself, my recollection of the document by reviewing the document before I could answer that because I have not committed the document to memory.
Q. Are you aware of the National Cancer Institute reaching a conclusion that would not be based on valid studies or statistically significant results?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. I wouldn't be able to answer that question either way.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Well, when you performed your initial evaluation or review of NCI's Monograph 13, did you come across any epidemiological studies or anything that they referenced that were not valid studies or did not produce statistically significant results?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. He's not an epidemiologist.
A. I'm not recalling any particular way.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And the reason I asked, Dr. Kyriakoudes, is because you said you would have to go back and refresh yourself on the epidemiological studies that they're referencing here.
A. I would have to review the monograph to answer these questions. I haven't committed it to memory.
Q. And from your initial review of the monograph, do you recall having any concerns about the validity or statistical significance of the studies that they referred to?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. I don't recall having any concerns. It's
an authoritative monograph.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Is this a good time for a break?
MR. GEISE:
That's fine.
(Off the record.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. I was reading your testimony from the Haldeman case, and you made a comment or an observation there that there was more smoking in cinema than society in the 1930s.
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you recall making that observation?
A. I do.
Q. What did you mean by that?
A. Well, that was drawn upon a study conducted by Stanton Glantz and a team of researchers where they watched a set of films, recorded the prevalence of smoking in the films and then compared it to the prevalence in the wider society. And they concluded that smoking was kind of ahead of the curve in cinema, compared to the prevalence, and they focused on the '30s and the '40s in that study.
Q. And is the basis for that statement you
made in Haldeman based on the one study from Stan Glantz?
A. Yes. I believe that appeared in Tobacco Control, but I would have to confirm the exact citation.
Q. Do you know if they compared the percentage of characters in a certain cohort who were depicted as smokers to the percentage of those in the corresponding cohort in the public who smoke?
A. Oh, by age cohorts? It's — I would have to refresh my memory on the study. I can't quite exactly recall. But that was a conclusion of the study.
Q. Have you conducted any of your own empirical research with regard to that observation?
A. No, I haven't. I relied on a peer-reviewed study.
Q. Is it your opinion that the over-prevalence of a behavior in cinema influences society to engage in that behavior?
A. Well, smoking in the movies, particularly at this early — now, this is a historical judgment — particularly in this early period in
the smoking story plays a role in normalizing smoking, projecting it as a pleasurable and interesting activity to engage in. And so in that regard, by normalizing the cigarette, it does help promote cigarette smoking.
Q. You agree there are lots of behaviors that are depicted in cinema that may be overrepresented in cinema as compared to society? Would you agree?
A. It depends on what you are talking about.
Q. How does the amount of drug use depicted in cinema compare to the amount of drug use in society?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form, definition.
A. I really couldn't answer that question because, one, you've — when you say "cinema, do you mean all cinema in the entire history of cinema forever that we've had films? That's just too broad.
The other is, I've never done an investigation of that particular issue. I've relied on this tobacco story, and I think that's relevant, and my characterization was accurate. MR. GEISE:
Q. I think before, you said that Glantz's research dealt with the 1930s and 1940s?
A. That's my recollection, yes.
Q. Are those the only two decades for which you would offer the observation that there was more smoking in cinema than society?
A. Well, that was what that study determined, so that would be the basis that I would have. I'm not aware of that similar research. It may be out there for later periods, but that's what I'm aware of.
Q. So for the 1950s, and 1960s, and 1970s,
1980s, 1990s, you are not aware of any research that compared the prevalence of smoking in cinema to the prevalence of smoking in society?
A. I'm not. As I sit here, I'd want to refresh my memory of Stan Glantz's study. It's been a number of years. I read it when it first came out a few years ago and haven't looked it again.
But, you know, the '30s are an important decade in this regard because that's one of the decades where you have really the expansion of women smoking. So there's changes, broadening and deepening of smoking behavior over time.
Q. Just so I can clarify this, you are not going to offer the opinion that there was more smoking in cinema than society for any decade other than the 1930s or 1940s?
A. I'm not going to offer the opinion beyond what the research shows. And as I sit here, that's what I understand. I mean, smoking in cinema, you know, reinforces the broader smoking culture, as well, no matter what the incidence is.
Q. In the 1930s and 1940s, what was the prevalence of diamond heists in cinema compared to the kinds of diamond heists in society?
A. Well, I can't think of one movie from that time period that deals with diamond heists.
I can only think of one movie that deals with any kind of diamond heist, and that would be "The Hot Rock" from the early '70s. So I'll have to just say that I don't have an opinion on that question.
Q. Does the appearance of movies depicting diamond heists normalize that behavior?
A. No. Just because something appears in a film doesn't mean that they factor normal in it.
It's how it's depicted. And what is depicted in terms of smoking, in most films, you know, when someone like Marlene Dietrich or Paul Henreid are
some of the examples I mentioned in my report, it's not just the presence of smoking, it's also the way it's depicted.
Q. In the 1930s and 1940s, how was drug usage depicted in the cinema?
A. Tended to be depicted in a very negative fashion, as a deviant behavior, unlike cigarettes, which were depicted as a positive, socially acceptable behavior.
Q. Did the prevalence of drug use in society increase during the 1930s and '40s?
A. I'm not sure. I haven't looked into that issue. I wouldn't be able to say either way.
Q. But whatever the prevalence of drug use, it would be counter to the way it was depicted in cinema; is that your testimony?
A. My testimony is that's my — I'm relying
—	I'm thinking of just one film, "Reefer Madness." I've not done a systematic analysis ol 1930s era films as it relates to drug use. So you are asking me things that I'm trying to give you t good answer to, as best I can, but I haven't really looked at in a systematic way.
So, in a way, I don't really have a firm opinion on that; just a sense or a hunch.
Q. What about the use of alcohol as depicted in the cinema in the 1930s and 1940s?
A. I'd have — I don't know. I wouldn't be able to — I haven't either read research on that or done my own research on that particular issue.
Q. So with regard to the prevalence of a behavior in the cinema compared to society, is it fair to say that your observation in that area is limited to cigarette smoking and limited to the 1930s and 1940s based on Glantz's study?
A. Based on peer-reviewed scholarship, right. Now, that's in terms of prevalence. Now, in my report, I talk about the ways in which depictions of smoking create a kind of socially normative message about smoking and how it's used. That's a different opinion. I just want to make sure that those are kept apart.
Q. Have you researched how the depiction of drug use has created a social norm for drug use?
A. No. I've not investigated that particular subject.
Q. Have you investigated whether the cinematic depiction of alcohol use has created a social norm for alcohol use?
A. The only way in which my research, in
response to that question, is that the drug of the cigarette is the one that I have researched. I've not researched other drugs.
Q. So you don't — you can't compare the depiction of cigarettes in cinema to other behaviors as depicted in the cinema and the impact on usage?
A. You mean other drug behaviors, as you suggested alcohol, or perhaps other types of drugs separate from the cigarette? No. I haven't done that. It's not important for my opinions.
Q. Throughout the decades, tens of millions of people have seen cigarette advertising and have never become smokers; is that correct?
A. That's true.
Q. And just because a person recognizes a slogan from a cigarette ad doesn't mean that person is going to become a smoker, correct?
A. No. That's not how advertising works. Advertising is part of a broader marketing effort that works to create demand for the product, works to create positive images of the product, both for the product category and the brand within the product category.
But, you know, if you don't have the
availability of the product, if it's not marketed, and by that, I mean literally delivered to market outlets effectively, you know, you have to — it's a part of a broader full press to promote the use of, in this case, cigarettes.
Q. And tens of millions of people have been exposed to what you term this full press with regard to cigarettes and have still never become cigarette smokers, correct?
A. That's true. The industry works hard to persuade as many people as it can, but it doesn't
—	it never reaches 100 percent.
Q. And people recognize slogans for lots of products that they'll never use, true?
A. Well, what do you mean by that?
Q. You are aware that there are lots of advertising slogans out there for lots of different products?
A. Yes.
Q. And just because I may recognize a slogan for a particular product or a particular company doesn't mean I'm ever going to use that product or purchase it?
A. Sure. As I said to you earlier, advertising is part of a larger effort to promote
the use of the cigarette and never reaches 100 percent.
Q. Now, I think you've testified in the past that the sale of cigarettes increased between 1964 and the 1980s; is that correct?
A. Total sale of cigarettes, yes.
Q. Do you draw a distinction between total sales and consumption?
A. Well, industry deliveries of cigarettes is a pretty good mark for total consumption. When you say "consumption," did you mean to say per capita consumption?
Q. Well, when you've testified in the past that the sale of cigarettes increased between 1964 and the 1980s, what are you referring to for that statement?
A. The sale of machine-made cigarettes.
Q. And what data do you rely on to support that statement?
A. What is the source of the data?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. These data reported to the Federal Trade Commission. I believe that the specific location of the data that I got from was a — there's like a data portal at the Centers For Disease Control,
under their tobacco research area, and there, the data is presented — the data are presented in an Excel format, which means you don't have to do them yourself.
Q. If I could ask you to look at Page 23 of your expert report, Exhibit Number 1.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. The bottom paragraph on Page 23, you see where it starts by saying, "The much anticipated Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health released on January 11, 1964"?
A. Yes.
Q. And the third sentence in that paragraph, you write, "By August, The New York Times had reported that 'Americans are beginning to forget the cancer scare generated by the government report on smoking.'" And you have in quotes, the statement, "Americans are beginning to forget the cancer scare generated by the government report on smoking." And then you continue by writing,
"... as consumption of cigarettes increased." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. So do I understand what you wrote on Page 23 of your expert report to be an observation that
consumption of cigarettes increased in 1964?
A. Well, what happened is that there was — it decreased. Consumption decreased and then increased. So, I mean, consumption did take a hit after the Surgeon General's Report and the data showed that.
Q. Just so I'm clear, so is what you are saying in this paragraph that consumption initially decreased after the publication of the Surgeon General's Report, but then later, consumption increased again?
A. Yes.
Q. So in nineteen — January of 1964, consumption decreased, but then by August, consumption had increased?
A. Yes. That's what The New York Times reports, yes.
Q. And is that what your research has revealed?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. Then with regard to your testimony that the sale of cigarettes increased from 1964 to the 1980s, is that referring to the consumption, as well?
A. Well, there's two — there's two numbers
here. And we're dealing with per capita consumption, and then we're dealing with total sales of cigarettes. And total sales of cigarettes peak in 1982, and per capita consumption rises, peaks in 1963, and then kind of hovers in a — within a range. And then in the 1970s, begins to decline, mid to late '70s, begins a kind of — then it begins to decline. That's in terms of per capita.
So there's two ways to measure it, total sales by the industry and per capita. And, of course, per capita is a ratio measure.
Q. When you refer on Page 23 of your expert report to consumption of cigarettes increasing later in the year in 1964, are you referring to total sales or are you referring to per capita?
A. This one, because the per capita figures are annual figures and they're estimated based on populations here, I believe I'm referring to kind of total sales. You know, they — they do decline a bit after the Surgeon General's Report, and then they essentially recover.
Q. And when you've testified in the past that the sale of cigarettes increased between 1964 and the 1980s, you are referring to total sales;
is that correct?
A. Yes. If it's — again, it's total sales that peak in 1982. Per capita consumption peaks just before the Surgeon General's report. It does have an effect. And hovers, you know, within a narrow range and then begins to decline in the mid to late '70s.
Q. So from 1964 throughout the 1980s, per capita consumption either hovered, level, and then declined?
A. That's correct.
(Exhibit 4 was marked.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I've handed you what's marked as Exhibit 4 to your deposition. And this is a document entitled, The Effect of Advertising on the Level and Composition of Cigarette Consumption. And the author is Joseph Mulholland and it's dated November 18th, 1989. Do you see that?
A. I see that. You've read that correctly.
Q. And you've seen this document before as an analysis prepared by the FTC; is that correct?
A. I've glancingly seen it. I haven't, you know, studied this document carefully, so I'm —
you know, ask your questions.
Q. Okay. Well, you've been asked about this document in prior cases, as well, correct?
A. I may have.
Q. If you could look at V, although it's not labeled in the Executive Summary, but it's the page before VI. So I think it's the page before the one you are looking at.
A. Oh, I see.
Q. So it's the first page of the Executive Summary. Do you see that?
A. Okay.
Q. And if you look at the bottom paragraph, in 1989, the report states, "Smoking levels in the United States have been declining since the mid 1960s." Do you see that?
A. Yes. I see that.
Q. And then the next sentence says, "Per capita consumption has dropped approximately 26 percent since 1963, and the proportion of the adult population that smokes has declined from 42 percent in 1966 to 27 percent in 1986." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. So that's consistent with what you said
before with regard to per capita consumption peeking in 1963, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. If you'd look at the last paragraph on VI, the first sentence states, "Cigarette company promotional efforts have also been extensive, albeit unsuccessful, in reversing the decline in cigarette demand." Do you see that?
A. Yes. You read that correctly.
Q. So the report to the FTC states that promotional efforts were unsuccessful in reversing the decline in cigarette demand from the mid 1960s on. Is that what it states?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. Do you agree with that conclusion?
A. Well, you know, this is one of those cases where you are dealing with a dynamic trend. It's true in the sense that after the Surgeon General's report that the — and especially by the 1970s that the tobacco industry was not able, through the use of advertising, to arrest the decline in per capita smoking, but they were able to increase the total number of cigarettes that they sold.
And when you deal with a dynamic time
series like this, the other question is, well, if the industry had not advertised, if the industry had accepted the findings of the Surgeon General, if it had behaved differently as a matter of history, what then would have been the course of smoking prevalence in the United States, which is the percentage of people that smoke? And, you know, that's a powerful question. And people have, in fact, made attempts to — there are scholarly works where they've attempted to estimate that, and I've done some work on that, myself.
Q. Do you agree with the statement in Exhibit 4 that cigarette company promotional efforts were unsuccessful in reversing the decline in cigarette demand?
A. Well, they were unsuccessful in preventing a decline, but they were successful in,
I think, making the decline less than it would have been had they not advertised and disputed the health charges, developed fraudulent products like lights and low-tars.
Q. If you look at Page 7 of Exhibit 4, under the heading, The Influence of Advertising and Cigarette Demand. Do you see that section?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. The first sentence says, "The available research has not identified advertising as a significant stimulant to the aggregate demand for cigarettes." Do you see that?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. Do you agree with that statement?
A. No.
Q. What's your basis for disagreeing?
A. Well, let's take Monograph 19, the most recent Surgeon General's report, which would be 2012, where they explicitly address these issues. And they point to the significant role of cigarette advertising in promoting and sustaining cigarette demand, arresting the decline of cigarette demand, the effectiveness of youth marketing and these other issues. And they explicitly state that these conclusions are drawn from internal marketing research. Or let me rephrase that. Documents obtained from the industry. And so the industry's own documents. Those conclusions are unambiguous, so I accept those statements.
Q. Do you see on Page 7 on Exhibit 4, under the statement that I read, the available research
has not identified advertising as a significant stimulant to the aggregate demand for cigarettes, that the authors of this report to the FTC state, quote, "This finding is based on analysis of (1) sophisticated statistical studies of annual consumption patterns; (2) comparative studies of the international experience with ad bands; (3) behavioral research into the reasons why youths smoke." Do you see that?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. Were those studies referred to in this report to the FTC valid studies?
A. I can't offer an opinion as to whether the studies, themselves, were valid or not, but I can offer an opinion as to what both NCI Monograph 19 and the 2012 Surgeon General's Report state, which is at variance from this conclusion.
MR. MIGLIORI:
I didn't want to interrupt. I just wanted to interject an objection as to foundation to the prior question.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Do you have any knowledge from your research that the studies referenced in the 1989 report to the FTC did not contain valid
conclusions?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Same objection.
MR. GEISE:
Actually, let me rephrase that.
Q. Do you know if the studies referenced in the 1989 report to the FTC produced statistically significant results?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Same objection.
A. I don't know either way. I haven't reviewed those.
MR. GEISE:
Q. If you could look to Page VIII again in the Executive Summary.
A. VIII?
Q. VIII, yes, the next page. There's a heading that says, Smoking By Youths. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And the first sentence after that says, "Behavioral research on the determinants of smoking by youth has not identified advertising as an important influence." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you agree with that statement?
A. No. I dispute it for the same reasons that I disputed the prior statements, that this is at variance with the findings of MCI Monograph 19 and the 2012 Surgeon General's Report in which they both explicitly say that if they had known what the industry had known about these procedures, they would have come to different conclusions. Or let me rephrase that, that they've come to these conclusions by looking at the industry's own internal research.
Q. What would the studies that the FTC was relying on in 1989 have done differently if they had access to internal tobacco company documents?
A. I haven't reviewed the studies referenced in this document, so I couldn't answer that. I don't — I just — I haven't — that's not an area I'm going to testify to.
Q. So as we sit here today, you can't say that there was anything methodologically flawed with the studies that the FTC was relying on in 1989?
A. I can't say either way, flawed or not flawed. I just — I haven't looked at these.
Q. For all you know, there are no
methodological flaws in the studies that the FTC was relying on in 1989?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation. Go ahead.
A. My answer is that I don't know either way. I haven't reviewed these. So, you know, I would — I have no foundation to offer an answer.
MR. GEISE:
Q. If you turn to IX on the next page, the first sentence in the first full paragraph, the report states, "The fairly uniform inability of the various research approaches to document a sizeable advertising effect on demand does suggest, however, that the influence of advertising on the aggregate demand for cigarettes is probably small." Do you see that?
A. Yes. You read that correctly.
Q. Do you agree with that statement?
A. Again, my answer is the same. The Monograph 19 and the 2012 Surgeon General's Report conclude otherwise, and they are quite explicit in addressing the basis of their conclusions.
Q. Do you have any criticism of the methodologies used in the various research
approaches that were relied on by the FTC in 1989?
A. Again, I haven't reviewed the individual studies, so I can't say.
Q. If you look at the bottom of that page on Exhibit 4, the last sentence says, "The continued decline in smoking levels, despite increasing levels of cigarette advertising expenditures, is consistent with the view that advertising has been relatively ineffectual." Do you see that?
A. Is that on Page 9?
Q. Yes.
A. I'm sorry. I — I'm sure you read it right. I just don't see it because I'm —
Q. It's the last sentence, the last three-plus lines.
A. Thank you. I was in the top of the paragraph. I see it.
Q. And, first, let me ask you, was it the view of the FTC in 1989 that advertising had been relatively ineffectual on smoking levels?
A. It's hard for me to — I mean, the FTC has consistently sought to restrain cigarette advertising. The way you put it, I'm not exactly sure what their position in that particular year
But, you know, generally, the FTC sought to restrain cigarette advertising because it promoted smoking, depicted smoking in incorrect ways, did not inform the consumer how the product actually worked and behaved.
So, you know, you ask a very pointed question. I would have to review for that particular year, but generally, what I've described as their position is consistent with what I know, that they've held over a long period of time.
MR. GEISE:
I move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, looking at the last sentence on Page IX where the report states, "The continued decline in smoking levels, despite increasing levels of cigarette advertising expenditures is consistent with the view that advertising has been relatively ineffectual," let me ask you, do you disagree with that statement?
A. I do, because for the reasons that I've identified. And the main one being what you don't
—	smoking rates are declining during this period, but without industry advertising, without industry promotion efforts, they might have declined
further and faster.
Q. And, in fact, during this same time period, millions of people were making the decision to quit smoking, correct?
A. Some people quit smoking, yes. Some people are able to quit. Many aren't.
Q. Well, between 1964 and 1980, about 30 million people quit smoking; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation. Go ahead.
A. I'm not exactly sure of the number, but, sure, people do — are quitting. Some people are quitting, yes.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And during that time period, if you are not sure of the number, you know it's millions of people quit during that time period?
A. Sure. Yes. Many people are giving up the habit. Many are taking it up.
Q. Well, and advertising and promotions during this time period from the mid 1960s until the 1980s did not prevent the smokers who quit from making the choice to quit smoking?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. That's true. But, in essence, that's the same issue as your previous question, which is while many people quit, many people didn't. And part of the purpose of advertising promotion was to persuade people who were perhaps considering quitting not to quit.
And, you know, I mean, the industry worked — you know, worked by marketing to children and people who are addicted. And a certain percentage of those did respond to the industry's appeals.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. The advertising and promotions during these decades did not prevent smokers from quitting smoking?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. Some smokers, that's true.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Millions of smokers were able to make the choice to quit smoking, despite the advertising and promotion during those decades?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form and foundation.
A. That's true. Some people are able to overcome the addiction. Others aren't.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Now, throughout the time period of, I guess, the 1950s up until the 1980s, would you agree that alcohol advertisements were ubiquitous?
A. Yes. Alcohol is also advertised, yes.
Q. Do you know what happened to the advertising budgets for alcohol between the 1950s and the 1980s?
A. Of particular companies?
Q. Of the industry, in general.
A. I know there's data on that. I'm not recalling exactly. But given, you know, the —
I'm not recalling exactly.
Q. Do you know how the advertising and promotional spending for the alcohol industry compared to the spending for the cigarette industry between 1964 and the 1980s?
A. No. I've never calculated that ratio.
Q. Do you know how the prevalence trends for alcohol use during this time period compared to the prevalence trends for cigarette use during the time period?
A. I haven't looked at that.
Q. Have you looked into whether people are more receptive to cigarette advertisements compared to alcohol advertisements?
A. There is a study of alcohol and cigarette advertising done in the 1970s comparing the two, but I would have to refresh my recollection of the comparison. I just don't have that at my fingertips. But I believe I have that listed somewhere on my reliance.
Q. If the prevalence of alcohol use is greater than the prevalence of cigarette use during the time period, is it your opinion that the public was more receptive to alcohol ads compared to cigarette ads?
A. No. I don't have an opinion on that. I mean, while a small population of alcohol - or a small percentage of alcohol users find alcohol use to be comprised of alcoholism, there are safe levels of alcohol use, safe dosages, and there are generally not with cigarettes. But I just don't have an opinion on that. I'm not going to offer comparative opinions.
Q. You are not going to offer a comparative opinion between consumption of alcohol versus
consumption of cigarettes?
A. That's correct.
Q. Or what may influence the prevalence of alcohol compared to what influences the prevalence of cigarette use?
A. They are very different products and they emerge from very different historical contents.
They have very different effects on the human body, both individually and as a population measure. And, you know, I don't see that as particularly informative to understanding the history of the cigarette.
Q. Are you going to offer any opinion, a comparative opinion between alcohol and cigarettes?
A. In terms of marketing in the modem post World War II period?
Q. Just in general, yes.
A. Well, the one opinion that I've given is when I talk about the early history of the cigarette, and I talk about the anticigarette movement, and the Anticigarette League, and that had a tight intertwining, at least early in its history, with the anti-alcohol movement. You know, I don't - I may be asked about that. I've
talked about that before.
Q. Do you intend to express an opinion about how the public's awareness of the health risks from the use of alcohol would compare to the awareness of the risks of the use of cigarettes?
A. At any point in historical time or do you have a particular time that you —
Q. Well, I guess we'll start, do you intend to offer an opinion on that topic, period, and then we can talk about the details. Because if you say no, I don't have to ask you about the details. If you say yes, I'm going to inquire.
A. Here's the opinion that I would have.
Fair enough. I follow you. I think when you look at the relationship between the Anticigarette League in the late 19th Century and the various temperance societies that were seeking to ban the manufacture and sale of the use of the cigarette or the use of alcohol in its various forms, and they all pursued different strategies, that, in essence, the cigarette movement is piggybacking on the back of the alcohol temperance movement. And many - at least among the leadership in the temperance and anticigarette movements saw cigarettes as a gateway drug to alcohol.
But once national prohibition is achieved, first during World War I and then by constitutional amendment immediately thereafter, the anticigarette movement withers very, very rapidly, and the temperance officials lose interest in banning cigarettes for a variety of reasons.
That's the only opinion that I would offer between the two of those, and that's — you know, that's interesting. It's an interesting historical story, but that's my understanding of it and that's my opinion.
Q. So other than the opinion about kind of the prohibition movement in the late 19th, early 20th Century, and the relationship between alcohol and the cigarette at that time, you don't intend to offer any opinion comparing movements or trends or awareness with regard to health risks of the two products?
A. No, not in any sustained way. I mean, I
—	you know, sometimes, you know, there are certain — it's hard to interpret your question.
So, for example, in my reliance documents, I've got a comparative risk chart from 1981 or data from — I'm sorry, data from 1983
reproduced in Chapter 4 of the 1989 Surgeon General's Report. And — printing fail. But I've disclosed this document many times. And that lists both a kind of hierarchy of perceived risks, health risks. One table lists health experts, public health officials, medical people, and the other is the adult public's ranking of these.
And it ranks a number of items in there, including alcohol use, never drinking and driving, for example. So that — that's not really comparing alcohol one-on-one with smoking in a kind of sustained way, which is how I've interpreted your question, but alcohol is listed as one of a number of factors.
And that kind of comparison is in previous earlier serving data, too. Do you understand what I'm saying?
Q. I do. Let me ask you, with regard to the chart or the table that you are looking at that's attached to your expert report, do you intend to rely on that chart to say that people had a greater understanding or appreciation of the risks of drinking and driving than they had for the risks of smoking?
A. No. That's not my interpretation of the
chart. My interpretation of the chart is that the public under-appreciated the risk of smoking, that
—	according to what experts assessed as the risk on health. They put cigarette smoking as the number one activity that can harm health among this list of activities. The public ranks it around Number 10. And I'm relying on memory. Noi smoking is Number 10. And so the emphasis is that, you know, the public under-appreciates the risks of smoking.
I guess what you are asking me is, am I going to testify that the public over-appreciates the risk of drinking and driving and those kinds of things? I don't know. I'm just —I'm not going to offer an opinion on that.
Q. With regard to the chart that you are looking at, in 1981,1 think, when the data was collected, what percentage of the public was smoking?
A. It actually says '83, but '81 is fine, in the early '80s. I made a mistake earlier and that's why you just beat that back at me, which is fine.
You know, we have — prevalence, unlike consumption, is not as systematically collected.
You know, we have surveys and there's different ways of measuring prevalence.
There is a big fat volume called International Smoking Statistics, compiled by Peto, Richard Peto, a prominent tobacco researcher in which they kind of summarize all that. And I would have to go to that, essentially reference work, to look up that particular year.
Q. It's fair to say, in 1983, the prevalence of smoking is the minority position in the United States?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
MR. GEISE:
Q. There are more non-smokers than there are smokers?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. I think so. Just barely. I think the prevalence is probably — and I would have to double-check — in the 40 percent range in the '80s, yes.
MR. GEISE:
Q. If you would look back at Exhibit 4 on V and VI, the report to the FTC reported that the
portion of the adult population who smokes has declined from 42 percent in 1966 to 27 percent in 1986; is that correct?
A. I'm sorry. Where are you?
Q. V and VI, the beginning of the Executive Summary.
A. Well, you read that correctly. Again, there's a number of ways to measure it, but it certainly was declining during that period.
Q. With regard to the chart we're referring to from the 1989 Surgeon General's Report, do you know if there's a warning label on alcoholic beverages that warns people not to drive after drinking?
A. There are — at some point, warnings are put on beer and those products, but I don't know the year that they were put on.
Q. So you don't know what year a warning label appeared on alcoholic products, correct?
A. Right.
Q. And do you know if the content of that warning label warned about the dangers of driving after drinking?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Objection to foundation. Go
ahead.
A. I'm not sure. I just don't know. I haven't researched the history of alcohol warnings in that regard. I know that they're — this is kind of interesting. I mean, I do enjoy a beer, and there's some kind of warning on there, but I couldn't tell you what it said. I don't ever notice it. Which is one of the problems, I guess, with those warning on the packages.
MR. GEISE:
Q. No matter what the warning said, people don't look at it?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. I'm just telling you, as I sit here, I can't remember what it says on a beer bottle, but I'll be sure to look when I get home.
MR. GEISE:
Q. How often do you drink a beer?
A. I like to have a beer, you know, when I come home from work. Not every night because, you know, homework with the kids and stuff like that but, you know, on the weekend, kicking back.
Q. A few times a week?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. And you don't recall the content of the warning of the beer bottle?
A. I don't, but I'll be sure to check.
Q. I take it then you've never noticed whether it mentions anything about drinking and driving or not?
A. I'm not sure what the warning says, as I sit here.
Q. Do you know when the health risk from driving after drinking was first mentioned or covered in textbooks for high school students? MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to foundation, relevance.
A. I haven't researched that, so I couldn't give you an answer.
MR. GEISE:
Q. So you don't have an opinion as to how the public would have formed their perception about the importance of never driving after drinking?
A. No. I mean, you know, there are groups, like Mothers Against Drunk Driving — this is not a scholarly opinion, but my own personal sense is that this was an activity that earlier was less castigated, maybe more tolerated. And I think
Mothers Against Drunk Driving has done a lot to make awareness that you shouldn't drink and drive more prominent. But I don't intend to offer any professional opinion about that.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, in the past, you've talked about a general pattern of industry marketing and promotion that kind of encourages smokers to make a transition from initiation with unfiltered brands, to filtered brands, to lights and ultra-light cigarettes.
A. Yes. Now, that is a — that happens to
—	well, that's a historically bound temporally, as in time, time bound process, you know, for those who begin smoking or the initiation of smoking before the widespread availability of filtered cigarettes. But, yes, I have — that is
—	for certain cohorts of smokers, that is a process that was quite common.
Q. And for the seven individual smokers involved in the cases that we're here about today, you don't know if any of them have followed the transitional pattern from unfiltered, to filtered, to lights or ultra-lights; is that correct?
A. Well, that is correct, in the sense that I am not going to give any individualized
plaintiff-specific testimony, and that is individualized plaintiff-specific testimony. I don't know the who, what, where, when of their lives.
Q. And while this is — this transition is temporally bound, there are smokers that do not make the transition from one product to another?
A. Sure. There's variations. Some people continue to smoke unfiltered cigarettes throughout their life. Some people smoke other types of cigarettes. I mean, there's always variation.
Q. Smokers can continue to smoke unfiltered cigarettes and never switch to filtered or light cigarettes?
A. I just said that, correct.
Q. And smokers can smoke filtered cigarettes but never switch to light or ultra-light cigarettes?
A. That's true, sure.
Q. And smokers who do not switch from one category to the next along this transitional continuum engage in behavior that is inconsistent with the broader trends in the market; is that true?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. Well, again, these are just — these are broad trends, but there's always individual variation. You know, you can read the letters sent to, for example, the R.J. Reynolds Company, which has a large collection of letters, and people in the '70s and '80s write in saying, absolutely, the Surgeon General's crazy. He doesn't know what he's talking about.
So a lot of people accept the industry's basic proposition that there's nothing wrong with any cigarette, and therefore, smoke any type of brand.
So, yes, there's all kinds of variation.
You know, there's tendencies, but there's always variation. Unfiltered cigarettes continued to be sold throughout this period that we're talking about as a matter of history.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, smokers who do not make a switch from either filtered to unfiltered, or filtered to light, or light to ultra-light are engaging in behavior that is inconsistent with the broader trends of the market?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation.
A. Well, you know, ultra-lights never become, at least numerically, the majority of cigarettes sold. And so to say broader trends in the market, then you have to break it down into, you know, many sub-trends. And the industry is engaged in a full-court press, if you will.
Sol wouldn't be able to agree with your statement. I would just say that there is variation in the products that are actually sold and used. And, you know, people smoke unfiltered Camels. They smoke filtered Camels. They increasingly comprise a smaller portion of the market, the unfiltered, compared to the filtered, but within that, you have lots of variation.
Q. Leaving ultra-lights aside, is it your testimony that there has been a broad trend in the market from unfiltered to filtered products?
A. Yes. Unfiltered cigarettes are 97 percent or so of the market in the early '50s.
They're approximately two-thirds of the market by the end of the '60s, and now, filtered cigarettes are the — I forget the exact numbers, but they're the vast preponderance of cigarettes sold today.
Q. And you've offered the opinion that that general pattern of switching from unfiltered to filtered was a result of industry marketing and promotion?
A. Yes. But, you know, keep in mind that the — you know, there are targets. The industry has — they don't see all smokers as an undifferentiated mass. They see smokers — the population of smokers and potential smokers is comprised of multiple segments. And so the appeal of the light, ultra-light and the appeal of the filter are to as — the industry often talks about in their documents the health-conscious smoker.
So to that market, they have a set of products. To other markets, they have a different set of products. To working class people, they have a set of products. I mean, they're pitching these things in very highly refined appeals.
When you come to good point, could we take a break?
Q. Absolutely. When you define these different submarkets, by defining a number of submarkets, do you agree that there isn't one overall pattern to the entire market?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation. Go ahead.
A. No. Because, I mean, patterns exist at the level that you look at them. You know, if you just want to look at the shift from unfiltered to filtered, that's one pattern. That's a broad pattern. Now, you want to know, though, who's moving into those areas.
So, for example, the industry does a lot of research on women and find that women are very interested in filtered and light, ultra-light cigarettes. Working class men, you know, want a different — a different product. And so they — it's not to say that there's no pattern. It's — at each level, there are patterns. It's just what is the pattern.
Q. And different markets would have different desires?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. Well, what I can say is that the tobacco industry viewed the smoking public, particularly from the 1950s onward, the story is of the industry learning more and more about smokers, and learning more and more of the market that
comprises the population of smokers as they invest more heavily in market research. And as market researching techniques improve, they learn more and more about smokers.
And they — you know, they — by the late '60s, they've got — they're targeting African-Americans. They see women as a major area of expansion of the market. They continue to target towards youth, and into the '70s, heavy investment in youth marketing.
Later in the '80s and '90s, they go after Gay and lesbian smokers. So there's a whole story of increasing sophistication in how they view the smoking public as a marketing target.
MR. GEISE:
Why don't we take that break.
(Off the record.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, the tobacco company stopped using celebrities and athletes in their advertisements in 1964; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. So for 50 years, no person has initiated smoking because of an advertisement that featured a celebrity or an athlete?
A. Well, the advertising didn't have celebrities and athletes in it. They moved away from that.
Q. So for 50 years, no person has initiated smoking because of an advertisement featuring a celebrity or an athlete?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation, outside the scope of his expertise. Go ahead.
A. All I can say is that the advertising did not have celebrities and athletes in it.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Similarly, for 50 years, no person has continued smoking because of an advertisement featuring a celebrity or an athlete?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation, outside the scope.
A. Again, advertising did not feature celebrities and athletes after '64 when they adopted the advertising code, then the voluntary advertising code, but that's all I can say.
MR. GEISE:
Q. You've testified in the past, referring to the 2012 Surgeon General's Report, on a causal
relationship between advertisements and youth initiation. Do you recall that testimony, generally?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you conducted your own research on causal relationships between advertising and youth initiation of any other behaviors, such as alcohol or illegal drug use?
A. No, I have not. I have focused on cigarettes.
Q. Now, you would agree there are no advertisements for illegal drugs, correct?
A. Legitimate advertisements, I don't think there are. Not in the U.S.
Q. But you agree that youth in the United States still initiate the behavior of illegal drug use?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation.
A. Yes. Some youths use illegal drugs, that's true.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And for illegal drug use in the United States, initiation by youth has to be influenced by something other than advertisements?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation and relevance.
A. Well, you know, I've not done research into initiation of youth drug use, but it wouldn't surprise me if I did begin reading the literature on that, that they would find it a multi-causal phenomenon.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Well, in addition to it being multi-causal, it's kind of a given that if there are no advertisements for illegal drug use, that such advertisements can't be the cause for initiation, if they don't exist?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. Right. Fair enough. I don't dispute that. That's not an area of my expertise and it's not an area I intend to testify about.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you have no expertise in youth initiation of any behavior other than cigarette smoking, and can't offer an opinion on how the initiation behaviors compare to smoking of those other behaviors?
A. No. I've never offered that analysis.
My expertise is in the history of smoking, including the history of the industry's efforts to target youths and market to youths.
Q. I'm going to ask you to look again at Page 13 of your expert report, Exhibit 1.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Page 15, it's in the bottom section, you have Cigarette Manufacturer's Internal Documents Acknowledged That Smoking Caused Disease.
A. Yes.
Q. In the first sentence, you write, "While tobacco industry officials never wavered from their public position that cigarette smoking had not been shown to be the cause of any disease, internally, there was widespread acknowledgment that smoking was a deadly health hazard." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And the next document you cite is the 1953 document from Claude Teague. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you or can you cite any document demonstrating acknowledgment before 1953 that
smoking was a deadly health hazard in an internal company document?
A. You know, the American Tobacco Company was engaging researchers at Virginia Commonwealth University, or the Medical College of Virginia, certainly in the 1940s. And the research cited in the 1953 report, some of it goes back to the 1930s, particularly the work of Angel Roffo, so I would give you those two examples.
Q. Now, all of the studies cited in Dr.
Teague's report or survey were publicly available?
A. As a specialist and scientist, yes, he has an extensive bibliography of scientific research.
Q. He did not cite in his paper any other internal tobacco company documents that were not available to the public?
A. I think that's correct, yes.
Q. So my question is, can you point to — identify any document demonstrating acknowledgment — any internal company document identifying acknowledgment before 1953 that smoking was a deadly health hazard?
A. Well, again, I gave you an example of some internal documents related to the American
Tobacco Company in the 1940s when they were working with the Medical College of Virginia.
There is a body of correspondence or documents on that.
Q. And did the American Tobacco Company documents in the 1940s contain an acknowledgment that smoking was a deadly health hazard?
A. Well, they contained efforts to conduct research on smoking and health, and to create a compliant body of scientific researchers. There's one document where they refer to the Medical College of Virginia as Sold American. So that's what I would —
Q. You would agree that efforts to conduct research in a particular area is different than an acknowledgment that smoking was a deadly health hazard?
A. Well, I think you can — the interest of the industry in researching this in the 1940s is an indicator that they were concerned and developing knowledge about this, in terms of their internal documents.
Q. Assuming that the American Tobacco Company was interested in developing knowledge on the topic, is there any document you've seen that
demonstrates an acknowledgment any time prior to 1953 that smoking was a deadly health hazard?
A. With that simple phraseology, no, but there's enough kind of smoke in terms of their research going on at that time. There may be — that document may exist. I'm not recalling an explicit statement the way you describe it, but they were doing a lot of research at the Medical College of Virginia, and other places, Damon Runyon, Cancer Fund and alike that they're a sponsor of, so there's a big story there. That's my answer.
Q. When you appear at trial at these cases, though, you are not going to show the Jury an internal document from a tobacco company before 1953 that you will say is an acknowledgment that smoking was a deadly health hazard?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. I don't know. It just depends what I'm asked. You know —
MR. GEISE:
Q. Can you identify any such document for me today?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form.
A. Aside from what I've already answered a couple of times to your question, that's my answer.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Look at Page 17 of your report, the bottom paragraph. You write, "Not surprisingly, the public tended to view smoking as a habit rather than an addiction." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. In the next sentence, you write, "The Tobacco Institute's own survey research indicated that 56 percent of smokers in 1980 saw smoking as a habit rather than an addiction." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. In 1980, the Surgeon General would have answered the question the same way by saying that smoking was a habit rather than an addiction; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form of the question.
A. The Surgeon General's Report doesn't come out authoritatively on the issue until 1988, but many scientists, including those working in the
U.S. Public Health Service, maintained that it was an addiction. That was the research. But in the sense that - in terms of Surgeon General's reports, the industry's knowledge was ahead of the scientific community.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, I didn't ask you about the industry's knowledge of that, so I'm going to have to move to strike. Let me ask you the question again. In 1980, the Surgeon General's official position is that smoking was a habit rather than an addiction; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form, foundation, and he's already answered it. Go ahead.
A. I would describe it this way, that the Surgeon General had not yet issued a report declaring smoking an addiction. That would happen in 1988. The Surgeon General's reports are complex reports. They come from a lot of different motives.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And even though the Surgeon General did not come out and identify smoking as an addiction until 1988, 44 percent of the smokers in 1980 did
describe smoking as an addiction instead of a habit, correct?
A. No. That's —
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to foundation. Go ahead.
A. That's not quite correct. I summarized this finding from the TI. I focused on — I'd have to remind myself of the actual response, and I may have that in — here we go. 25 percent identified it.
MR. GEISE:
Q. What page are you looking at?
A. I'm looking at - if you count — you are close. If you count back one sheet, two, three, four, the fifth, the back of the fifth sheet, Is Smoking a Habit Or an Addiction? Smokers Only, 1982, Tobacco Institute Roper poll. So to answer your question.
Q. I think you wrote in your report that The Tobacco Institute's own survey research indicated that 56 percent of smokers in 1980 saw smoking as a habit rather than an addiction. Do you see that?
A. That's correct.
Q. And if you look at the reproduction of
the poll as one of your attachments to your expert report, under habit, it says, 52 percent, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Under addiction, it says 25 percent?
A. That's correct.
Q. Neither is four percent?
A. Correct.
Q. Both, it says, volunteered response is 19 percent, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And then don't know or no answer is one percent, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. So if you add the people that said addiction and the people who said both, you get 44 percent, correct?
A. Yes. But I wouldn't do that. I think that's not a valid interpretation of the graph.
But if you do add those two numbers, you get 44 percent.
I would object to adding them because a habit and addiction, I mean, to me, that — you know, you want to look at the people that came out on one position or the other. Interpreting this graph, I would — and the underlying survey, which
I've read, as well, the both, the volunteered response means that — who knows what that means? It's both habit and an addiction.
So I would focus on the first two bars in terms of the interpretation.
Q. Even if we focus on the first bar under addiction alone, 25 percent of those surveyed described it as an addiction, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And that 25 percent was describing it as an addiction years before the Surgeon General described it as an addiction?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and definitions. Go ahead.
A. Well, they are describing it as an addiction six years before the release of the 1988 Surgeon General's Report.
MR. GEISE:
Q. And if you look at — if you combine the group of people who said addiction or said both habit and addiction, it's 44 percent of the people?
A. Correct, although I don't think it's a valid interpretation of the data.
Q. Doctor, if I could ask you to turn to Page 32 and 33 of your expert report. And beginning at the last sentence on Page 32, referring to a document authored by Claude Teague, you wrote, "Indeed, since the 'desire to be daring is part of the motivation to start smoking,' he noted, 'the alleged risk of smoking may actually make smoking attractive.'" And then you continue by writing, "Teague concluded that, 'in this sense, the warning label on the package may be a plus' in heightening the risk and appeal to teenagers experimenting with cigarettes." Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Is it your opinion that Teague's theory, as expressed in that document, was that stressing the risks of smoking would heighten the appeal of smoking to teenagers?
A. Yes. That was one of the things that he proposes in that document. He says that teenagers see themselves as basically invincible. They don't appreciate the long-term risk. That's another way to put that. And that, you know, the risk then becomes part of the appeal of the product.
Q. If risk makes smoking more appealing to teenagers, and the company was targeting teens, as you suggested elsewhere in your report, wouldn't the tobacco companies want to stress the risks of smoking to increase the appeal to teenagers?
A. Well, I mean, Teague identifies the fact that, as he says, you know, the warning is kind of a help on that. So he's accepting a situation.
If you look at a lot of the advertisements from this period, which is the 1970s, you know, you see a lot of the — just by way of example, a lot of the ads stress kind of tough, macho outside activities, motorcycle riding, jumping out of airplanes with parachutes and things like that, so in that way, they're kind of associating, at least for a certain market segment, risk is part of the appeal of the cigarettes.
Q. And for the market segment of teenagers, risk and stressing the risk of smoking would make it more appealing?
A. In the way that Teague describes, you know, under the —
Q. So as you understand what Teague describes, stressing the risk of smoking would
encourage youth experimentation?
A. Well, what he says is that the situation, as it exists, where there is a warning label, should not be seen as a hindrance. It's, in fact, part of the appeal.
Q. From your research, have you found other conclusions that, in fact, stressing the risks of smoking encourages youth experimentation?
A. This is the example that I relied upon, Teague's formulation, a head — high official of the company who is basically in charge of their research efforts and is part of the decision-making process of the company.
Q. If Teague's suggestion to stress the risks of smoking, that it would encourage youth experimentation was, in fact, the case, then efforts by the tobacco company to downplay or deny the risks of smoking would actually deter youth experimentation; is that correct?
A. Well, that would be true only if the tobacco industry spoke to only one audience, but they didn't speak to only one audience.
First of all, they played both sides of the fence, so to speak, metaphorically. Secondly, they're speaking to many different audiences at
the same time. They are trying to persuade established regular, addicted smokers not to attempt to quit. That's the purpose of offering them lights, low-tars, filters, et cetera.
They're speaking to youth by showing them that smoking can be exciting. They're promoting menthols to certain subcategories, to African-Americans. They're promoting full-flavored cigarettes to working class males.
I mean, they're running the full spectrum.
So by asking the question that you asked, you are reducing or conflating a wide variety of activities into just one narrow threat, which is not historically accurate.
Q. Let me ask you, with regard to the youth category, in particular, industry denials of the risks of smoking would actually deter experimentation among that youth category?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, foundation.
A. Not necessarily. I couldn't accept that, no.
MR. GEISE:
Q. If stressing the risks of smoking encourages experimentation among some youth, then
denying or downplaying the risks of smoking would work to deter experimentation among that segment? MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Correct?
A. Not necessarily. Not necessarily.
Because the environment is much more complicated than you indicate. The risks are at many levels. Smoking is a risk that these students basically don't perceive. They don't perceive the accurate risks of smoking. That is accurate. Teague acknowledges that. Research by the Department of Health and Human Services, which I cite here, also acknowledges that. But the risk is part of the excitement and the appeal at the same time. It — they are not necessarily counterbalancing or mutually exclusive.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, if you could look at Page 34 of your expert report. I want to ask you about a couple definitions here.
A. Sure.
Q. In the first sentence, you say,
"Knowledge among the public that cigarettes cause cancer and that they are addictive can develop
slowly, and this information was not commonly known until very recent times." Do you see that?
A. Yes. You found a typo. I'm adding into the exhibit the 1-y.
(Off the record.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. My question is, you say this information was not commonly known until very recent times. What is your definition of the term "very recent times"?
A. Well, now - and even now, if you look at some segments of the population, there are still gaps, gaps of numbers, but they are reduced. But in recent times, you know, current contemporary times, or very recent, which I mean about now.
Q. So you say this information was not commonly known until very recent times. You mean 2010 and more recently?
A. Yes. I mean, it - it develops slowly.
It increases over time. And, again, I would stress that there are still gaps on certain aspects of cigarette knowledge.
Q. So with regard to the issue of knowledge among the public that cigarettes cause cancer and that they are addictive, that information was not
commonly known until 2010 or more recently?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, the next sentence —
A. And with the qualification that there are still some gaps.
Q. The next sentence, you write, "A significant portion of the smoking public was unaware of the health hazards of smoking until very recent times." Do you see that sentence?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, is your definition of "very recent times" in that sentence the same as the sentence above?
A. Yes.
Q. So it's 2010 or more recent?
A. Approximately. You know, it's hard to date specifically these things, but, you know, very recent times. I can't give an exact date because I'm just kind of summarizing everything that I talked about in the report.
Q. And when you say, "a significant portion of the smoking public," what's your definition of a significant portion?
A. Portions that reveal lack of knowledge, that are above that of kind of the standard error,
that are above results to be the creation of statistical chance. I mean significant that — in the most precise term in that regard relating to statistical significance.
Q. So in a statistical study, sometimes the rate of error will be plus or minus three points. Are you saying that a significant portion is as little as three percentage points of the public?
A. Well, you can have — you can express the error that way. I think a better way — that's more the error range, the range of estimates. "Statistically significant" means — is generally expressed as the likelihood that these results are the product of chance, of statistical chance. And what rate is acceptable is highly — there's no standard number that people follow. It's a judgment call.
But, for me, you know, even — and, again, you break — you have to break the public down into subgroups. I'm not going to put a number on it. In some surveys, 90 percent of the public, by the 1990s, will agree with the statement that cigarettes are a cause of lung cancer. Of course, that means ten percent don't. That's a lot of people.
Q. And is ten percent in that example, is that - would you define that as a significant portion, for purposes of that example?
A. Yes. That's a lot of people.
Q. So by "significant portion," you are not referring to majority versus minority or anything like that? A significant portion could be a very small percent —
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
MR. GEISE:
Q. - of a particular group you are looking at?
A. Yes. These are not elections. This is a product that causes serious death. I'm sorry, that causes serious disease and death, and half of them are long-term users. So what's the acceptable rate of death? That's, to me, the way I look at it.
Q. With regard to this idea of awareness and common knowledge, you've seen and been shown at prior depositions and trials statements from a number of contemporary public health officials about their interpretation of common knowledge or awareness at different points in time?
A. Yes. You know — yes.
Q. Let me follow up. You are familiar with Dr. Leroy Burney, who was the Surgeon General between 1956 and 1961?
A. Yes.
Q. And you've seen the statement from Dr. Burney in 1957 where he said, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV." You've seen that?
A. He testified before Congress, made that statement. I've seen that.
Q. When Dr. Burney said "our position," he was referring to the office of the Surgeon General, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is it your opinion that Dr. Burney was incorrect that the public had not been informed through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Well, it's my opinion that he is correct, but you have to look at what he's saying. What he's saying is that we have, you know, sent out
the memoranda, and I've gone on television and the radio and told people that, you know, smoking might be a hazardous activity.
But, you know, you have to look at what he actually says. So he says on the radio, at one point, should we — should people stop smoking?
He says, no, no, no. I still smoke a pipe.
So, you know, he did inform people, but the issue is what did he inform them of.
Q. So for what Dr. Burney said, when he said, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV," you agree with that specific statement from Dr. Burney?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form.
A. Yes. I agree with that specific statement. But just so that I'm clear, that in no way indicates that the public was fully informed, understood and knew that the risks of smoking were, in fact, what they really were.
MR. GEISE:
Q. You are also familiar with Dr. John Heller, who was the director of the National Cancer Institute in 1957?
A. Yes.
Q. And you've seen the statement from Dr. Heller where he said, "Newspapers, radio, TV and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." You've seen that statement?
A. Yes, I have. And, again, just so that we know what that statement means is that the newspaper is a good way to reach the public. What are they being told in the mid 1950s? Well, they're being told that it's a controversy. And it's a controversy because the industry is ginning up the controversy with the help of Hill & Knowlton.
(Off the record.)
MR. GEISE:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, let me break down what Dr. Heller said in 1957. Do you agree with what Dr. Heller said when he said that newspapers, radio, TV and other media did an excellent job covering the problem?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form and foundation.
A. Well, there's a lot here in this
statement that requires definition, so I have to break it down even further. Excellent job, to the extent that it was an item of news interest, yes.
I mean, this smoking and health debate, as it proceeded in the media, occupied a large amount of energy of the press.
But, you know, the press was being fed disinformation, directly and indirectly, through the tobacco industry and its agents. You know, there are clear discussions of the pressures put on science writers to make sure that their coverage is favorable to the industry. So, you know, I can't say if it was excellent or not.
One of the things that Heller did not have at his disposal was knowledge of what was going on behind the scenes.
Q. But Dr. Heller did have at his disposal a firsthand look at what was going on in the public in 1957?
A. Well, he was a member of the public, yes.
Q. And he was involved in the dialogue with the public over what was communicated to them about the health risks associated with smoking cigarettes?
A. Yes. I mean, he was a scientist who was
alive at this time and he was in a position of responsibility. But, again, these judgments can't be taken as — my interpretation of those statements is an example of how successful the industry was in getting its message across because even scientists like Heller perceive that this debate was unfolding in the public in the ways that he describes. So I actually see the opposite of they way you — in significance, the opposite of what you see.
Q. Is it your opinion Dr. Heller was wrong that the excellent job by the media was not an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public? MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. Well, he's wrong in the sense that he doesn't have the benefit of historical perspective. He doesn't see all that's happening because he is living through this controversy. He is not looking behind the curtain to see how the industry is shaping the news coverage of the smoke and health debate.
So it's not that he's wrong. It's just that he — you can't — you can't accept his judgment as indicating anything of significance
about this — the smoking and health debate except to the fact that it shows that even important scientists saw that this thing was unfolding in ways that were more positive.
Q. This was Dr. Heller's contemporaneous observation in 1957?
A. That's his statement, made in 1957.
Q. Now, you're also familiar with the statement from the American Medical Association in 1964 in JAMA that states, "The health hazards of excessive smoking have been well-publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge. Labelling will not alert even the young cigarette smoker to any risks of which he is not already aware." You have seen that statement?
A. I have seen that statement.
Q. Is it your opinion that the AMA was wrong, that as of 1964, the health hazards of excessive smoking had not been well-publicized for more than ten years?
A. I'll start first by saying, first, the AMA, itself, has issued a formal retrospective mea culpa and apology for this particular — for its behavior.
Secondly, the industry, itself, have
people like Harvey Haag, who are essentially moles operating within the American Medical Association, and those documents are unambiguous.
Third, the industry was maintaining a process of creating an environment of doubt and confusion as to the truth of the matter.
And so while some people, some health — public health officials are trying to get the word out that smoking is the cause of lung cancer and other serious diseases, the fact that it is constantly challenged in the public means that the effect on the public mind was not effective. And Blasingame was dead wrong on this.
Q. So the statement in 1964 that appeared in JAMA by Dr. Blasingame that the health hazards of excessive smoking had been well-publicized for more than ten years was dead wrong?
A. Blasingame's judgment about the public's knowledge and understanding is dead wrong. And, again, yes, it was widely publicized, but at very point that it was publicized, it was contested either directly or indirectly by the industry in a way that created confusion and doubt so that smokers, themselves, by and large, did not accept this, particularly at this early period.
Q. And when Dr. Blasingame says, "The health hazards of excessive smoking have been well-publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge," he was dead wrong on that, as well?
A. Dead wrong that they were commonly known.
Q. And, again, Dr. Blasingame, that was a contemporaneous observation he made in 1964?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Yes. And contemporaneous with that was the donation of a $10 million educational research fund to the AMA. Contemporaneous to that were tobacco industry allies operating within the AMA. MR. GEISE:
Q. You mentioned Dr. Haag.
A. Yes.
Q. And I think you called him a mole?
A. I think that's fair.
Q. Dr. Haag was involved with some of the initial Surgeon General's reports, correct?
A. Well, that's why he's a mole.
Q. And he's a mole — moles, typically, you don't know what their background is or their allegiance, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Is that the definition of a mole?
A. Well, he was working for the tobacco industry, and those documents are unambiguous.
Q. And before he took a position with the Surgeon General's committee, Dr. Haag disclosed his work with the tobacco industry to those who were selecting the committee; is that correct?
A. It was known that he was aligned with the industry, but what was not known —
Q. Sure.
A. Wait a minute. Let me finish.
Q. I have all day.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Mostly.
A. I'm just asking to finish my statement.
MR. GEISE:
Q. Go ahead.
A. I'm not making any claims on your time.
Q. Go ahead.
A. Haag gets appointed to committees in the early '60s on the AMA where he works explicitly and communicates that work explicitly to the
industry, saying that he — you know, he's working against AMA acceptance of the authoritative statements on smoking and disease. These activities were not known.
Q. You said it was known that Dr. Haag was aligned with the industry. In fact, Dr. Haag, himself, pointed out his relationship with the industry; is that correct?
A. You know, his salary was paid by the tobacco industry at the Medical College of Virginia. They kind of created that position for him.
What was not known was the lengths to which he would go to work within the AMA to inhibit the AMA from making an authoritative statement on smoking and health, to delay that. And, in fact, there's a memo discussing he's about to retire and they need to find someone else to take his place. So, in that regard, that's — it's shameful behavior.
Q. Prior to becoming a member of the committee, Dr. Haag disclosed his financial relationship with the tobacco company?
A. He may have. But that doesn't excuse his behavior.
MR. GEISE:
Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. Prior to becoming a member of the committee, Dr. Haag disclosed his financial relationship with the tobacco companies to the committee?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. Now, when you talk about committee, I'm talking about within the American Medical Association, not the Surgeon General's committee, which he was not a member of, but just so we're clear on that.
Q. That's what I'm talking about.
A. He may have. That's of no significance in my evaluation.
Q. Well, when you call him a mole, a mole typically refers to somebody who is there and nobody knows what their other relationships are. They're unknown. It was always known to the AMA Dr. Haag's relationship with the tobacco industry?
A. Yes, but what was not known was the length that he would go to to explicitly try to impede the AMA from making what were scientifically valid statements on the risks of
smoking, on human health.
Q. Was Dr. Haag part of an AMA committee or was he the leader of the AMA committee?
A. I'd have to refresh my recollection as to whether he was the chair or a member. As I sit here, I'm not exactly remembering.
Q. There were other representatives on the committee who could voice their opinions on policies and actions that the AMA was going to take?
A. Well, it was a committee and there were other members of the committee. That's true.
Q. Did the other members of the committee disclose their other financial relationships before joining the committee?
A. I'm not exactly sure about that.
MR. GEISE:
Dr. Kyriakoudes, I think that's all of the questions I have for this morning. I'm going to turn it over to my colleagues here, but I appreciate your time and attention.
EXAMINATION BY MS. TEDDER:
Q. Good afternoon, Dr. Kyriakoudes. I introduced myself this morning earlier. My name
is Gay Tedder, and I'm here on behalf of Lorillard Tobacco Company. If, for any reason, you don't hear my questions, let me know.
I've listened to what you said this morning, and I really just think I have a few areas to follow up on, and hopefully, won't take a whole lot of time this afternoon.
But I'm going to go back a little bit and ask you some questions about your opinions. I heard what you said to Mr. Geise this morning, but I kind of want to talk about your opinions in light of your prior testimony in cases involving Lorillard Tobacco Company. I heard what you said about the Haldeman case, but Lorillard wasn't in that case, so I want to talk about some cases a little bit earlier in time.
Do you remember giving a deposition in a case called Jewett in February or March of 2011?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And in that deposition, I think you were asked some questions by a colleague of mine by the name of Roger Geary. Do you remember Roger, by any chance?
A. Yes. Roger, I remember him well.
Q. All right. So Roger asked you a number
of questions about Lorillard at that deposition.
Do you recall that?
A. That was in 2011 ?
Q. Yes.
A. That's over two years ago.
Q. Yes. I'm not asking you the specifics.
But, I mean, you remember Roger asking you a series of questions in that deposition?
A. I do. Was that — was that deposition in Jackson?
Q. I don't know, to be real honest.
A. Generally, I remember Roger and —
Q. Okay. Well, my question would be to you
—	I don't know the location of the deposition, but my question to you would be, have any of your opinions with respect to Lorillard Tobacco Company changed from the ones you expressed back at the time of the Jewett deposition?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Overly broad. Go ahead.
A. Do you have some specific examples that you could help me with? I'm trying to remember that deposition. It was some time ago.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Sure. Well, I know you testified in Jewett, and then you later also gave a deposition in a case called Callaway in 2011. Do you recal that?
A. Yes. Callaway. I do remember generally that, yes.
Q. And, basically, in those depositions, you didn't really differentiate Lorillard in any way from the other tobacco companies?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Is that a question?
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Well, I'm just setting something up. I guess my question is, all I'm trying to figure out is, do you have any new opinions about Lorillarc Tobacco Company that you think you've not previously expressed?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form. Overly broad. Go ahead.
A. Well, I want to answer your question as efficiently as possible, so let me say what I know about Lorillard in a general way and that might give us a basis.
Lorillard is — they are the manufacturer
of Kent, and that is, you know, a part of the history of smoking, the early filter, health filter cigarette. And it's also a manufacturer of Newport, which is a cigarette that is a menthol cigarette, and it has a strong African-American market.
Lorillard comes up in my report. I believe I cite one of their documents where they say, the basis of our business is the high school student.
There's some good — Lorillard has some good marketing data from the early 1960s, largely polling together a convenient form of Gallup survey data that are useful, more for what they say about the general state of the cigarette industry. Lorillard also did a lot of public opinion work in the '50s among doctors, commissioning studies. I've never testified about that, but that's an interesting, you know, area there.
Q. And when you say, public opinion work with respect to doctors, what are you referring to?
A. They did studies to try to ascertain medical professionals', doctors' knowledge and
understanding regarding risks of smoking.
Q. As you sit here — I don't mean to cut you off. So if you were —
A. No.
Q. As you sit here today, is there any particular Lorillard document or documents that you are thinking of when you say that Lorillard did studies to ascertain the knowledge of the risks?
A. They do have one. It's not on my list here. I've seen it. It's done by — I believe the public opinion market research firm is something like the Mendoza firm, and it's from the late '50s. I'm just reaching into the memory, here. Lorillard is a smaller firm, so they're —
Q. And the document that you just referenced is not on this list, so that's not something you intend to talk about? I didn't see anything in your report.
A. No. No, I don't.
Q. And then just kind of going back to the broader scope, you talked a little bit about Newport and you talked a little bit about Kent.
And I know that in Callaway, for example, and in the Jewett deposition, I think you talked a little
bit about those brands. So my question would be, is there anything — any new work or research that you have done with respect to those brands or with respect to Lorillard since those depositions?
A. No. My Kent research was done early on and I'm consistent in that.
Q. And is there anything that you have done, researched that either informed or expanded your opinions specifically for these federal cases?
And, again, with respect to Lorillard.
A. The special research that I did for these cases?
Q. For Lorillard, yes.
A. For Lorillard, no.
Q. And having looked at your report, would it be fair to say that none of — it didn't appear to me, but that none of the opinions in your report pertained only to Lorillard Tobacco Company, as opposed to the other tobacco companies, as well?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to form.
A. So what you are saying is — yes,
Lorillard is part of the industry. They're part of the TI, and TIRC, CTR effort. So they're part
of the broader industry effort.
You know, even in the area of menthols, they're — they have a very successful menthol brand, but they're competing against Kool and Salems for that market, so they're part of the menthol story that is also shared by the other competitors they were going up against.
Q. So, again, my question is, would it be fair to say that none of your opinions pertain only to Lorillard Tobacco Company?
A. That's fair. I mean, I cite Lorillard —
I mean, the only — the only thing that's only to Lorillard is Lorillard is the only company that manufactured Kent. So Kent-specific opinions would apply only to Lorillard. You follow me?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. But in terms of broader, youth marketing, that kind of stuff, Lorillard was involved in that, but so were the other manufacturers.
Q. Do you have any specific opinions about Lorillard advertising, in general, or any particular Lorillard advertising that you intend to offer in this case that you have not already offered in one of those other cases?
A. I have testified about Kent advertising
in the past and my statements will be consistent. I've testified about menthol advertising, and Lorillard is part of that, so it will be consistent and the same.
Q. Do you have any specific opinions about the Old Gold brand or Old Gold advertising?
A. Well, they're slow getting, Not a Cough in a Carload. Old Gold is the early essentially American blended formulation that Lorillard puts in and I believe introduces in the 1820s. Babe Ruth advertised Old Gold, Laurel and Hardy, these are in the '20s and the '30s. Old Gold has one of the more interesting television commercials from the 1950s, which are the dancing cigarette packs, in the early history of television. If those are opinions, those are descriptive accounts of the Old Gold marketing campaigns or advertising campaigns.
Q. Are there any specific documents, as you sit here today, on your reliance list that relate to what you just told me about Old Gold?
A. You know, I didn't include those ads that I just described, but they come from my research in The New York Times from the 1920s and '30s. I mean, I've seen them and saved them. I have
hundreds and hundreds of New York Times articles and other articles just in my files.
The television commercials from the early '50s, those are just widely accessible videos.
Any compendium of historical cigarette advertisements will contain those.
Q. But I didn't see those on this reliance list.
A. That's correct. I didn't include that.
Well, let me take that back. I did include the Archive.org and Not a Cough in a Carload web interfaces, and there are good collections of Old Gold advertisements at the Stanford University Not a Cough in a Carload history of tobacco advertising site, which is a good way to get good, high-quality representations of the print advertisements. And Archive.org, in their tobacco collections, has a strong collection of cigarette advertisements, which I believe the dancing cigarette packs are included in there.
Q. But I, again, didn't see those broken out on your reliance list here.
A. No. Because they are databases. I included them from the source.
Q. As you sit here today, for purposes of
these cases, can you tell me what internal Lorillard documents you intend to rely on in connection with your testimony at trial?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, overly broad. Go ahead.
A. Well, yes, I mean, I don't know what I'm going to be asked at trial. You know, I only get to answer the questions that are posed to me by the person doing the direct exam. But I cite some Lorillard documents in this expert report, and it may be the case that those come up.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. And at this point in time, as we sit here today, would those be the documents that you anticipate relying on?
A. It can change. I can't say because I haven't determined with the attorneys what they want to focus on in terms of my testimony.
Q. But you understand that this is our opportunity to ask you about your opinions and about the materials that you are relying on for those opinions.
A. Correct.
Q. So that's why I'm asking you, as we sit here today, you know, this is my opportunity to
inquire about what it is you are going to use. So to the extent that you — I mean, to the extent that you have Lorillard documents on your reliance list, would I be correct that those are the documents that you intend to rely on?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to the form. Overly broad. He's also referencing the databases that refer to him, as well.
A. I expect - perhaps, I would show some of the advertisements that we've already discussed, and, you know, Newport advertisements over time. I like "the basis of our market is the high school student." I think that's a very succinct and powerful document. I would share that one, if asked, about Lorillard and youth marketing, how they conceived of the cigarette market. Those are the things that come to mind as I sit here.
Q. You mentioned two databases. One was the Stanford database?
A. Yes. It's the History of Cigarette Advertising, Not a Cough in a Carload hosted by the School of Medicine at Stanford University.
Q. You also mentioned something called the archive?
A. Archive.org, which is where the Legacy Tobacco Documents database keeps its multimedia collections.
Q. And you understand that those two databases have thousands and thousands of documents on them?
A. Yes. I am aware of that.
Q. And you understand that the purpose of the reliance list in this case is for us to be able to find out what you are relying on in this case, correct?
A. That's fair enough, yes.
Q. And how would we find out from the thousands and thousands of documents in the Archive.org or something, Stanford database, what documents, if any, you intend to rely on, or is it your position that you are not relying on those? MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, overly broad. The disclosures are sufficient. You can go ahead and answer.
A. Again, let's be precise as to what these two databases contain. They contain advertisements. One, the Stanford site contains print advertisements, and the Archive.org contains commercials, television broadcast commercials and
some radio, limited radio.
And to help you guide, I would make a number of choices. If Lorillard was going to be the focus in a direct examination, I would go and I would choose some historical Lorillard ads, perhaps for Old Gold, in the '20s through the '40s and '50s. Newport for the period after that. I don't know when that becomes a major brand, '60s, '70s, maybe into the '80s. So that would be my criteria I guess I would select.
But they would be — things that would be known to you and they would be more kind of to demonstrate the types of advertising that prevailed for that product at that time.
Q. How many Old Gold documents are on these two web sites?
A. I've never counted them up, but there are quite a few Old Gold print advertisements on the Stanford site. And if I were to select television commercials, I might select the dancing cigarettes, which I referenced, which are very famous, and then perhaps things along the lines of what I showed in the Jewett case, which were more '60s and — '60s era Old Gold advertisements.
Q. And how many Old Gold commercials are on
the Archive.org?
A. I've never counted them, but there's a few. I wouldn't call it a large number.
Q. How many Newport documents are in the Stanford database advertisements?
A. They probably have a few dozen, at least.
Q. And how many other, if any, other Lorillard advertisements are in that database?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Object to form.
A. Well, they have Old Gold. Those are the two that come to mind.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Are there any commercials other than the Old Gold commercials you referred to in the Archive.org?
A. Well, you know, if I was asked to show some Old Gold commercials, I would show the ones that I showed in the Jewett trial for the '60s, and I might show the other dancing cigarettes because it's just kind of fun.
Q. And do you know how many commercials other than Old Gold commercials are on Archive.org?
A. I've never made an attempt to count them
up. I don't think it's, you know, a burdensome number. And they're all well organized. You know, the —
Q. But as you sit here today, you can't tell me how many are in either one of those?
A. I've never counted them.
Q. Fair to say it's probably hundreds?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Don't guess.
A. I don't — well, perhaps it is. I don't know. I mean —
MS. TEDDER:
Q. And there are also ads for the other tobacco companies on both of those sites?
A. Yes. Yes. There's quite a few commercials available.
Q. And, all told, it turns out to be literally thousands and thousands of pages on those sites, correct?
A. Well, in terms of — I mean, pages are not involved with the audiovisual items or medic items.
Q. You would agree there are thousands of things between those two sites, correct?
A. Yes. And I have not looked at all of
them. Maybe a representative, just to give the Jury a taste of what television commercials looked like.
Q. Is it your representation today that you will choose, in terms of the television commercials, only what you chose in the Jewett
case?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. That's not his testimony.
These are your advertisements we're talking about. Go ahead.
A. Oh, and I might add, just to kind of — you were asking about documents. Lorillard has some good documents relating to - I believe I cite them in this, related to the print documents that relate to the prevalence of television advertising and alike, some reports prepared for Lorillard, and I believe there's some in the report.
Yes, I haven't selected - the thing about the advertisements is they — they are what they are, you know. They're advertisements.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. But we can agree those are not cited in your reliance list or attached here today,
correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. The specific advertisements?
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Yes.
A. No. Just where they are stored for use.
I do refer to some advertisements in the report.
The specific ads are referenced in the report, but, I mean -
Q. How many Lorillard ads do you refer to in the report?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection.
A. I'm not sure. I think I mostly focus on Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds in the report.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. If you want to turn to Exhibit 1, your expert report. If we look at Page 12, you mentioned earlier the document that you included, Footnote 28, T.L. Achey to Curtis Judge, "Product Information," August 30, 1978. Have you researched the context surrounding Mr. Achey's memo?
A. I'm familiar with the memo. I've — yes.
It's a memo to the head of Lorillard.
Q. And have you researched the surrounding documents to give you the context for the memo?
A. Oh, scrolling left and right? I believe so, yes. I'm not recalling exactly what they said.
Q. And what documents did you find?
A. I'm not recalling. This is a document I encountered a very long time ago.
Q. And when did you encounter this document?
A. Oh, I mean, a long time ago. This is a
—	you know, a widely cited document in tobacco history.
Q. What was Mr. Achey's title at the time?
A. I'm not recalling exactly. I would have to go look at the original document and remind myself.
Q. Do you know what his position was?
A. Well, that would apply to title and position are often non-synonyms, so my answer would be the same.
Q. Have you done anything to research the information in the document, itself?
A. When you say that, I'm not sure if I follow you.
Q. Okay. Do you know what the document is about?
A. Do you have a copy of it?
Q. I do not.
A. I would have to refresh my recollection with the document. I mean, in fairness here, there's millions of documents. I've looked at, myself, thousands of documents, and unless we want to play Jeopardy or a memory test — you know, if we had the document here, we could look at it. We could look it up on the internet.
Q. I'm just following up because it's a document that you included in your report.
A. Yes. And I cite the document. I quote from it.
MR. MIGLIORI:
If you had questions for it, you could have brought it, as well.
MS. TEDDER:
If you have an objection, make your objection.
MR. MIGLIORI:
That is my objection. If you have something you want to ask him about a document, you can ask —
MS. TEDDER:
I'm asking him questions.
MR. MIGLIORI:
It's out of context. Objection to form.
Show him the document if you have questions about
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, where in the document does it state that Mr. Achey was summarizing, as you say, the entire tobacco industry's approach to youth smoking?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection to the form. The document is not here.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. And I'm referencing to the top of Page 12.
A. Yes. What I write is, "A Lorillard Tobacco Company official summarized the entire tobacco industry's approach to youth smoking when he wrote, 'The base of our business is the high school student.'" That is my evaluation that he summarized the industry's approach to the business.
Q. So the document doesn't say that?
A. No. That's not what I said. It's my evaluation that the document summarizes the industry's approach to the youth market.
Q. Yes. And I'm just trying to follow up on that. So the document doesn't use those words? Those were your words?
A. Yes, but that's my professional opinion that this document stands for the industry's entire approach to youth marketing.
Q. Okay. Now, I think that you have previously given testimony that since the 1970s, you are not aware of Lorillard authorizing the use of its products in movies or TV shows; is that correct?
A. Yes. I am not — it may be out there, but I just haven't seen anything to indicate that. MS. TEDDER:
Let's mark this as Exhibit Number 5.
(Exhibit 5 was marked.)
MS. TEDDER:
Q. In fact, before we get to that document,
Dr. Kyriakoudes, you haven't seen a movie where you think Lorillard paid to have its product placed in a movie; is that correct?
A. I'm not aware of Lorillard doing that.
Q. We'll get to that in just a minute.
A. Well, you've handed me a letter, so I'm looking at it.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Take your time.
MS. TEDDER:
That's fine. You can look at the letter.
I just have a few questions.
A. Okay.
Q. You haven't seen a Lorillard document that says that Lorillard paid to put a Lorillard brand cigarette in a movie; is that correct?
A. I have not seen that.
Q. Are you aware that Lorillard adopted a policy as early as the early 1970s or perhaps even earlier of actually refusing requests by movie producers to use Lorillard brand products in films?
A. I'm not aware of a particular policy either way.
Q. But you do know that in the early 1970s, there was no law or regulation that prohibited product placement in movies, correct?
A. That's true. It was not against the law.
Q. All right.
A. Criminal law.
Q. And have you — it just wasn't against the law, period, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, foundation. He's not an attorney.
A. I'm not an attorney.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. As far as you know, it was not against the law, correct? And I'm not asking you for a legal opinion.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection. Yes, you are. Go ahead. Answer, if you can.
A. Yes. I'm not sure. I'm not going to offer a legal opinion.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Have you researched Lorillard's policies regarding product placement in the movies?
A. Not Lorillard by itself, no.
Q. And what I handed you as Deposition Exhibit Number 5 is a letter. Did you have a minute to look at that letter?
A. I did.
Q. The date at the top of the letter is
March 23rd, 1973, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And have you ever seen that letter before?
A. I haven't seen this particular letter, I don't think.
Q. And it's — the letter is written to Milton B. Scott at United Visuals Corporation; is that correct?
A. That's what it says.
Q. And if you will look at the name at the bottom, it's coming from Curtis Judge at Lorillard. Do you see that?
A. I do.
Q. Do you understand that at one point, Mr. Judge was president of Lorillard?
A. I do know that, yes.
Q. And if we look at the top of the second page of this letter, it says, "Lorillard has absolutely no interest in sponsoring or in any way fostering directly or indirectly the use of our tobacco products in any films. Furthermore, we emphatically prefer that they not be used." Did I read that correctly?
A. You did.
Q. Let's take a look at one more. Let's mark this as Exhibit Number 6.
(Exhibit 6 was marked.)
MS. TEDDER:
Q. We marked Exhibit Number 6, and I think you have that now in front of you. If you need a minute to look at it, that's fine. You just let me know when you are ready. This is another letter dated — and this particular letter is dated June 5th, 1996, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And it's to Celerie Kemble, production manager at Myth America, Inc. Is that correct?
A. You read that correctly, yes.
Q. And it's signed by George Telford and on Lorillard Tobacco Company letterhead?
A. Yes.
Q. It says at the top that Mr. Telford is vice-president of advertising and brand management for Lorillard, correct?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. Have you ever seen this document before?
A. No. I have not seen this letter.
Q. And what Mr. Telford tells Ms. Kemble is, "With respect to your request for Lorillard to
supply True cigarettes for product placement in the movie Myth America, please be advised that it is long-standing Lorillard policy not to authorize the use of its product in any films. Accordingly, we do not give consent or permission for the use of the True brand name, nor will we provide True cigarettes for your project." Did I read that correctly?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. I know that we talked a little bit about your prior testimony on Kent and on Newport, and I did not see anything in your report or your prior testimony, there's nothing about the original Kent brand that you are going to testify to in this case; is that correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
I object.
A. When you say "the original Kent brand," do you mean the brand that was introduced in the early '50s and contained asbestos in the filter?
MS. TEDDER:
Q. Yes.
A. I might be asked to testify about that, and if I do, I will.
Q. And how is that relevant to your
opinions?
A. Well, it's a filter that had asbestos in it. It's just a historical fact that the first iteration of Kent had asbestos in the filter. I mean, that's just a fact.
Q. And is that what your testimony would be?
A. Yes. It had asbestos in it. That Kent
—	I mean, what else is there? It's just that it's an asbestos-based filter.
Q. I'm just trying to figure out if you were called to testify, what it is that you would testify to.
A. If I'm asked if the Kent filter had asbestos in it, from essentially, I guess it's around 1952 for a couple or three years after that, I forget when they took it out, probably —
I would say yes, it did.
Q. And is there anything beyond that that your testimony would encompass?
A. No. That's about it.
Q. Okay. And do you know when the asbestos was removed?
A. It's — yes, I do. It's in the mid '50s.
I'm forgetting the exact point. I would have to refresh my recollection on the documents, but,
yes, it was removed.
Q. But you don't know the date, as we sit here today? I'm not saying you haven't seen the date before. I'm just asking.
A. I'm not recalling the exact date, but it was a period in the mid '50s.
Q. I wanted to — if you have your report and the demonstratives that were attached.
A. Yes, I do.
Q. I'm not sure where this falls because the pages — I think it's — this particular page isn't numbered, but it comes after — there's a page labeled as Page 10, and then there is a Kent ad, and then there's another Kent ad after that.
A. Okay. Yes. Which one do you want to look at?
Q. I want to look at the one right after that. Okay. Yes. And what I'm really interested in, is there is an article that you have off on the right, and I can't — that is not legible at all to me, so I am trying to figure out, first of all, what it is.
A. Well, what I've taken is a page, I believe this is from The New York Times, and I've placed it in a PowerPoint. I would be happy to
supply you with a digital copy of the original document which would then be able to be read.
Q. Okay. As we sit here today, just for purposes of the record, it says — it looks like the article, at the top, says, Credit for Kent's Sales Leadership Goes to Research.
A. Yes. That's correct.
Q. Did I read that correctly as we can?
A. Sure.
Q. Do you know what the purpose was of attaching this as we sit here today?
A. Well, the whole thing is an advertisement. So this is kind of like a — it's a news story that's part of this full-page ad, so that's not exactly an independent news story.
It's part of the ad.
Q. Do you know what the year is of the news story? I just can't read anything on here, so I'm just testing your recollection.
A. I believe this is a '50s era advertisement, but I didn't indicate the year on the PowerPoint.
Q. I know the ad is a '50s era advertisement. Again, I'm just trying to get to the article, if you know. If it's from The New
York Times, do you know when, by any chance?
A. It's sometime in the '50s. But, again, what looks like an article is actually part of the advertisement.
Q. I understand you are saying it's part of the ad. It's not something you added; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
MR. MIGLIORI:
No, no, no. I think he's saying that is advertisement, not an article.
A. That's correct.
MS. TEDDER:
Q. This little — you did not add the — what I'm saying is an article is it says, Credit For Kent's Sales Leadership Goes to Research. You are telling me that's part of the ad; is that correct?
A. That's right.
Q. But you also referenced something about a New York Times article? Do you understand that to be what this is from originally or do you know?
A. No. I believe this advertisement appeared in The New York Times.
Q. The ad appeared in The New York Times
from the 1950s, but you don't know when, as we sit here today?
A. No.
Q. If we look at your — if we look at your
—	if we look at your expert report, Page 3, Paragraph 5, you wrote that — you write in Paragraph 5 that the tobacco industry and Lorillard — I'm just going to focus on Lorillard
—	possessed information indicating that cigarettes were, in fact, addictive and the cause of serious disease and injury to smokers.
So my question would be, are there any particular Lorillard documents or facts that relate to Lorillard that you plan to use to illustrate this opinion if you testify at trial?
A. You know, Lorillard was part of the conspiracy, a member of the TIRC, and later CTR and Tobacco Institute, and in that context, I will discuss Lorillard.
Q. So you will be discussing it in the context of CTR and TI type documents?
A. Yes, the general industry's — the industry's efforts to confuse the public as to the truth of the matter. Lorillard was part of that effort.
Q. If I ask you that same question about each one of these opinions, would your response be the same in the sense that you would basically be referring to TI or CTR type documents? I'm just looking to see, as we sit here today, are there specific Lorillard documents that you would be using to illustrate these opinions?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, overly broad. Go ahead.
A. Well, I mean, there are some Lorillard documents that are good. I cite them in this report. And Lorillard is a party to all the actions of the TIRC, TI, CTR as they —
MS. TEDDER:
Q. But as we sit here today, beyond the documents that you've cited in the report and what you are telling me about TIRC, CTR or TI, there isn't any specific Lorillard document that you can point me to?
A. Aside from what I cite in my report, nothing comes to mind.
MS. TEDDER:
I don't think I have any further questions. Thank you.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Does anyone on the phone have questions? MS. BROWN:
Jennifer Brown on behalf of Lorillard USA. I want to respond that Mr. Migliori put on the record at the beginning of the deposition regarding the Jolley case. As Mr. Migliori acknowledged, the Jolley case has been administratively closed. My understanding is that we are not proceeding with depositions in the Jolley case due to the administrative closure of the case. So, from our perspective, this deposition is not going forward in the Jolley case.
MR. MIGLIORI:
I understand your position. Is there any questions of the witness?
MS. BROWN:
I have no questions.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Does anyone else on the phone have questions?
MS. ROSSEL:
This is Jennifer Rossel. I have no questions. Thank you.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. MIGLIORI:
Q. We will start with Jolley. You probably don't know this, professor, but one of the cases for which the defendants have noticed this deposition, called Jolley, has been temporarily or administratively dismissed for a legal reason relating to bankruptcy.
And my question is a little — given that background, I have a general question for you. Irrespective of whether there are seven, six, five, four plaintiffs noticed in this deposition, and irrespective of whether Jolley is one of them, are any of the opinions either expressed in your expert report or that you expressed today in deposition different in a — depending on whether or not Jolley is in the case?
A. No. The history doesn't change. The tobacco industry's actions don't change because of the mix of contemporary litigation, the history of what it is.
Q. So if the deposition were noticed just in the Jolley case today, would your testimony and report have been the same as it was?
A. Identical, yes.
Q. And then the only other question I have,
you were asked by Mr. Geise earlier in the deposition a lot about the filtered cigarettes and the nineteen — I believe the — I asked him for the date and I've forgotten it. The NCI report, I believe, of 2001?
A. Yes.
Q. And how the NCI report talked about the public health position on filtered cigarettes. Do you recall that testimony?
A. I do.
Q. And there was an exhibit that he showed you, it had a cover page, Exhibit Number 3, had a cover page of Monograph 13, as well as Pages 65 and 146. Do you recall those questions?
A. I do, yes.
Q. All right. And, again, that Monograph was dated 2001. In your expert report, do you also rely upon the Surgeon General's report of 2010 entitled, The Report of the Surgeon General, How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease?
A. Yes. That's an authoritative report that I rely on.
Q. And only because we're in the age of technology, and as a historian, if we brought all of your paper reliance materials, we would be
pushed out of this room. I am going to show you from the internet, and we can test the validity of it later, but I'm going to show you the Surgeon General's Report from 2010 and direct you to Chapter 2, Page 16 of the report. And if you would, could you read the last full paragraph of that page? And I'll let you guys look at it.
MR. GEISE:
Object to the form.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Read that so that it's in the record and we know what we're talking about.
A. "In contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation in response to design changes were not well understood by parties outside of the tobacco industry, itself. Public health officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw in more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes that was represented by machine-measured yield of tar and nicotine." And they cite Monograph 19 and — I'm sorry, Monograph 13.
Q. So, first of all, is that a portion of the 2010 Surgeon General's report upon which you rely on your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. And I referenced it in the initial question, when I talked about industry knowledge.
Q. Can you explain just the way in which you rely upon it as it relates to the early representations in 2001 about filtered cigarettes and the health effects?
MR. GEISE:
Object to the form.
A. Well, again, it's a case where, as I described earlier in the deposition, where if the public health community had known what the tobaccc industry knew about the design and behavior of its products with smokers, they would have reached very different conclusions about filters and the lights and low-tar cigarettes. The industry did not share that information with the public health community.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Q. Can you go to the paragraph just above that and read the first sentence just so the record is clear on what we're talking about?
MR. GEISE:
And I just, for the record, object to the
form.
A. "Tobacco industry documents, many of which are available at the Legacy Tobacco Documents Library at UCSF clearly demonstrate that at least by the mid 1970s, the tobacco industry well understood the importance of creating health reassurance messages in order to alleviate health concerns, and that one important method of doing so was through claims of low deliveries of tar."
Q. And they give some examples of that. Is that statement that you've just read, is that something you rely upon for your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. And I've testified about this particular document before.
Q. And the Legacy, the tobacco Legacy documents, when did they start becoming available? And if you know, how did they start becoming available to people like you, and in this case, the public health community to understand what the tobacco industry knew in the late '70s, for example?
A. Well, the documents only became available to researchers after a round of late 1990s
litigation. And I'm not fully aware of all of the aspects of the litigation, but growing out of what are called the State Attorney Generals cases and also sometimes called the Master Settlement.
The documents beyond that were first put on the internet by Tac Tacelosky at the Tobaccodocuments.Org initially in a subset. And then around 2002, with the establishment — approximately, the establishment of the Legacy Tobacco Documents at the University of California, San Francisco.
So these documents were revealed only late, the researchers. And the researchers have been conducting the research on these documents since then and making discoveries and learning about these issues that we've been talking about today, and only since that point.
Q. Do you have an opinion, from your perspective as a historian, as to whether or not the public availability of these internal tobacco documents in any way changed the public health community's views as expressed in Exhibit 3, the NCI Monograph 13 that was shown to you by counsel? MR. GEISE:
Object to the form.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Q. Do you have an opinion, yes or no?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And what's your opinion?
A. Well, my opinion is that once tobacco control researchers learned the full extent of industry design activities, marketing activities and — its discovery, industry's discovery of how smokers actually used the product, once they found that, they realized that much of — in fact, all of the industry's publicly cooperative efforts during this period of the '70s was, in essence, fraud, and that these products, when actually used, were extremely dangerous.
Q. Do you have an opinion as a historian whether that would have applied to the representations made in Exhibit 3 about lung cancer and filtered cigarettes as counsel was asking about earlier?
MR. GEISE:
Object to the form.
A. Well, I mean, you know, the documents reveal that filters don't work, and that lights and low tars are not safer when smoked by real people.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Q. So in conclusion, Number 5, where counsel repeatedly asked you about the statement, epidemiology studies have not consistently found lesser risk of diseases other than lung cancer among smokers of reduced-yield cigarettes, is that statement, conclusion informed by the tobacco industry documents that became available as a result of the MSA litigation?
MR. GEISE:
Object to the form.
A. No, it's not.
MR. MIGLIORI:
That's all I have.
EXAMINATION BY MR. GEISE:
Q. Epidemiological studies study the disease risk among the population, correct?
A. That's correct. Or the risk, incidence.
Q. Can you identify any methodology that has changed in any epidemiological study as a result of internal company documents being available? MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, form and foundation.
A. I'm not an epidemiologist.
MR. GEISE:
Q. So since the internal company documents became available, are you aware of any change in an epidemiological study, in terms of methodology, that would permit the scientists to better understand and evaluate the disease risk than they had been able to before the release of the documents?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, foundation.
A. Again, I'm not an epidemiologist, so I can't point to a particular study. But, for example, you know, one of the things epidemiologists do is estimate — perhaps they might estimate average tar intake from smoking and base that on the Cambridge method of measurement of tar, and then as the documents have indicated, that those tar rates are much higher, the nicotine rates are much higher, it seems, to me, that that would require a change in research design. But, again, I'm not an epidemiologist. I don't conduct epidemiological studies, so that's not an area where I'm an expert.
Q. Long before internal company documents were publicly available, the public health
community was aware that the Cambridge testing method did not measure the actual intake that a human smoker gets from a cigarette, correct?
MR. MIGLIORI:
Objection, foundation. Go ahead.
A. I can't — I can't completely agree with that. The - you know, it's not an issue of whether the method might have had some shortcomings and flaws. It's an issue of the degree to which industry design and research so completely circumvented the reliability of these testing methods. And that's all I can say.
MR. GEISE:
One housekeeping thing. I think we need to make as another exhibit, Exhibit 7, which is the collection of materials that you brought in response to the deposition notice for the deposition today.
Q. You chronicled for us earlier in the deposition what you brought in response. I have a set here of, I guess, invoices, CV and a PowerPoint presentation from your Finland presentation that we have that we can mark as Exhibit 7.
And I believe Mr. Migliori has taken a
look at some of the other materials that you brought with you today, and subject to Rule 26 and I guess Rule 502, has decided some of those contain privileged or work product protected information, and as a result, is withdrawing or calling back the production of those.
So we'll mark as Exhibit 7 the set of documents that is not affected by any claims of privilege and leave out the documents that are being clawed back for the moment. And I would just ask that after you complete the review of those, somehow, Mr. Migliori, to produce what is not subject to a claim of privilege.
MR. MIGLIORI:
Yes. I'll represent that the two documents that I allowed him to identify but am not producing are a prior iteration of a report.
It's actually an iteration of a report that was not used in tobacco litigation but had to do with the tobacco industry and asbestos litigation.
And, in my view, it's an earlier iteration of a report that became the final report that's actually now marked as an exhibit, and I think it's properly excluded under Rule 26.
The other thing I pulled out are
logistical e-mail communications between counsel. The witness was kind enough to go through and identify interactions with counsel that squarely fall outside of the three areas of proper production under Rule 26.
So I'll look through them, and if there's something in here that I think serves as a basis of an opinion or an invoice or something, of course, I'll hand it over to you. There's nothing in here that I'm worried about you seeing. I just don't want to start changing now how we are behaving in this litigation, in terms of production.
MR. GEISE:
So with that, these documents that were being produced will be marked as Exhibit 7 to the deposition.
(Exhibit 7 was marked.)
MR. MIGLIORI:
I'll also point out, there is a report in here that is not really hugely helpful or relevant. They are the Finland slides, and by producing them, we're showing you that these, in fact, could be things that are shown to the Jury, as well, as part of his story, if he does tell his
story.
MR. GEISE:
With that, I think we're done. (Deposition concluded at 2:00 p.m.)
CERTIFICATE OF COURT REPORTER I, MONICA SCHROEDER, Court Reporter and Notary Public, in and for the County of Jackson, State of Mississippi, hereby certify that the foregoing pages, and including this page, contain a true and correct transcript of the testimony of the witness as taken by me at the time and place heretofore stated, and later reduced to typewritten form by computer-aided transcription under my supervision, to the best of my skill and ability.
I further certify that I placed the witness under oath to truthfully answer all questions in this matter under the authority vested in me by the State of Mississippi.
I further certify that I am not in the employ of, or related to, any counsel or party in this matter, and have no interest, monetary or otherwise, in the final outcome of the proceedings.
Witness my signature and seal, this the 20th day of November, 2013.
Monica Schroeder, RPR, CRR, CSR #1285 My Commission Expires July 15, 2015
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF DEPONENT I, LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, do hereby certify that I have read the foregoing transcript of my testimony taken on 11/15/13, and further certify that it is a true and accurate record of my testimony (with the exception of the corrections listed below):
Page Line	Correction
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
_I_I_I_
LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO BEFORE ME THIS_DAY OF_, 20_.
(NOTARY PUBLIC) MY COMMISSION EXPIRES:
&	15 1:24 36:7 155:8
2:12,16,19,25 231:24 9*9 12 175'14 15,000 37:18 —-!- 1500 50:23
_®_ 16 220:5
(388 3:19	1600 1:23
(394 3:21	17 159:6
>03 2:4_ is 74:2
1__ 1820s 192:10
3:8 6:11,14 7:1 184 3:4 :25 12:8 14:6	18th 121:19
8:22 33:4,9,11,11 19 125:10 126:16
4:16 39:6 60:2,3 128:4 129:21 162:8 7:7 118:6 126:4 220:24
55:6 201:18	1920s 192:24
46:1 140:7,8	193<* 108:11111:2 80:12 212:13 112:4,10 113:4,11 ) 116:12 117:1 113:20 114:2,10
)00 1:6 156:8 L 50.23	1940s 111:2 112:4
3:12 118:11	112:10 113:4 114:2
114-1(1 ISfi-fi 1S7-1
15/13 232:4
201:19 204:17	1950 93:20
L 3.17	1950s 78:22 103:10
165 2:8	111:12 134:6,10
S5 2:24 231:23	150:23 175:11
3:15 79:14,18	192:14 215:1
6:4,11,19 87:8	1952 2n:15
0:1,5,11,22 91:10	1953 i55:21,25
1:15 96:5,7 97:7	156:7,22 158:2,16
8:1,15 100:9,11,22	1956 173:4
01:21,25 103:14	19*7 79:13,17 173:7
05:1 107:3 155:6	174:25 175:19
19:13 220:25	176:19 178:6,7
23.23	1960s 89:9,13
36.7	111:12 122:16
>0 2:20	123:12 132:22
U 2:20	188:12
>	3:15 97:24 99:5	1961 173:4
9:25 100:18,21	1963 120:5 122:20
01:9 102:12,15	123:2
05:1 106:10	1964 57:24 117:4,14
19.14	118:11 119:1,13,22
'	120:15,24 121:8
132:7 134:20 ^	2
151:21 178:10,18	2 3:12 li:8,ll,20
179:14 180:8	14;19 1? ? n&6
>66 122:22 142:2	22Q.5
•70s 61:25 88:1	20 232-23
111:12 120:7	20Q 2;8
123:20 135:6	2001 79-14^ gg;5
165:11 205:11	90;1 102;18 219:5
206:15,21 222:6	219’17 221’S
173 208:1	2002 223:8
>75 80:18,25 81:11	2oo^ 47:10
82:17	2008 10:5
>78 201:22	2009 |().-
180	132:7 159:13	2010 169:18 170:i
159:17 160:10,25	170:15 219:19
220:4 221:2
'80s 62:24 93:21	2011 185:18 186:3
111:13 117:5,15	18?.3
119:23 120:25	20I2 58:621 125:12
121:8 132:23 134:6	l2&l6 m.5
134:11,20	12921 152.25
181	17 84-17 ____ ...______
18:4 42:3,7 54:8,21
138:25 140:17	56:15 57:10 231:21
182 120:4 121:3	2014 58:2,12,16,21
161:17	59:4,11,18
'83 138:25 141:9	2015 231:24
'86 122:22 142:3	205 3.19
'88 159:24 160:19	2Q9 3'2|
160:25 163:17	2Qs 63:22 192:12
'89 121:19 122:14	19?.6
126:24 127:7	2Qth 138;15 23l;20
128:13,22 129:2	21g 3_5
130:1,19 139:1	,,, 3,,
142:11	229 3-23
>90 84:3,10 85:12	23 118:5,8,25
>90s 111:13 171:22	12(H3
222:25	2345 2* 12
>96 90:12,23 91:2	23rd 208:1
91:14,20 92:22 94:3	25 161:9 162:4 94:16 95:9,18,22
96:2,8,21 97:4	2555 2:16
209:10	26 20:8,9,16 122:19
>th 62:21 68:11	228:2,24 229:5 137:16 138:14
122:22 142:2	40s 108:24 113:11
201:21	197:6
h 42:4,7	42 122:21 142:2
77:6,9 79:11	44 79:19 160:25
5:19 87:7,13 95:3	162:15,19 163:22
5:7 97:17 102:8	5
05-23	-
I A	5 3:3,18 98:6 101:8 '0 230-4
u ^	104:25 106:10
- 205:18,19 207:22
3_ 215:6,7 225:2
3:13 33:12 34:17	50 151:23 152:4,13
9:23 91:8 95:10	502 228:3
7:25 105:2 126:7	50s 148:21 188:17
15:5 219:12	189:14 193:4 197:7
23:22 224:17	210:20 211:23
00	11:25	212:6 213:20,23
00	6:8	214:2
3/73 3:19	50th 52:18 57:20,23
132:7 201:22	58:3 59:2
1	63:23 108:23	52 162:2
11:21 192:12,24	56 159:13 161:21
it 6:19 8:17 14:25	5
6	3:11,20 41:21 ^	44:18 98:3 99:5,6
103:8 209:2,3,5
lOo.ZU	/V91
9cvll080 1:10
n,	60s 88:1 148:23
, ,l 151:6 181:24 197:8 197:24,24 198:19
9cvl2867 1:14 9cvl2919 1:15
r!SSf ! n 64108'2663 2:13
1.12-65 3.15 9o:9ilo 95:9
4_ 219:13
3:16 7:2,15 8:14 650 104:8 :19 9:10,15,18	7
0:1,9,25 11:1 14:7 7 9-11 53-15 121-12 ’ ’
A125:24 227:15,24
21 -15 124-14 23
A til , * 228:7 229:16,18
25-24 130-5 139-1
70s 93;12 112:17
41 -24
120:7 121:7 147:7
141-21
151:9 197:9 222:22
224:12	128:14
I 81:19	accessed 40:12,16 r 79:12 86:1,3 41:9 42:3,7 43:2
97:17	accessible 66:23 8 193:4
>	no io i m i n accommodate 6:2
Is 93:13 103:10	^ ^
140-21 141-22	account 102:13,20
147:7 151:11 197:9	accounts 192.16
140-70	accurate 19:14
, 1402o	104:6 110:24
,	167:14 168:11,12
232-5
50 1:25	^ - achey 201:21 204:9
_-_ achey’s 201:23
130:10	202:14
1 171:21	achieved 138:2
Is 93:13 151:11 acknowledged
130-4096 2:8	155:10 217:7
r 148:20_ acknowledges
a	168:13,15
m ^25	acknowledgment
^	155-16 95 156-90
>le 40:1 62:1	^, .v,,^
101:18 106:24	158:1,16 232:1
113:13 114:4	acquired 44:15
123:20 22 132:6	action 32:19
133:22 134:2 148:9	actions 29:14 76:4
196:10 213:2 226:7	184:9 216:13
►ridged 55:6,8	218.18
5^.5	activities 29:3 56:15
►solutely 82:13	56.19 140.6 165.13
147:8 149:21	167:13 182:4 224:7
208:20	224:7
ademic 39:20	activity 110.3 140.5
:cept 125:22	144.24 174.3
147:10 167:21	actual 49:13 64:16
177:24 179:24	69:19 161:8 227:2
ceptable 113:9	ad 115.17 126.7
171:15 172:18	212:14,14 213:14
ceptance 182:2	213.16,23 214.6,17
:cepted 124:3	214.25
cepting 165:8	add 162.14,19
cess 39-14 41-4	200:12 214:14
62:5,8,16 63:1,5	added 36:22 214:6
licted 25:11 77:2	196:23,24 197:18
33:10 167:2	197:24 198:5,8
liction 25:16,24	200:10,21,22 201:4
34:3 159:9,14,19	201:8
60:2,12,18,24	advertising 3:16
61:1,16,22 162:4	28:18 63:20 67:15
62:15,22 163:3,7,8	67:17 115:13,19,20
63:11,12,17,21,22	116:17,25 121:16
lictive 27:18 28:6	123:21 124:24
8:12 73:1,7,16	125:3,14 126:1
68:25 169:25	127:23 129:14,16
15:10	130:7,8,19,23 131:2
ling 162:21 169:3	131:17,19,24
lition 45:17	132:21 133:5,15,23
7:14 154:10	134:10,17 135:6
Iress 63:21	152:1,10,19,21,22
25:12	153:6 191:21,22,25
Iressed 80:23	192:2,6,17 193:15
Iressing 129:23	195:22 197:13
ninistrative	200:17 209:19
2:22 217:10	advice 55:3,11,12
rrinistrativelv	5Q-10
nonition 5:24	african 151:7 167:8 )pted 152:21 188:5
06:14	afternoon 184:24
i	135:14,15 185:7
65:12 192:22	age 74:1 109:11 97:5 199:13 201:9 219:23
01:11	agencies 67:15
lit 41:25 42:18	agents 176:9
22:21 139:7 142:1	aggregate 125:4 mnce 6:6 126:2 129:16
^ertised 124:2,20	ago 36:7,8,14 55:3 34:8 192:11 66:14 95:13 99:4 fertisement 111:19 186:5,24 51:24 152:5,14 202:9,11
13:13,21,24 214:4	agree 56:10 91:19 14:11,23 92:3,21 94:2 98:15 fertisements 99:11 100:8,10 8:15 134:7 135:3,4 105:22 110:6,9 51:21 153:1,12,13 123:15 124:13 53:25 154:12,13 125:7 128:1 129:19 65:10 193:6,13,17 134:7 148:9 149:23 93:19 195:11,12 153:11,15 157:14
171:22 174:13,17	alleged 24:3 164:7
175:19 199:23	allegiance 180:25
200:24 227:6	alleviate 222:8
;reed 4:2 9:6	allies 180:14
;reeing 9:8,13,14	allow 7:23 42:24 9:17,25 10:24 65:6 220:20
;reement 82:10	allowed 39:2 228:16
;riculture 60:19	allows 39:10
61:4 69:17 70:5,13	ama 178:17,22 70:17,22 73:9 180:13,14 181:24 ;riculture’s 70:1 182:2,14,15 183:20 lead 31:9 37:16 183:24 184:2,3,9
48:3,25 67:25 78:5	amended 4:8
78:15 83:7,13	amendment 138:3
105:13 108:22	america 209:13 129:5 132:11 143:1 210:2
150:2 152:9 160:4	american 11:5 160:15 161:5 29:18 60:6,12,18 163:15 181:20,22 76:5 156:3,25 157:5 186:21 187:20 157:12,23 178:9 194:5 196:20 179:2 183:10 188:5 700-11 9.07-n 1Q9-Q
z-iu.y z-z- /	amviivaiik? i iu.ij
ded 231:9	118:18 151:7 167:8
rplanes 165:14	amount 6:8 110:11
1:10,11,12,13,14	110:12 176:5
1:15,16	analysis 3:8 66:4
beit 123:7	76:2 77:23 79:7
cohol 114:1,23,24	91:21 113:19 115:9 134:7,8,10,18 121:23 126:4 155:1
134:23 135:4,5,11	analyst 77:21
135:14,17,18,18,20	angel 156:8
135:25 136:4,14,24	anniversary 52:18
137:4,19,22,25	57:20,24 58:3 59:2
138:15 139:9,11,13	annual 120:18 126:5
143:3 153:7	answer 15:23 29:11
coholic 142:12,19	29:17 30:14 37:8
coholism 135:19	44:23 81:3 82:6,21
ert 178:13	82:22,24 83:8 84:1
igned 181:11	89:1,8 94:14,19
182:6	95:2,17 96:25
ike 52:11 98:25	106:16,24 107:17
158:10 200:17	110:16 113:22
ive 177:1	128:16 129:6,8,20
144:15 158:12
59:4 161:17	appendices 3:11 62:11 187:21 6:15
94:8 196:20	appendix 6:24 33:8 02:20 207:14 33:11 45:16
31:12	applications 52:10
»wered 27:13	applied 29:11 0:7 73:21 76:13 224:16
2:21,23 83:25	applies 6:22 7:2 4:12,13 96:23 16:12 37:23
00:25 159:2,18	apply 14:20 191:15 60:15 201:3 202:19
iwering 5:18	appointed 181:23
»wers 4:13 98:2	appreciate 164:22 ;i 31:14 136:24 184:21 :icigarette 136:21 appreciated 140:2
36:22 137:15,24	appreciates 140:9 38:4 140:12
:icipate 46:13	appreciation 139:22
94:15 220:19	approach 204:10,20 :icipated 118:9 204:23 205:3,9
:icipating 73:15	approaches 129:13
inmnfprl 71-6	1^0-1
f uuuj	appi uAiinai^ij
irt 114:17	12:16 104:9 122:19
)logy 178:23	148:22 170:16
seal 149:10,11 223:9
64:11,17,24 165:5	archetype 44:18
65:17 166:5	archive 66:3 195:25
68:16	archive.org 193:11 3ealing 165:1,21 193:17 196:1,15,24 3eals 133:12 198:1,16,24
49:18	archives 66:5 69:24
3ear 158:13	area 48:5 75:19 78:2 90:16 78:6 84:25 114:8 3earance 6:6 12:3 118:1 128:17 151:7 12:19 154:18,19 157:15 3earances 2:1 188:19 191:2 3eared 109:3 226:22
42:19 179:14	areas 150:8 185:6 14:24,25 229:4
Dears 112:21	arrangements 12:5 lend 17:24 12:6
jended 17:23	arrest 123:21
4:4	arresting 125:15
•tide 212:19 213:5	associating 165:16
213:25 214:3,11,15	association 178:9 214:21 179:2 183:11
tides 193:1,2	assume 5:1640:13
bestos 210:20	assumed 80:2
211:2,4,7,9,14,21	assuming 157:23
228:20	assumption 81:22
certain 188:24	athlete 151:25 152:6 189:8 152:15
ia 62:20	athletes 151:20 ide 148:17 159:2 152:2,11,20
216:20	attached 33:7 ked 7:7 8:3 9:4 139:20 200:25 11:3 12:11,20 14:9 212:8
17:15,22 18:6,7	attaching 213:11
19:1,10 27:13 33:16	attachments 162:1
33:18 48:9 58:16	attempt 42:22 167:3 59:9,13 63:1,5 70:7 198:25
73:21 76:13 82:21	attempted 124:10
82:25 94:12 96:23	attempts 24:20 100:25 107:12 124:9
11	atfpnrlprl SR-4
185:21,25 194:7	attitudes 42:1,19 195:16 198:17 49:19
201:3 210:23	attorney 2:5,9,14,17 211:13 219:1,3 2:21 5:10 7:7 10:12 225:3 12:21 13:9 33:17 king 5:18 55:7 36:9 39:4 207:6,7 63:14 74:17 80:24 223:3
99:18 104:4 106:8	attorneys 4:4 7:11 113:21 140:11 10:3 12:6 14:13 167:11 181:18 36:3,6 47:20 48:9 186:6,7 194:24 48:16 194:17
200:13 204:2	attractive 164:8
207:10 212:4	audience 55:15 224:19 166:21,22
pect 7:8 24:20	audiences 166:25
pects 169:22	audiovisual 199:21
223:2	august 12:12,12,19 sessed 140:3 13:10,14,22 19:8,10 sist 59:17 118:14 119:14 sociated 3:13 72:3 201:22
176:23	author 121:18
:hored 164:4	b
:horitative 78:20	^ 208^8 6:6 108:1 182:2,15 babe 192:io
19:21	back 10:5 13:10
lioritatively	14;25 lg:13 19.g
59:2.4	42:16 65:19 89:5
:honty 231:13	92:18 96:11 102:5
;horize 210:3	107• 13 137-22
horizing 205:12	140-22 141-24
:hors 103:14	143;23 |36:7
26:3	161:14,15 185:8
oinated 40:22	186:17 189:21
3:4	193:10 228:6,10
oinatically 40:18 back	d i80:24
9-1^ 14	&
218;9
inability 116:1	backgrounds 22:8
45:15 223:20	baJ 2;16
'liable 3611	ban 137:17
2:18 63:15 65:22	bands n&J
6:4,6,11,16,22	bankruptcy 7:17
7:10 71:24 83:18	218-7
95-9.OS 156-11 17	. .* ____
' ' ’ ’	bar 163:6
22:24 225:8,22	barely 141:19
26:3,25	bars 163:4
:nue 2:20	barton's 67:16
:rage 54:22	base 2Q4:21 226:16
26:15	based 31:6,23 37:9
ards 52:7,11	80:6 81:6,22 83:17
are 30:8 32:4,11	88:6 91:20 97:2
6:1 63:17 66:21	106:20 109:1
9:2,9,14,16 70:24	n4;io,ll 120:18
1:15 75:14 76:21	126:4 211:9 4:8 101:24 106:18 bases 19;17 11:9,11,13 116:16 bask 63:23 65:5
78:15 196:7	66:11 147:11
05:12,25 206:14	basically 19:2 51:2
06:19 223:1 226:3	164:21 166:11
27:1	168:10 187:7 216:3
areness 137:3,5	basis 29:6 8 108:25
38:18 145:2	111:8 125:9 129:23
72:20,25 220:13	187:24 188:9
195:13 220:19 229:7
;ach 1:23	benefit 80:4 82:4 ;ar 21:15,17 85:22 86:13 89:22 ;at 140:22 91:23 102:12 icoming 182:21 177:17
183:3 222:18,19	benefits 93:10 103:6
;er 142:16 143:5	benson 2:19
143:16,19,20 144:2	bertha 35:12
^ginning 1:25 6:7	best 113:22 231:10
10:5 86:21 118:15	better 42:25 93:14 118:18 142:5 164:3 171:10 226:5
217:5	beverages 142:13
jgins 120:7,7,8	beyond 7:19 50:25 121:6 68:7,16 112:5 half 185:1 217:3 211:18 216:15 shaved 124:4 223:5
131:5	bibliographic 42:23
shaving 229:12	bibliography 33:20 Savior 23:19 77:3 87:17 91:3 156:13
80:13 82:3 109:21	big 20:8 61:17 62:2 109:22 111:25 73:5 141:3 158:11
112:20 113:7,9	biggest 52:12
114-7 146-99	billion 79-90
154:22 178:24	biographer 21:19
182:20,25 221:15	bit 49:21 57:2 61:23
toavioral 93:12	63:23 79:25 120:21
126:8 127:22	185:8,16 189:22,23
Saviors 110:6	190:1210:10
115:6,8 153:7	blasingame 179:13
154:24,25	179:15 180:1,7
iliefs 26:23	blasingame’s 179:18
4ieve 9:2 15:1	blend 71:9,12
59:19 77:14 78:1	blended 192:9
90:4 99:4 109:3	body 87:9,18 95:11
117:23 120:19	96:16 136:9 157:3
135:9 188:8 189:11	157:10
192:10 193:19	book 55:5,16,18
200:14,18 202:4	56:5,7,8,9,12
212:24 213:20	books 51:3
214:23 219:3,5	bottle 143:16 144:2
227:25	bottom 118:8
4ieved 26:19 28:4	122:13 130:4 155:8
28:12 81:9	159:7 208:12
;lt 70:11	boulevard 1:23 2:12
2:16
ind 145:12,13	budgets 134:10
46:6	burden 93:22 95:16
ivden 15:2,22,23	99:10 103:11,16
7:20	burdensome 199:1
ys 35:12	burney 173:3,7,13
ind 71:6 115:23	173:17 174:10,14
47:13 191:4 192:6	business 61:8 188:9
97:8 206:12,17	204:21,24
09:19 210:6,14,18	busy 12:16 37:5
10:19	52:19
mds 23:4,9,12,23	button 40:23
9:4 145:9,9 190:1	buy 76:19
90:3	_?_
;ak 6.1 18.15	,V1Q90
0:17 59:24 108:3	' ’ 10 48:6 149:20
caffeine 64:5
I	™’	calculated 134:21
, !,	California 2:8 13:11
ckell 2:20	223-10
efly i'2:1.210._	call 60:17 171:17
ng 17.6,9 18.7	102.1'y iqs-^
9-19 73 91-18	183.17 198 3
189-24
48:18 150:6	n A ~ ^
86-70 187-19	CaUed 11:334:6
56.20	187.19	37-2 40-19 44-19
94-5 195-7 196-19	’ ’ ’
1* q	50:22 55:3 101:8
:	141:3 180:18
)adcast 196:25	ioc 10 iot q
i	. _ .	Ioj:io io/:j
•ademng 111:24	i 95-24 211 11
rnder 35:15 46:22	oiqcoooo/i
7:181:19 112:8	n /
15:20 116:4	hV L „
46:23 147:25	C"ge 226:16
48:5 189:22 191:1	1/1Q ia camels 148:13,13
ii	^010	camino 2:8 >adly 43:13	. mo 1-7 ,	campaigns 192:17 >ken 193:21	£ ®
o3o!?m 1 o	cancer 78:23 79:15 79:21 80:20 81:13
19:24 227:16,20	82;lg 33.4^0 84:5
. ^	85:9’21 86:4’n
0T0 oilot'1^7	87:5,12,21,24 88:20
67 ^	88:23 89:10 90:16
ice 67:16	92:7,13,22 93:1
94:3,7 95:6 96:19 9:9,10,15 10:1,1,9 96:21 97:4,8 98:9 10:10,25 11:1,16,20 98:10,14 99:14	11:24 13:23,25 14:7
100:13 102:3,10	14:17,23 16:7,14,17
103:3,5 105:6	16:22 17:18 18:12
106:18 118:16,19 18:16 19:11,11 21:2 158:10 168:25	21:6,9,20 22:2,5,22
169:24 171:24	25:10 27:8,10 29:4
174:25 179:9	30:12,20 31:2,4
224:18 225:5	32:5,23 46:18 48:10
ipacity 53:1	53:15,18,23 55:12
pita 117:12 120:1 56:23 122:3 123:17 120:4,9,11,12,16,17 145:20 158:13 121:3,9 122:19	185:12,15 190:9,12
123:1,22	191:24 194:1 218:3
ipitalize 62:1	223:3
ire 61:13,16	cast 60:18
irefully 69:8	castigated 144:25
121:25	category 67:9 irload 192:8 115:23,24 146:21 193:11,14 195:22 167:16,18
irolvn 44-17 1R	rniisnl 159-95 15^-6
1 .VJ I U. 1	1 1 . / L
10:14 11:6 12:10	cause 25:16,25
13:6 15:2,10,13,22	154:13 155:15
15:23 16:1,18,25	168:24 169:24
17:20 19:15 20:3	171:23 179:9
21:12 26:1 27:25	215:10
28:3 29:15 30:5	caused 93:22 103:11
32:16 36:4,6 37:1	155:10
37:12 38:9 42:9,18	causes 172:15,16
45:5 46:13 49:13	219:20
53:13 56:22 77:7	ceased 36:12
78:20 80:17 81:21	celebration 52:7
81:22 83:12 86:15	celebrities 151:20
108:9 116:5 166:16	152:2,11,20
185:14,15,18 187:3	celebrity 151:25
191:23 194:11	152:6,15
196:9,11 197:23	celerie 209:12
200:7 210:15 217:6	center 52:13,23,25
217:7,10,11,13	53:5,10
218:16,22 221:3,12	centers 117:25
222:14,20	century 51:5 62:21
ises 1:5 6:22 7:3,5	68:11 137:16
7:13,15 8:14,18,19	138:15_
tain 31:14 57:5	children 133:10
1:13 64:19 109:7	choice 76:19 132:24 33:11 138:22 133:23
45:17 165:16	choices 197:3
67:7 169:21	choose 197:5 200:5
tainly 14:20	choosing 45:19
4:11 142:9 156:6	chose 200:6
tificate 231:1	chronicled 227:19
tify 231:4,11,15	cigarette 3:17 11:5 32:2,4 23:16 26:20 28:15 era 167:4 28:18,21 43:14 60:6 lir 184:5 60:7 67:2 68:2,7,12 illenged 179:11 71:2 72:21 73:19 ince 103:20 171:2 76:3 88:6 93:20 71:14,14 185:23 95:15 99:1 103:9,12 14:1 110:4,5 114:9 115:2 indler 62:20 115:10,13,17 116:9 inge 50:9 93:20 117:1 121:17 123:5 94:16 218:17,18 123:8,12 124:14,16 26:3,20 124:25 125:14,15 inged 82:3 125:16 130:7,22 R6-17 99/3 *91 131-9 17 m-19.9.4
inges 80:13 90:13	136:12,21 137:18
2:4,9,23 94:4	137:21 138:16
5:14 103:9 111:24	140:4 147:12
20:16	154:23 155:9,14
inging 229:11	169:22 178:13
ipter 101:4,14	188:3,4,5,15 192:14
39:1 220:5	193:5,18,20 195:17
iracter 95:22	195:21 206:12
iracterization	227:3
10:24	cigarettes 3:10,14
iracters 109:7	23:5,9,12 28:5 61:6
irge 166:11	67:23 68:16,23 69:1
irges 124:21	69:18 71:10,11,19
irt 138:24 139:19	71:24 72:11,17 74:1
39:21 140:1,1,16	74:15 75:12,12,18
42:10	76:5,20 77:11,16,17
ick 6:6,8 84:15	78:9,11 79:21,22
41:21 144:3	80:3,14,21,21 81:14
;ek 52:5	81:15 82:19,19 83:5
imistry 64:17	83:5,21,22 84:6,6
;rry 104:7	84:12,13,19 85:1,10
85:11,22 86:12
87:23,23 88:21,22	cite 39:19 86:3 89:17 90:15,18,19 97:11 100:9 105:24 91:23 92:6,11,14,16 155:20,24 156:15 92:25 93:3,4,15,22 168:14 188:8 94:6,9,10 95:16,20 191:11 194:9 97:10 98:9,11,18 200:15 203:14 99:15 100:3,14 216:11,20 220:24
102:4,11 103:3,6	cited 45:17 95:9 105:6 113:7 115:5 156:6,10 200:24 116:5,8 117:4,6,9 202:12 216:16
117:14,17 118:21	cites 90:23 91:1 96:7 119:1,22 120:3,4,14 102:19
120:24 123:23	city 2:13,17 58:6
125:5 126:2 129:16	civil 4:8
135:21 136:1,15	claim 45:21 228:13
137:5,25 138:6	claims 181:21 145:10,16 146:9,11 222:10 228:8
146:13,14,16,18	clarification 15:25
147:16 148:5,20,23	clarified 8:3
148:25 150:12	clarify 7:24,24 153:10 164:12 11:22 15:21 112:1
16V1R 167*9	rlass 149-16 150-19
171:23 176:24	classes 37:5
197:21 198:20	classroom 55:14
210:1,7 215:10	claude 155:21 164:4
219:2,8 220:14,20	clawed 228:10
220:22 221:8,18	clear 76:7 119:7 224:18 225:6 174:18 176:10 ?ars 69:6 183:13 221:24
tiema 108:11,22	clearly 222:5
109:21 110:7,8,12	click 40:23
110:17,18,19 111:6	climate 30:3
111:14 112:3,8,11	close 51:1161:14
113:5,16 114:2,7	closed 217:8
115:5,6	closure 217:10
nematic 114:23	coca 62:21 64:19 rcumstances 66:2,4
16:12 24:5 28:19	code 152:21,22
rcumvented	cohort 109:7,9
227:11	cohorts 109:11 tation 40:22 86:8 145:17
90:25 91:16 94:24	coke 62:19,23,23 95:22 96:15 109:5 64:14 66:12
a 62:21 64:19	committee 49:24 6:2,4 52:9 181:8,10 league 185:21 182:22 183:4,6,9,11 leagues 184:20 184:2,3,8,11,12,13 lect 35:1 45:5 184:15
lected 35:22,25	committees 52:4 0:21 74:23 75:1 181:23
40:18,25	common 47:10 66:8 lection 35:7 145:18 172:21,24 6:10 44:5 52:16 178:12 180:4
47:6 193:18	commonly 169:1,8 27:16 169:17 170:1 180:6
lections 52:20	commonwealth 3:20 193:12,18 156:4
96:3	communicated lege 52:9 156:5 176:22
57:2,12 158:9	communicates 82:10 181:25
nbine 163:20	communication nbined 45:8 54:8,12
ne 50:9 52:18	communications 4:9 107:4 19R-R.W 57:16 99Q-1
dunlinumvj / / ./-u\j
59:23 160:20,24	80:11,12 81:20
92:23 194:11	89:12 93:13,14
95:18 198:12	160:5 221:14,20
nes 57:12 188:7	222:21 227:1
12:12 216:21	community's 223:22
ning 55:6 208:12	companies 74:20
nmemorate 59:2	134:12 165:4 183:5
nment 7:21 108:9	187:9 190:20
nments 59:9	199:14
nmercials 192:13	company 2:10,14
93:3 196:25,25	5:11 29:18 30:22
97:20,25 198:14	31:6,24 32:6 62:6
98:15,18,22,23	63:19 67:5 116:21
99:16 200:2,6	123:5 124:14
nmission 95:5	128:14 147:5
17:23 231:24	151:19 156:2,3,16
32:25	156:21 157:1,5,24
nmissioning	158:15 165:2
88:18	166:11,13,17
nmitted 106:17	182:23 185:2,13
07:17	186:16 187:16
190:19 191:10,13
204:19 209:16	comprise 148:14
225:22 226:2,24	comprised 135:19 mparative 126:6 149:10
135:23,24 136:14	comprises 151:1
138:24	computer 43:22 mpare 20:2 66:18 61:21,25 231:9
110:12 115:4 137:4	conceived 195:17
154:24	concern 13:20 20:11
mpared 17:2	concerned 18:8 23:23 66:5,12 79:21 157:20
80:21 81:14 82:19	concerns 20:13 83:5,21 84:6,12 86:16 107:20,25 85:11 108:20,22 222:9
109:6 110:8 111:14	conclude 81:12 112:11 114:7 82:17 83:3 94:16 134:19,23 135:4,15 97:8 129:22
136:4 148:15	concluded 79:3,20 mparing 135:6 80:19 81:1 83:19 138:17 139:11 84:4 86:19 87:21 mparison 135:8 88:20 90:15 92:6,12 139:15 92:23,25 94:6 inmarisnns 66-11 10R-91 164-Q 9^0-4
mpensated 82:2	conclusion 81:5,18 mpensation 87:6 89:10 91:20 220:15 93:17 97:12,16,18 mpensatory 23:19 98:3,6 99:5,6 100:1 mpetent 14:11 101:3 104:5 105:23 78:2,12 106:19 109:13 mpeting 191:4 123:15 126:17 mpetitors 191:7 225:2,7
mpile 59:16	conclusions 79:5 mpiled 141:4 95:13 98:3,24 99:7 mplete 34:23 99:12 100:10,22 228:11 101:9,14,24 102:20 mpleted 34:1 102:22 106:5 mpletely 53:3 125:18,22 127:1 227:6,11 128:9,10 129:23 implex 160:20 166:7 221:17
mpliant 157:10	condition 24:8
implicated 168:8	conduct 49:16,18 imposition 3:17 77:22 80:10 87:12 64:10 71:9 121:17 157:8,14 226:21
mprehensive	conducted 60:4,11
33:19 38:22_ 60:19 61:5 64:4
9:23 75:23 76:8	consumption 3:17 7:20 79:6 87:5,20 117:8,10,11,12 8:19 90:23 91:2 118:21 119:1,3,4,8 6:18,20 108:17 119:11,14,15,23 09:15 153:5 120:2,5,14 121:3,9 iducting 223:14 121:18 122:19 iference 58:5,20 123:1 126:6 135:25 iferred 77:11 136:1 140:25
ifimi 109:4	contact 13:19 59:14
lflating 167:12	contacted 9:1 12:10 lfuse 215:23 12:11,15,19,21 lfused 26:25 13:10,14,17 19:10 7:11 28:21 62:25 63:4
lfusion 27:4,7	contacts 19:2
0:3 55:18 179:6,23	contain 39:7 126:25 lgratulations 157:6 193:6 196:22 0:7 196:22 228:4 231:5
lgress 78:22	contained 15:6 73:11 48:14 99:6 157:8 lgressional 95:4 210:20
mection 12:3	contains 196:23,24
94’3	rrmtpmnnrnnerms
IklV-lUUkl	± f \J.*J 1UU.U,I 1,1 J
lsent 210:5	contemporary 69:1
isider 45:20	169:14 172:23
1:21 67:21 68:1,6	218:19
isidered 95:12	content 45:11
isidering 80:6	142:21 144:1
33:6	contents 3:1 94:25
isistent 102:22	136:7
03:4 122:25 130:8	contested 179:21
31:9,18 190:6	context 44:14
92:1,4	201:23 202:3 204:4
isistently 97:9	215:18,21
8:7,16 99:13	contextualizing 49:5
00:12 102:2 103:1	contiguous 43:21
05:4 130:22 225:4	continue 31:5,22
ispiracy 30:4	60:8 118:20 146:9
15:17	146:12 151:8 164:8
istantly 179:11	continued 130:5
istitutional 138:3	131:16 147:16
istraint 34:4	152:14
lsumer 61:6,11	continues 105:4
1:21 62:22 64:22	continuum 146:22 6:18 131:4
intrary 101:25	87:2 90:24 91:12
intrast 220:13	97:19 98:3,4 99:8
intributing 58:8	101:9,22 105:25
introl 47:10 77:2	106:1,6 108:12
109:4 117:25 224:6	115:14,18 116:9
introversy 26:19	117:5 121:1,11,23
28:5,7 175:12,13,14	122:3 123:2,3 132:4
177:19	132:8 136:2 142:3
nvenient 188:13	142:19 145:23,24
•nversation 56:12	146:15 151:21,22
•nversations 55:1	153:12 156:18
55:2	159:20 160:12
invincible 93:19	161:2,6,24 162:2,3
mvincing 103:8	162:5,7,9,12,13,16
•operative 72:23	163:8,9,24 166:19
224:11	168:6 173:15,16,23
•pies 37:21 39:13	180:21,25 181:10
41:15	182:8 193:9 194:23
»py 19:21,22 20:5	195:4 196:11
35:13 91:4 203:3	199:19,24 201:1
213:1	205:14,24 206:12
irnoration 61-1R	70<v73 707-3 10
. L 9	1U?1 1
•rrect 5:14,15,19	209:13,20 210:15
5:20,23 6:19,20	213:7 214:7,8,12,18
9:24 11:25 14:7	225:18,19 227:3
15:2,7,14 16:8,11	231:6
16:19,20 17:4,8,9	correction 232:8
17:20 18:4,5 21:2	corrections 70:25
21:21,25 22:3,6,9	71:1,10,18 73:18
22:12,15,18 23:7,10	74:14 76:22 232:6
23:13,17 24:4,9	correctly 100:18
25:3,4,6,11 26:5,6	101:13 121:21
26:20 27:1,11 28:22	123:9,14 125:6
29:10 30:23,24 31:7	126:10 129:18
31:25 32:1,7,12	142:7 208:24
39:8,9 40:13,14	209:14,21 210:8,9
41:7,7 42:17 43:6	213:8
45:7,12,15 50:5	correspondence 9:2
51:23 57:21,22,25	20:15 157:3
58:22 64:23 65:16	corresponding
66:17 71:20 74:21	109:9
76:14 77:13,17,24	costs 47:4,5
77:25 79:22 81:1	cough 192:7 193:11
83:22 84:7 86:8	193:14 195:22
insel 7:19 8:2,5	created 114:19,23 23:23 224:18 179:23 182:11
25:2 229:1,3	creating 179:5 31:16 222:7
int 7:6 87:17	creation 171:1
61:13,14 198:25	credit 213:5 214:15
inted 197:17	criminal 207:1
98:2 199:6	criteria 197:10
inter 113:15	criticism 129:24
interbalancing	err 2:24 231:23
68:17	csr 2:24 231:23
inting 85:5	ctr 30:15 190:25 inty 231:3 215:17,21 216:4,13 iple 36:8 39:12 216:17
5:2 85:5 89:25	culpa 178:23
0:7 106:4,7 159:3	cultural 52:14
68:21 211:15	culture 112:9
irse 5:25 22:24	cured 70:10
3:5 27:17 50:19,21	current 7:14 17:16 1:16,18 53:7 61:8 17:21 169:14
2:2 80:5,9 81:9,24	currently 50:12
5-^ RQ-1Q Q9.-17	riirririilnm 17-15
20:12 124:5	curtis 201:21 208:12
71:24 229:9	curve 108:22
irses 50:12,17	cut 189:2
1:8,11,15 53:4	cutoff 51:4
irt 1:1 2:25 4:6	cutting 80:13
2:23 14:1 148:8	cv 1:6 13:6 227:21 31:1,2 d
irts 15:3	danion 158:9
lrty™^ dicing 192:14
Tq if 1Z	193:19 197:20
198:20
^rage 173:9,19 ,	,
74-17 17^17	danger 26:4
74:12 176:12	,	nn -tr
dangerous 77:16
1	nncnn 78:10224:14 ered 9:9 59:11 ,	on
dangers 26:20
142-22
'ering 'J5'4’22 daring 164:5
erS 147 8	data 79:25 117:18
I 114 14	117:20,22,24,25
1?21 22 157-9 118:2^ 119:5 ,	134:14 138:25,25
139:16 140:17	decades 111:4,23 163:25 188:12,14 115:12 133:16,24
itabase 33:25 34:1	december 47:10
40:25 42:11 195:20	decided 31:21,22,23 196:2,15 198:5,8 228:3
itabases 34:22	decision 132:4 35:23 37:25 45:6 166:13
193:23 195:8,19	decisions 31:4
196:5,22	declaring 160:18
ite 9:1 10:22 36:22	decline 120:7,8,20 40:12,16 41:1,1,4,5 121:6 123:7,12,22 91:3 102:15,15 124:15,18,19 170:17,18 207:25 125:15 130:6 212:2,4,5 219:4 131:16
ited 3:19,216:18	declined 121:10 121:19 209:9,10 122:21 131:25 219:17 142:2
ites 90:25	declining 122:15 ly 2:7 41:9 53:9,10 131:23 142:9
61:2,2 83:10 90:18	decrease 93:21 92:15 93:3 94:9 103:11,16,22,23 1 R1 -1 5 7^1 -?1 104-14 15 1R1Q
UV/V/1 vaav/U i
lys 51:1153:9,9	119:14
ad 179:13,17,19	deep 99:24
180:4,6	deepening 111:25
^adly 155:17 156:1	defendant 82:10
156:23 157:7,16	defendant’s 3:12
158:2,17	defendants 7:12
ial 20:8 64:17 67:2	11:12 68:8,17 218:4
123:25	define 149:21 172:2
waling 120:1,2	defining 149:22
123:17	definition 110:15
;als 112:14,15	169:9 170:11,22
salt 10:12 49:10	176:1 181:4
111:2	definitions 163:14
;ath 172:15,16,18	168:21
;bate 27:6 49:6	definitive 67:20
78:20,25 79:10 83:9	degree 220:19
83:14 87:25 88:10	227:10
176:4 177:7,22	delay 182:16
178:1	delete 42:17
;cade 89:3 111:22	delivered 116:2
112:3	deliveries 117:9
222:10
nand 115:21	218:15,21 219:2
23:8,12 124:16,25 221:13 227:17,18 25:4,15,16 126:2 227:20 229:17 29:14,16	230:4
nonstrate 197:13	depositions 21:8 22:5 22:2 50:4 75:5 nonstrates 158:1 172:22 187:7 190:4 nonstrating 217:9
55:25 156:20	derived 87:9
nonstratives	describe 158:7 12:8 160:16 161:1
lials 167:16	described 49:22 ly 166:17 131:9 163:8,12 lying 168:1 192:23 221:13
jartment 69:16	describes 165:22,25 9:25 70:5,13,17,21 177:8
0:25 71:1,10,18	describing 163:10 3:9,18 74:14 163:16
68:13	description 44:3
jartments 72:9	descriptive 192:16
jending 61:22	deshaies 1:10
IRIS	dpsian Q^-?OQ5-15
10:10 158:20	221:15 224:7
jicted 109:8	226:20 227:10
10:7,11 112:23,23	designed 104:21
13:3,5,6,8,15	desire 164:5
14:1 115:6 131:3	desires 150:18
jicting 112:19	despite 130:6
jiction 114:18,23	131:16 133:23
15:5	destroyed 35:8
jictions 114:14	details 14:4 64:15
jonent 232:1	69:7 137:10,12
)osed 15:1 22:5	deter 166:18 167:17
josition 1:20 3:12	168:2
:23 4:5,14 5:13,17	determinants
:1,7,14 7:12 9:23	127:22
1:11,13 14:18	determine 10:1
5:18,22 16:3,7,23	12:24
7:11 18:17,22 33:4	determined 111:8
4:2 105:2 121:15	194:17
85:17,20 186:1,8,9	develop 88:5 168:25
86:14,18,24 187:2	developed 16:2 49:4
89:25 207:21	124:21 17:5,12 218:5,11
iveloping 52:19	disclose 184:14
157:21,24	disclosed 7:15 139:3 ivelopment 60:21 181:8 182:22 183:4
61:25	disclosure 8:11
ivelops 169:19	disclosures 196:19
iviant 113:7	discover 49:9
ivote 52:25	discovered 49:7 rvoted 53:3 69:21
lhs 90:12	discoveries 223:15
agnosis 38:11	discovering 43:10 alogue 176:21 43:18
amond 112:11,12	discovery 224:8,8
112:14,16,20	discuss 28:7 54:25 ego 2:8 55:21 56:22 57:5 etrich 112:25 79:9 215:19
fference 20:2	discussed 57:11 33:14,15 195:11
fferent 11:16 17:2	discussing 182:17 23:23 34:21,22 38:8 215:20
55:9,16 57:2,3,4	discussion 11:2 58:7 64:18 72:9 80:1 58:19,24 101:17
114-16 1 16-1R	discussions 10-^
1 ^}\J U	, sLuj 9 1 I
137:20 141:1	disease 90:13 92:4 149:15,22 150:13	92:10,23 93:22 94:4 150:13,17,18	95:16 99:10 103:11 157:15 160:21	103:16 117:25 166:25 172:25	155:10,15 172:16 218:15 221:17	182:3 215:11 fferentiate 187:8	219:20 225:17 fferently 124:4	226:6 128:13	diseases 24:2 98:8 fficult 37:17	99:14 100:12 102:2 gest 35:5,11	103:2 105:5 179:10 gital 35:13 213:1	225:5 rect 38:23 86:23	disinformation 194:9 197:4 220:4	176:8 rectly 67:1 176:8	disks 33:22 36:8 179:22 208:21	dismissed 218:6 rector 52:13	display 21:15 174:24	disposal 176:15,17 sadvantage 99:23	dispute 128:2 sagree 131:20	154:17 sagreeing 125:9	disputed 124:20 _ 128:3_
seminated 67:11	documented 65:10
sertation 60:16	67:8,13
tinction 117:7	documents 3:22
tribute 74:16	17:6 25:1 28:9 29:5
tributed 72:18	30:6 33:20 34:7,8,9
trict 1:1,2	35:2,4,7,16,18,19,21
ision 1:3	36:10,13,16,19,21
ulged 96:24	36:23 37:3,11,18,24
ligliori 2:5	38:3,13,16 39:7,14
;tor 100:7 105:21	39:20,24 41:16,25
64:1	42:15 43:8 44:6,14
;tors 188:17,22	45:6,23 57:6,10
88:25	60:25 62:6,14 63:2
anient 1:8 11:15	63:6,10,16 64:8,23
4:16,17 35:14	65:12 67:9 69:25
7:20 39:11,22	71:17,23 72:2,4,5
0:20 41:6,10 42:8	74:19,23,25 75:1,17
2:10 43:4 45:19,20	81:24 83:12 96:14
5:21 46:3,8,11,15	125:20,21 128:14
6:25 47:12,14,15	138:24 149:13
8:15 49:2,8 50:1	155:9 156:16,25
6-14 16 91 93 9.4	157-36 99 17Q-3
6:12 98:24 99:22 192:19 194:2,10,14 9:24 101:5,11,12 195:3,5 196:2,6,14 01:15,16 102:5,18 196:16 197:15 03:8 104:5,7,8	198:4 200:13,14,15
05:15,16,16,18,22 202:3,7 203:7,8 05:25 106:2,4,6,15 211:25 215:13,21 06:16,17 121:16 216:4,6,11,16 222:3 21:22,25 122:3	222:5,18,24 223:5
28:16 129:13	223:10,12,14,21
39:3 155:20,21,24 224:22 225:8,22 56:2,20,21 157:11 226:2,8,17,24 228:8 57:25 158:6,15,23 228:9,16 229:15
64:4,16,20 189:6	doing 40:19 52:8 89:16 195:15 53:10 54:15 57:10 01:20 202:8,10,12 158:8 194:9 205:25 02:16,23 203:1,6 222:9
03:10,13,14,24	donald 2:3
04:5,8,13,25 205:2	donation 180:12
05:5,8,21 206:10	dosages 135:20
09:22 213:2	double 141:21
16:18 222:16	doubt 30:3 179:5,23
>w 38:3	driving 139:9,23
>wnplay 166:17	140:13 142:22
>wnplaying 168:1	144:6,10,19,22
>zen 51:2 85:5	145:1
198:6	dropped 122:19
•	3:11,23 5:6 6:13	drug 110:11,12
8:16 11:10 20:25	113:4,10,14,20
21:18 28:10 33:3	114:19,19 115:1,8
35:1 50:3 54:20,25	137:25 153:8,16,23
56:2,4,14 57:11,14	154:5,12
57:19 60:2 64:21	drugs 115:3,9
66:13 74:18 75:10	153:12,20
77:5 80:18 82:15	drunk 144:22 145:1
83:2,17 88:18 89:25	duces 3:12 11:13
91:13,18 94:2 96:1	17:7
107:12 121:14	due 217:10
131:14 145:5	duke 63:18
147:21 151:19	duly 5:2
154:21 156:10	duplication 33:24
160:7 168:19 173:3	dynamic 123:17,25
173:6,13,17 174:10	e
174-14 93 175-9 1R -„ _____ . _ „—
A x	229-1
177:11 178:5	'
, „ , _ , „ ,.	earlier 15:119:6
179:15 180:1,7,16	6 2 101 20
180:20 181:8 182:5	nfi-24 139-16
182:6,22 183:4,21	140:21 144:24
184:2,18,24 204:8	lg4;25 185:16 205-22
J ^ ^	201:20 206:16
•aft 13:3 19:12	219-1 22M3
•aw 79:4 87:18	224:19 227:19
117:7 220:21	228:21
;ario108:16	early 36:11 109:24
195.10	j
® ^	109:25 112:17
•pw
. ,	136:20,23 138:14
ink 61.10 62.5,6	140*21 148*21
62:11,15,25 63:4,8	179-25 181*24
64:9 65:16,23 66:19	|8s;2>|,
I.4?.19 14,5;^ „	192:8,15 193:3 •inking 139:9,23
140:13 142:14,23	210:20 221:7
144:5,10 20	easjl 6&23
■inks 61:9 64:5,6	.
■iye 142:13 145:2	eaSt L23
inomic 50:20	emphatically 208:23
0:20 61:8	empirical 109:16
ted 55:14	employ 231:15
tor 58:9	encompass 211:19
icational 22:8	encounter 37:24 80:12 202:10
ect 3:16 80:15	encountered 46:8 1:8 89:16 121:5,16 202:9
29:14 179:12	encourage 66:24 active 179:12 166:1,15
actively 116:3	encourages 145:7 sctiveness 125:16 166:8 167:25
sets 136:8 221:9	energy 176:6
iciency 43:24	engage 109:22 110:3 Icient 42:24 146:22
iciently 187:22	engaged 23:19 3rt 24:12 34:22 56:12 148:8
2:20 115:20	engaging 147:24 16:25 190:25 156:4
91:1215:25	engle 1:5 10:5
jrts 123:6,11	enjoy 143:5
94-15	entire R6-14 16?^
66:12,17 215:23	99:22 100:9 101:3
24:11	101:15,16 102:21
ler 26:17 28:23	102:23 106:2,3
2:15 35:22 71:25	110:18 149:24
3:23 74:11 75:14	204:10,19 205:9
6:23 77:4 84:9	entirety 101:25
5:11 93:22 103:12	entities 67:22 68:15
06:25 113:13	68:22
14:4 121:9 127:11	entitled 11:12
28:23 129:6	121:16 219:19
47:22 179:22	entity 73:5
90:8 199:5 206:20	entries 46:2
18:13	entry 41:24 46:3
2:8	enumerated 101:8
ctions 172:14	environment 43:12
ctronically 41:16	168:8 179:5
ments 29:15	epidemiological
ins 1:11	80:6 97:8 98:7,16
erge 136:7	99:12,19 100:11
phasis 57:2,3	102:1 103:1 105:3,9
40:8	106:11,12 107:4,14
225:17,21 226:4,22
ddemiologist 79:8 211:24 212:5
100:6 107:9 225:25	exactly 13:4 14:3 226:11,21 34:25 46:7 54:22 ddemiologists 95:23 109:13 226:14 130:23 132:12 ddemiology 100:5 134:15,16 184:6,16 104:17 225:4 202:5,15 213:15
a 113:20 197:24	exam 38:23 194:9
213:20,23	examination 3:2 5:4 red 34:5 184:22 197:4 ror 170:25 171:6 217:25 225:15
171:10,11	examined 5:3 77:15
pecially 123:19	example 15:9 38:9 quire 2:3,7,11,15 42:12 44:17 46:15 2:19 46:21 67:3,15 sence 65:8 133:2 138:23 139:10 137:21 224:12 147:5 150:9 156:24 sentially 81:20 165:12 166:9 172:1 89:15 99:1,19 172:3 177:4 189:24 120:22 141:7 179:1 222:23 226:13
192:8 211:14	examples 55:23,25 tahlislied 1 fn-1 57-Q 6?-^ m-1
223:9	222:11
timate 37:18	exceedingly 175:6 124:11 226:14,15 177:13
timated 120:18	excel 118:3
timates 171:11	excellent 173:9,19 1:10,11,12,13,14 174:12 175:4,21 1:15,16 167:4 176:2,13 177:12
aluate 66:10	exception 232:6
99:23 226:6	excerpt 105:1
aluation 49:10	excerpted 90:1
67:19 77:18 92:20	excerpts 98:1
107:3 183:16	excessive 178:11,19 204:22 205:2 179:16 180:2
aluations 78:22	exchange 20:16
aluative 67:7	exchanges 55:1
ents 79:17	excitement 168:16
idence 4:15 26:24	exciting 167:6
28:24 30:8 32:4,11	excluded 228:24
32:17 93:19 95:11	exclusive 168:18
95:14 103:9	excuse 182:24
act 9:1 109:4	executive 86:20 148:24 170:18 98:25 122:6,10
27:15 142:5	86:18 95:3,8 96:17
libit 3:8,12,13,16 102:8 105:23 118:6 :18,20,22 6:11,14 118:25 120:13 :25 11:8,11,20	139:20 155:6 162:1
2:8 14:6,19 17:7 164:2 168:20 8:22 33:4 60:3	194:10 201:19
7:7 89:23 91:6,8 215:5 218:14 5:10 97:25 105:2 219:17 226:23
18:6 121:12,15	expertise 44:25 24:14,23 125:24 99:21 152:9 154:18 30:5 141:24 155:6 154:21 155:2
69:4 201:18	experts 7:1112:25 05:18,19 207:22 49:6 53:14,18,23 09:2,3,5 219:11,12 54:2,6 77:19 139:5 23:22 224:17 140:3
27:15,15,24 228:7	expires 231:24 28:23 229:16,18 232:25
libits 3:7	explain 221:6
st 65:14,18 66:16	explicit 129:22 50:3 154:14 158:6 158:7
sts 166:3	explicitly 125:12,18 landed 190-R 1 ?.R:fi 1 R1 :?4 .IS
W itllkjll/ll	1 1 1 .
51:8	exposed 116:7
>ect 195:10	express 137:2 171:9
>ectation 81:7	expressed 164:16
>enditures 130:7	171:13 186:17
31:18	187:17 218:13,14
>erience 9:20	223:22
26:7	extensive 60:5,11,19
>erimentation	61:5 123:6 156:13
66:1,8,16,19	extensively 68:13
67:18,25 168:2	extent 60:13,24
>erimenting	64:13 100:18 176:3
64:12	195:2,2 224:6
>ert 3:10 6:15,22	extremely 224:14
:2 8:17,25 9:14,15	eye 45:10
:17,21,22,25 10:24	f
2:7’25 14:17 16'8	face 92:18
7,23	18-21 19'6,20	fact 34:i6 58:6 40’7 44’5 7
7:24^48^53^ 13,14
124:9 132:^^65:6
l' 5 603	166:4,7,16 174:21 6:21 77:6 85:19
178:2 179:10 182:6	fence 166:24
182:17 205:21	field 66:9
211:3,5 215:10	fifth 161:15,15
224:10 229:24	figure 187:14 ctor 112:22 211:10 212:21
ctors 65:3,5	figures 120:17,18
139:14	file 43:21,23
ctory 69:11	files 67:5 193:2
cts 215:13	film 112:22 113:18
il 139:2	films 108:18,19 ir 56:11114:8 110:19 112:24 137:14 141:9 113:20 206:18 154:17 180:19 208:22 210:4
190:16 191:9,11	filter 88:11 97:12 196:12 199:7 149:12 188:2,3 irly 129:12 210:20 211:2,4,9,13
irness 203:6	filtered 77:10 79:21
11	37:5 52:4 229:4 79:22 80:2,3,20 Us 212:10 81:14 82:18 83:4,21 miliar 5:16,20 84:5,12,19 85:10 39:3 42:10,20 74:17 87:23 88:22 90:14 91-14 174-n Q1-?? 11 95
mous 197:22	145:22 146:13,16
r 7:19 49:12 207:9 147:22,23 148:13 mi 73:12	148:15,19,23 149:3
rther 83:13	150:6,11 219:2,8
scinating 65:7	221:8 224:18
shion 113:7	filters 80:7,12 81:7 ster 132:1 81:23 82:1 88:1 t 141:3 89:15 100:2 167:4 vorable 176:12 221:17 224:23
ature 152:19	final 20:11 228:22 atured 151:24 231:18
aturing 152:5,15	financial 18:6 bruary 185:18 182:22 183:4 d 176:7 184:14
deral 4:8 7:20,23	find 37:19 40:25 12:23 14:1 19:11 43:20 49:24 135:18 53:23 95:4 117:22 150:10 154:7 190:9 182:18 196:10,13 el 14:10 202:7
els 77:1	finding 86:12 126:4 minine 61:16 161:7
dings 80:22 98:25 I focus 72:19 98:23 24:3 128:4	163:4,6 194:18
e 20:19 108:5	197:4 201:15 215:8
40:20,23 206:7	focused 12:17 09:7 108:23 153:9 161:7
ely 61:1	focusing 98:23
gertips 135:9	folks 48:23
ish 181:14,18	follow 31:19 49:25 land 18:3 227:22 137:14 171:16 29:22 173:2 185:6 191:15 n 113:24 189:12 202:25 205:4
89:13,15	followed 145:21
ns 69:1	following 48:21 it 5:2 9:5 34:7 203:12
1:5 60:4 77:9,10	follows 5:3
0:9 111:18 122:10	footnote 7:1,7 14:9 23:5 125:2 127:21 14:12 79:12 85:25 29:11,11 130:18 86:1,3,8 97:17 38:2 144:10 201:21
55:12 163:4,6	footnoted 97:16
66:23 168:23	foregoing 231:4 7R-91 91 911 9^9-^
A^*^A	luittu l iv.
23:5	forget 36:7 118:15
ithand 176:18	118:18 148:24
: 47:7	211:16
s 218:11	forgetting 211:24
yor 64:14,18 81:4	forgotten 219:4
vored 77:17	form 4:12 8:8 16:10
8:11 167:9	27:21 31:9 32:25
wed 128:20,23,24	37:16,23 38:20
ws 129:1 227:9	44:10 45:14 46:20
3r 2:4	47:23 48:3,25 64:25
rida 1:2 2:20 15:3	66:1 67:25 68:19
3:24 68:23 69:2,4	74:9 78:5,15 83:7
9:10,12,16,24 70:9	85:14 87:15 91:25
0:12,17,21,25	100:16,24 105:12
1:17,23 72:8 73:2	106:23 107:24
3:5,17,25 74:6	110:15 129:4
5:11,18,24 76:9,15	132:10 133:1,19
6:17,22,24	134:1 141:18
rida's 70:13 72:1	143:14 147:1 148:2
2:5 73:8	150:1,20 152:8,17
te 70:10	153:19 154:2,16
158:19 159:1,22
160:14 163:14	francisco 223:11
168:4 172:10	fraud 88:11 224:13
174:16 175:24	fraudulent 124:21
177:15 186:20	free 74:1
187:19 188:13	freedom 52:18 190:22 195:7 57:20
198:10 204:4,13	frequently 9:22 220:9 221:11 222:2 40:11
223:25 224:21	friday 1:24 53:6
225:11,24 231:8	friedman 2:19 rmal 52:21 178:22 front 99:22 209:6
rmality 4:9	frontier 99:21
rmat 118:3	ftc 89:17 121:23 rmed 144:18 123:10 126:3,12,25 rms 137:19 127:7 128:12,21 rmulation 166:10 129:1 130:1,19,21 192:9 131:1 141:25
rth 4:6 87:6	full 50:4 77:9,17 rward 217:12 78:11 81:4 91:16 stering 30:2 94:22 101:4 104:6 208:21 105:18 116:4,7 nnrl TVg'VvIR 19.9*11 14R-R 167-Q
97:9 98:8,10,16	220:6 224:6
99:13 100:12 102:2	fuller 95:24 96:15
102:10 103:2,5	fully 65:9 94:19
105:5 166:6 169:3	99:23 174:19 223:1
224:9 225:4	fun 198:21
undation 64:25	function 93:16
100:16 105:12	fund 158:10 180:13
106:23 126:20	further 132:1 176:2
129:4,8 132:10	216:23 231:11,15
133:19 134:1	232:4
142:25 143:14	furthermore 208:22
144:13 147:1 148:2	future 10:10
150:1,20 152:8,17	g
153-19 154-2	-
ijh.z	3-2146-4 6
160:14 161:5	,,
___ „	gallup 188:13
167:20 168:4	m/i m
„ __. „	game 104:10
175:24 207:5	*
____ _	gaps 169:13,13,21
225:24 226:10	170-5
227-5	’
^ ^	gateway 137:25
gay 2:11151:12
185:1
try 185:22	83:18,19 84:3 85:4
se 2:7 3:3,6 5:5	124:3 134:13
:10 6:12 7:18 8:1,7	136:18 145:6 149:2
:15 10:23 11:9	159:17 160:17,23
6:15 20:18,24	163:11 173:3,15
7:15 28:1 31:18	187:23 188:15
2:20 33:2 39:5	191:21 215:22
5:18 46:24 47:25	218:9 219:19
8:8 59:22 60:1	general’s 57:24 58:2
5:20 68:5,14,21	58:9,13,17,21 59:5
0:14 72:25 73:24	59:11,18 80:22
4:12 76:16 78:8	84:11,18,25 85:8
9:1 81:10 82:5,14	89:13 118:10 119:5
3:1,15 84:2 85:17	119:10 120:21
7:19 88:16 89:2,24	121:4 123:19
1:7,11 92:2 93:25	125:11 126:16
4:15 97:1 99:3	128:5 129:21 139:2
00:20 101:6,19	142:11 147:8
02:17,24 104:11	152:25 159:23
05:20 107:1,11	160:3,10,19 163:18
08:4,7 110:25	180:21 181:8
91-n 196-??	1 R^-11 91Q-1R
31:12 132:15	generally 36:6 37:24 33:13,21 134:4 60:21 131:1,8 41:14,23 143:10 135:21 153:3 43:18 144:16 171:12 186:12 47:19 151:15,18 187:5
52:12,23 153:22	generals 223:3
54:9,20 158:22	generated 40:17 59:5 160:6,22 118:16,19
61:11163:19	generic 8:22 11:3 67:23 168:5 169:6 15:6 19:12 24:24 72:11 174:22 46:17
75:17 180:15	george 209:15
81:3,19 183:1	georgia 70:12
84:17 185:10	getting 45:8 177:5 19:1 220:8 221:10 192:7
21:25 223:24	ginning 175:13
24:20 225:10,16	girls 35:13
26:1 227:13	give 8:22,24 9:22 29:14 230:2 11:3,6 19:16 24:24 leral 37:4 44:14 25:18 29:17 44:17 8:4 64:3 80:19,25 55:20 89:3 94:22 1:12 82:16 83:2,10 113:21 144:15
145:25 156:9	145:25 155:5 158:5
170:18 187:24	158:14 160:8
200:1 202:3 210:5 171:20 176:16,18 222:11	184:9,19 185:8
ven 38:24 55:15 189:21 191:7 194:7 134:15 136:19	195:1 197:3 207:15
154:11 205:11	210:14 215:8
218:8	217:12 220:1,3
ving 25:22 48:4	gold 192:6,6,8,11,12 132:19 185:17 192:17,21 193:13 ancingly 121:24 197:6,15,18,24,25 antz 108:17 109:2 198:11,15,18,23
antz’s 111:1,17	golden 55:5 56:6
114:10	good 5:6,7 41:19
i	5:21 18:10 20:19 56:8 108:3 113:22 31:9 37:3,16 39:11 117:10 149:19 42:16 48:3,25 50:25 175:10 184:24 51:2 61:23 64:16 188:11,12 193:12 67:25 78:5,15 83:7 193:15,15 200:14 89:5 100:19 102:5 216:11
105:12 107:13	goods 60:17
19Q-4 m-10 141-7	pnrpp 50-94
151:11 152:9	118:16,19
160:15 161:5,9	governmental 78:21
163:14 181:20,22	graduate 51:16
182:14 183:23	grained 61:1
185:8 186:20	grand 2:12,16 67:4
187:19 194:5	grant 52:10
196:20 197:4	grants 52:15
200:11 202:16	graph 162:18,25
207:13 216:9	great 17:14 67:2
221:22 227:5 229:2	greater 135:12
les 53:9 156:7	139:22
213:6 214:16	grew 69:17 70:5
ling 6:7 8:22 18:13	72:9,10 73:13
20:4,19 21:14 24:6	group 2:21 31:7,24
25:9,13,15,18,24	32:7 88:2 93:23
26:22 27:3 28:10	103:12 163:21
32:9 44:13 46:1	172:12
59:1,23 100:4 112:2	groups 144:21
112:5 115:18	growing 68:3 70:9
116:22 128:18	73:3,10 223:2
135:22,24 136:13	grown 70:16,21 137:12 140:12,15
>ws 89:17	hard 6:4 105:18
>wth 70:1	116:10 130:21
iss 17:5 35:15	138:22 170:16
5:5 56:4 98:1	hardy 2:16 192:11
04:3 134:6 137:8	harford 1:12
40:11 143:8	harm 140:5
87:14 197:10	harms 47:5
99:9 211:14	harvey 179:1
27:21 228:3	hazard 155:17
dance 59:10	156:1,23 157:7,17
de 197:2	158:2,17
fport 1:22	hazardous 78:10
Y& 220:7_ 174:3
h	hazards 3:9 170:8
ig 179:1 180:16	178:10,18 179:15
i £09
80:20 181:8,23	i5U,z _
82:5,6,22 183:4	head 166:10202:1
2	heading 101:8
ig's 183:21	124:24 127:18
3it 132:20 159:8	heal 44,22
59:14,19 160:11	health 3:9 27:1,6
_ ’___________9.8*1? 4Q-6 SR-S 9.0
62:22 163:3,22
80:4,11,12 81:19
)its 26:15
deman 15:13	83:9 85:1,22 86:13
6:1 37:2 108:9	88,4 89,12 91,23
09:1 185:14	93:13,14 102:11
f 51:5 80:14	103.6 118.10
?2.16	124:21 137:3
, ' !	138:18 139:5,5,6 lway 59:1
A	0/1	140:4,5 144:9
299	149:13 155:17
ided 89:25	156:1,23 157:7,9,16
21:14 206:2	158.2,17 160.1
07.21	168:14 170:8
A: ,nii in	172:23 176:4,23 iding 6:13 11:10
,,A	177:22 178:1,10,18 idling 55:4 ’ ’
i*n ig	179:7,8,15 180:1 jpen 160:18
P A in,	182:16 184:1 188:2 jpened 10:4
19*2 134-9	219:8 220:18 221:9
' .	221:14,19 222:7,8 jpening 177:18
P 1/.CH	222:21 223:21
jpens 145:11	^ ^
jpy 88:13 212:25	226:25
hear 12:13 13:7
65:19 185:3
;ard 28:25 29:9	historians 55:13 30:10,21 185:10,13 65:11,15,22 67:12
tarings 79:13	historical 3:8 45:25 iavily 151:2 48:7 54:18,21,24 ;avy 151:9 56:17,20 63:9,16 lighten 164:17 65:7 66:5 74:23,25 iightening 164:11 78:19 79:9 80:1 iist 112:16 97:2 109:24 136:7 iists 112:11,12,14 137:6 138:11 112:20 177:17 193:5 197:5 ad 37:1 88:7 211:3
131:10	historically 145:12 iller 174:24 175:3 167:14
175:19,20 176:14	histories 23:1,21 176:17 177:6,11 24:14 52:16
filer's 178:5	history 11:4 22:11 4p 110:4 165:8 24:21 26:7,9 27:24 175:14 186:23 28:8,17 29:3,13 197:2 30:2,25 31:12 38:12 aped 62:12 44:25 46:10,22 49:5 apful 17:12 39:18 50:20,22,23 51:17 99Q-91 S9-n 17 S4-1Q SS-S
111 ^1U 1	/
Teinbefore 4:6	60:18 61:5,8 67:1
Teto 4:3	68:12 72:6 76:3,22
Tetofore 231:7	80:7 110:18 124:5
Titage 52:14 69:5	136:12,20,24 143:3
erarchy 139:4	147:18 155:2,3
gh 144:11 166:10	188:2 192:15
188:9 193:16	193:14 195:21
195:13 204:21	202:13 218:17,19
gher 87:22 88:21	hit 119:4
90:14 92:5,11,24	hold 75:20
94:5 226:18,19	holocaust 55:6 56:6 ghly 92:17 149:18 home 35:12 143:17
171:15	143:21
11	175:14	homework 143:22
ndrance 166:4	honest 14:10 38:4
red 48:10	186:11
storian 43:13	honor 51:1
45:24 54:17 65:2	honors 50:22
66:7 67:22 68:1,6	hoped 49:9 80:3,12
78:18 79:9 84:10	81:20
219:24 223:19	hopefully 185:6 224:15
Ding 42:24 49:24	illustrate 215:15 sted 195:22 216:7
: 112:16	images 115:22
ir 59:23	imagine 5:21 21:12
irs 51:19,21	immediately 138:3
isekeeping	impact 64:14 115:6
27:14	impede 183:24
Fered 121:9	import 104:6
vers 120:6 121:5	importance 144:19 bbard 2:12 222:7
®e 105:16	important 93:21 ®ely 229:21 103:11,15,18,22 ®hes 2:12 104:1,14,18 111:21 ®heshubbard.com 115:11 127:24 :13 178:2 222:9
ti 64:12 75:9 77:8	improve 151:3
17:21118:7 125:1	inability 129:12
55:7 191:16	incidence 112:9 man 136:8 225:19
68:14 184:1 227:3	include 7:5,7 14:9 mans 89:22 14:13 16:5 35:18 mnr 67^ IQ-77 40-7 6Q-6
idred 101:23	192:22 193:9,10
idreds 36:21	included 8:19 17:23
93:1,1 199:7	44:6 60:21 83:10
Dothesizing 89:14	90:8 96:2 193:20,24
i	201:20 203:13
includes 17:17 a 19:17 172:20 _ „ „
42’14
ntical 218:24
ntified 125:3 'ncludmg 23:2,21 26:1 127:23	24:14 60:7 139:9
31:22 161:10	155.3 159.25 231.5
t-r 1 rc r	income 18:7
ntines 165:6	. .	^
,n i~	inconsistent 146:22 ntify 17:13
J	147-24
56:20 158:23
60:24 225:20	incorrect 131:3
28:16 229:3	173:18
increase 90:17
ntifying 156:21
ntity 18:9	92:14 93:2 94:8
136 17	104:2 113:11
i	123:23 165:5
gal 153:8,12,16 .
53:20,23 154:12 lncreased 117:4’14
118:21 119:1,4,11
119:15,22 120:24
creases 169:20	37:25 43:14 44:21
creasing 120:14	45:1 46:23 47:3
130:6 131:17	49:4 56:16 60:12,14
151:13	60:15,19,22,25
creasingly 148:14	61:10,11 62:5,11,12
dependent 91:21	64:1 65:3,8,23,24
213:15	66:7,8,12,14,20
dicate 41:5 98:22	67:9 68:3 70:10
168:9 205:16	72:7,12 75:5,6 76:3
213:21	77:19 78:23 81:24
dicated 15:5,11	81:25 83:12,13 88:3
90:4 159:12 161:20	88:10,11 89:14,20
226:17	93:8,11 116:10
dicates 41:9,24	117:9 120:11
42:3 174:19	123:20 124:2,2
dicating 89:21	125:21 128:7
177:25 215:9	131:24,24 133:8
dicator 157:20	134:13,18,20 145:6
directly 176:8	148:7 149:3,6,12
179:22 208:21	150:9,22,24 155:13
dividual 16:6,21	157:19 166:21
71-71 77.-1fi.1Q 7/VQ	167-16 175-n
24:11,15,19,23 25:1	178:25 179:4,22
25:8,10 26:4,14,18	180:14 181:6,9,12
26:21,23,25 27:2,8	182:1,6,8,10 183:21
27:14,17 28:4,11,16	188:16 190:24
28:19,21,25 29:6,8	191:1 215:7 220:13
29:8,16 30:4,7,9,21	220:18 221:5,15,18
31:2,3,16,21 32:2,5	222:3,6,22 224:7
130:2 145:19 147:3	225:8 227:10
dividualized	228:20
25:19,22 27:22 28:9	industry’s 30:25
29:4,15 31:1,17,20	49:10 125:21
32:9 145:25 146:2	128:11 133:12
dividually 136:9	147:10 155:3 160:4
dividuals 21:19	160:8 204:10,20,23
22:24 25:13 27:9	205:3,8 215:22,23
28:14 54:13 57:15	218:18 224:8,11
59:3,7 74:1	ineffectual 130:9,20
dustries 60:6,23	131:19
61:4 66:19 67:13	influence 124:24
dustry 3:8,9 11:5	127:24 129:15
31:6,11,24 32:7	136:3 34:9 35:3,4,23
luenced 153:24 96:19,21 97:4 luences 109:21 102:10 103:5 36:4	106:19 161:17
luencing 31:13 174:25 215:18
Drm 131:4 174:8	institute's 86:4 74:9 159:12 161:20
ormation 16:6,18	intake 226:15 227:2
8:6,8 24:10 27:16	intend 32:21 46:18 7:23 28:2 48:13,14 137:2,8 138:16 8:20,23 49:19 61:9 139:20 145:3 2:18 169:1,7,16,25 154:19 189:18 01:22 202:23 191:22 194:2 195:5 15:9 221:19 228:5 196:16
Drmative 136:11	interactions 229:3
ormed 10:21	interest 14:1 39:15 3:15 173:8,18 44:20 49:13,21 71:7 74:11,19 190:8 75:6 138:6 157:18 25:7 176:3 208:20 arming 175:6 231:17
77:13	interested 72:6,16 ;redients 64:11 150:11 157:24 libit 1R9:15 919/1 R
Hitl 1 Vy / • ^ j 1 >/	111 |/vl V/kJ 1/111^	I U • y
80:21 221:4	47:18 69:4,22 71:5
tially 19:9 119:9	110:3 138:10,10
23:7	143:5 188:19
tiate 153:16	192:13
tiated 151:23	interface 43:23
52:4	interfaces 193:12
tiation 145:8,14	interject 126:20
53:2,7,24 154:5,14	interjecting 15:24
54:22,24	internal 52:10 57:6
uries 25:25	60:25 62:6 63:2
ury 25:17 215:11	64:8 71:17 72:2,5 nates 75:12,13,18 78:22 81:25 83:12
6:19	125:19 128:11,14
[uire 137:12	155:9 156:1,16,21
95:1	156:25 157:22
ide 99:24	158:15 194:1
tance 43:2 65:15	223:20 225:22
titute 29:24 30:1	226:2,24
0:11 78:24 79:15	internally 155:16 5:21 86:11 87:5,12 international 126:7
7:21 88:20 89:10	141:4 2:22 94:3 95:6
ternet 67:10	iron 60:17,18 61:3
203:11 220:2 223:6	irrespective 218:10 terpret 14:11 218:12
104:13,23 138:22	island 2:4
terpretation	isolated 104:7
139:25 140:1	issue 16:7 18:9 162:18 163:5,25 21:20 23:21 24:14 172:24 177:3 27:5,25 28:9 32:3 terpreted 139:13 32:10 38:4 49:1 terpreting 162:24 78:13 86:16 110:22 terrupt 126:19 113:13 114:5 133:3 tertwining 136:23 159:24 169:23 terviews 46:12 174:9 227:7,9
troduced 5:9	issued 160:17 184:25 210:19 178:22
troduces 192:10	issues 11:6 14:14 troduction 62:20 45:25 49:23 54:18 80:7 54:21,24 57:17 64:3 vest 151:1 77:23 125:12,17 vestigated 114:20 223:16
114:22	item 17:13,17 48:6 vestiantirm RR-1Q 10^-R17fv^
110:22	199:22
vestigations 85:20	iteration 20:10
87:1,1,4,11,20 95:5	211:4 228:17,18,21
95:6,7 96:18 102:9	ix 129:10 131:15
vestment 151:10	j
vincible 164:21	“ 63-19 22
voice 18:20 229:8	*! , ' ’ m
.	lackson 186:10
voices 18:10,12,14	231*3
18:16,19 227:21	. , ' ia
volved 11:113:23	70 „
16:13,16 19:11	f"*3 178=‘° *79:15
,,.,n,1,inK.n	January 57:25
21.20	2/. 10 36.1 /	118*11 119*13 49:14 54:6,9,13
M _ ’ ’	lbt 1:6,10,11,12,13
58:16,23 59:4,8	J
™^-2° 116:21	jenn.fer ’2;1V19
I80-20 191-18	82:9 217:3,23
19f21 10	jeopardy 203:9 volvement 5812
volves 52.10,14	186;18 187:2
volving 104:17	lg9;25 197;23
185:12	198:19 200:6
i 50:11 175:4,5,21	kept 114:17
76:2 177:12	kicking 143:23
in 174:23	kids 143:22
inson’s 35:12	kind 12:17 13:3 ling 184:15 17:12 19:3,12 36:10 it 88:2 37:2,6 38:11 40:23 singly 52:4 43:3,17,23 45:16 ley 1:13 7:16,25 49:4,10,25 51:1 :12 217:6,7,10,12 54:24 61:2 63:23 18:2,5,12,16,22 70:4 71:6 78:19 les 2:7 96:5 97:17 108:22 iesday.com 2:9 112:16 114:14 eph 121:18 120:5,8,19 138:13 Ige 3:19 201:21 139:4,12,15 141:6 08:12,16 143:5,6 145:7 Igment 109:25 154:11 158:4 165:7 71:17 177:25 165:12,15 170:19 79:18 170:25 182:11 Igments 177:2 185:11 189:21 y 79:13 231:24 191:18 197:12 nping 165:14 198:21 200:12 ip 1R-4 909-10 ?n-n??9-?
V71 -r\J. 1 Z-	IMllUkl “T / .KJ *J / .“T UU.J
ors 47:20 48:10	112:12 140:13
8:20 49:14,19	147:14
y 45:2 158:14	kitchen 34:6
00:2 229:24__kluther 2:21
k	knew 8:3,22 9:16
-26:4 88:14 93:12
isas 2:13,17 58:6	„ „ _ _ _
’	174:20 221:15
iowitz 2:19	^ ^
222-22
>owitz.com 2:21	'
■p 19:25 37:19	w 5:136:29:18
9:17,18 40:4 41:12	i0:17,25 12:5,22,24
1:14,19 43:15,25	13:3,25 14:3,3,9
5:17 64:22 149:5	16:21 19:15 20:8
;ps 1%:2	22:4,7,10,13,16,19
nble 3:20 209:12	22.23 23.1,4,8,11
09:24	23:15,18,20,22,25
it 188:1 189:23	24:2,4,13,16,19,22
90'5 191 * 14 14 25	25:3,5,8 26:3,9,13
10;il,13;i8 2li:4	26:14,17,18 27:10
11*7 13 212*13 14	27.14,16,22,24
it's 213:5 21*16	28:15,18,20,23 31:3
32:15 34:7 35:6,10 37:22 38:3,8,12,22
39:1,2,19 45:2,16	197:8 198:17,22
47:19 49:22 55:9	199:1,3,11 200:22
56:25 59:1,3,6,7,8	202:12,18 203:1,9
61:20,22 64:15,17	206:21 207:9
68:10,25 69:6 70:4	208:17 209:8
70:8 71:8,11,12,13	210:10 211:21
71:25 72:1,16,19,24	212:2 213:10,17,23
73:1,7,11,13,16,22	213:25 214:1,22
73:25 74:4,5,11,13	215:1,16 218:3
75:10 76:17,23,24	220:12 222:19
78:24 83:9 87:17	224:22 226:13
88:3,4 92:17,19	227:7 93:6 96:1,19 99:20 knowing 49:14 99:22 100:1 101:14 knowledge 3:8
103:7 104:2,9	37:12 44:15,24
106:12 109:6	47:10 71:22 72:2
111:21 112:8,24	77:4 81:25 83:13
114:3 115:25 116:3	89:20 126:23
120:20 121:5,25	157:21,24 160:4,8
122:1 123:16 124:8	168:24 169:22,23
127:6,11 128:25	170:24 172:21,24
19.9*6.7 m-1.fi.10	176-15 17R-1?
134:9,14,15,17,22 188:25 189:8 221:5
136:10,25 138:10	knowlton 175:15
138:21,21 140:9,14	known 38:7 42:19 140:24 141:1 73:2,8,17 81:25 142:12,16,18,21 93:15 128:6,7 169:2 143:2,4,20,22,23 169:8,17 170:1 144:9,21 145:13,21 180:6 181:11,12 146:3 147:4,9,15 182:4,5,13 183:20 148:3,7,12 149:5,6 183:22 197:12 150:4,7,12 151:5 221:14 154:4 156:3 158:20 knows 163:2 183:19
158:21 162:11,23	kool 191:4
164:23 165:7,11,23	kotex 61:17
169:14 170:16,17	kyriakoudes 1:20 171:18 173:1,25 3:11,23 5:1,6 6:13 174:2,4,8 175:9 6:16 8:16 11:10 176:7,9,13 180:24 20:25 21:18 28:10 182:1,9 185:3 33:3 35:1 50:3 186:11,14 187:1,22 57:19 60:2 64:21 188:1,19 189:24 66:13 74:18 75:10 191:2 192:22 194:6 77:5 80:18 82:15 194:7,25 195:12 83:2,17 88:18 89:25
1:13,19 94:2 9671	learned 224:6
07:12 121:14	learning 150:24,25
31:14 145:5	223:15
47:21 151:19	leave 228:9
54:21 160:7	leaving 148:17
68:19 175:18	left 202:4
84:18,24 204:8	legacy 39:8 41:24
05:22 232:2,21	42:15 43:3,8 196:1
1	222:4,17,17 223:9
?:11 169:4	legal 207:11,16
el 142:12,19,22	2.18:6
64:10 166:3	legible 212:20
fieri 127 6	legitimate 153:13
12-13	legitimized 62:22
n- no n	leiff 13:12 elling 178:13
k 170-24	length 183:23
king 914	len§ths 182:13
ks 17:18	lengthy 55:13
ge 35:7 47:15	leroy 173:3
5:4 87:9 96:15	lesbian 151:12
47:6 176:5 179:24 lesser 97:9 98:8’10 ______QQ-n 100-1? 10?-?
gely 188:12
letter 3:18,20 206:2
5*11 11&25	206:7 207:22,23,25
5	62:21 88:1	208:3,5,7,19 209:9
9:12 120:7 121:7	209:9,23
37-16 138-14	letterhead 209:16
51-5 189-14	letters 147:4,6
22:22,25 223:13	level 3:17 27:4 70:16
. ooio	70:20 121:9,17 sst 88:18
rel 192:11	150:4,15 220:15
j 206:22,24 207:1	levels 23:2371:14
07.3	10	122:14 130:6,7,20
V	131:16,17 135:20
rauits 75:17	„ ’
der 184:3	i L10
uTfu-ir23	iSLy 35:2441:25
„ „ 1 oo	146:10
16	lifestyles 41:25
™.313'2 67'2	lifetime 26:16 27:18
etimes 22:25 23:3	literally 116:2 23:6 199:18
*gett 2:21	literature 154:6
*ht 49:2 77:11,16	litigation 9:2112:23 78:9 80:3 88:11 14:14 36:18 43:12 145:10 146:13,17 46:10 47:2 48:7 146:17 147:23,23 54:3,6,10,11,16 147:23 149:11,11 57:4,16,17 65:5 150:11,11 185:12 68:8,17 74:20,22 'hts 80:8,8 81:7,8 75:2,16,25 76:10,15 85:21 86:12 89:16 76:19 77:1 218:19 99:2 100:2 102:10 223:1,2 225:9 103:5 124:22 145:9 228:19,20 229:12
145:23,23 148:3,17	little 49:21 57:2 167:4 221:18 79:25 171:8 185:8 224:23 185:16 189:22,23 telihood 171:13 189:25 210:10 nited 101:16 214:14 218:8 114:9,9 197:1 220:19
le 20:20,20 36:12	lives 146:4
39:22 66:22 232:8	living 177:19
ips 10-4 no-15	Hr 9-91
lk 39:19,22 43:4	load 52:22
iks 39:7,23	location 117:23 it 17:17 33:7,11,20 186:14
34:24 35:2,17 36:2	logistical 229:1
36:17,23 37:10,13	long 36:7,12,14 38:18 39:6,17,25 42:10 47:16 56:8 40:4,6,7,11,24 41:4 97:11 104:9 131:10 41:22 42:25 44:4 164:22 172:17 45:4,20 46:2,16 202:9,11 210:3 48:15 74:18 96:2 226:24
101:8 140:6 189:10	longer 34:2
189:17 192:20	look 6:25 13:1 17:10 193:8,22 195:4 18:14 20:12,14 33:3 196:9 200:25 38:23 41:21 43:9,23 ited 11:20 14:18 45:23 46:1 49:18 18:17 34:19 38:17 62:10 65:11,15,22 135:9 139:13 232:7 77:6 90:8 96:11 itened 185:4 97:24 98:5 118:5 iting 45:20 122:5,13 123:4 its 7:13 11:16 33:7 124:23 127:14 39:17 40:9,11 45:6 130:4 137:14 141:8 45:9 139:4,5 141:24 143:12,17
50:4,5 155:5 159:6 204:18 205:12,23 61:25 162:23	205:25 206:10,11
63:20 165:9	206:11,14,17
68:19 169:11	207:20 208:13,16
72:19 173:24	208:19 209:16,20
74:4 176:18	209:25 210:3 215:8
01:19 202:16	215:8,13,14,16,19
03:10,11 206:7	215:24 216:6,10,12
07:23 208:11,18 216:18 217:3
09:1,7 212:16,17	lorillard's 207:18
15:4,4,5 220:7	lose 138:5
28:1 229:6	lot 33:23 38:1 40:25 ked 22:21 23:13 41:14 42:13 43:18 4:18 26:6,8 31:1 44:13 47:13 49:7 1:15 32:1,8,16,18 52:8 59:7 60:16 5:6,10 37:18 38:13 61:7,9,14,18 68:3 3:12,16,17,20,22 96:13 145:1 147:10 4:1,5 60:23 64:8 150:9 158:8 160:20 0:12,15 71:20 76:1 165:9,11,12 171:25 6:13,20 111:19 172:4 175:25 185:7 13:12,23 128:24 188:16 219:2
^5-17 1Q0-15	lots 110-6 116-n 16
king 33:8 40:21	louis 1:20 5:1 6:15 0:2 67:21 85:18 232:2,21
7:14 104:25 122:8	love 52:8
28:10 131:14	low 3:14 77:10 80:3 39:19 140:17 80:8 81:7 85:21 61:12,13 172:12 86:12 88:11 89:16 77:20 206:3 216:5 97:12 99:2 100:2 ks 18:2 213:4 102:11 103:5 14:3 124:22 167:4 3:19,21 221:18 222:10 illard 2:14 29:22 224:24
85:1,13,14 186:1	lower 23:16 87:23 86:16 187:8,15,23 88:22 90:15,19 87:25 188:7,11,16 91:22 92:6,11,15,25 89:6,7,15 190:4,10 93:4 94:6,10 95:20
90:13,14,18,24	lung 79:20 80:20 91:10,11,13,13,15 81:13 82:18 83:4,20 91:18,21,22 192:3 84:4 85:9 87:24 92:9 194:2,10 88:23 90:16 92:7,12 95:3,16 197:3,5 93:1 94:7 97:7 98:8 98:8 200:13,18 98:10,14 99:14 01:11 202:1 100:13 102:3 103:2
105:5 171:23 179:9	manufacturer 28:22
224:17 225:5	34:3 60:17 64:22
ther 50:25	69:19 187:25 188:3
dick 1:16	manufacturer’s
155:9
1 -70 5-1 6-15	manufacturers 62:7
'	62:15 63:1,5,8 64:9
b ' ’	65:16 68:2,7 72:21
’ V,- a 1/1/10 1 a	76:4 191:19 220:20
achine 3:14 42:13	„ . ^
117 17 220 23	manufacturing 60:7
* 1/:<*	69:5 73:12,19
acho 165:13	, „ ’_____ „
A Ham	march 185:18 208:1
adness 113:19	, „ „ , _
. 1 n	mark 117:10205:18
agazines 26:10	____ ____ „
ail 9:2 13:6 19:8	0 ' , Jf,,2
55-1 229-1	marked 6:11,14
10*	8:25 11:8,1114:6
a!n 2-4 72-19	33:4 77:7 89:23
98:23 99:7,11 100:1
209:3,5 228:23
... ,,,	229:16,18
aintain 66:3	, ’ ^
•	* • a	market 63:23 64:6
aintained 160:1	^ ^ ^
... .	64-15 77-16 76-5
•«* i48:w5-'» 148:21,22 149:14
,	149:24 150:25
ajonty 148:4	151:2,2,8 155:4
i rA in	165:16,19 188:6
akeup 64:10	___^
i • ao 11 /in o/i	189:12 191:5
aking 38:11 40:24	____ „
195-13 17 205-3
108:13 124:19	zuj.j.
132:3,24 166:13	marketed 116:1
181-21182-15	marketing 3:9 31:13
iqqo/iooqi<	60:8 61:10 62:12,14 183:24 223.15
167:9 „1S	72:20 115:20
anagement 52:15	^
209819	125:17,19 133:9
' onnia	136:16 145:7 149:3
anager 209:13	, _ _ _____
% , ,n ,	151:10,14 188:12
anufacture 69:1	_ ^
71-19 24 76-4	191:17 192:17
137.18 '	195:16 205:9 224:7
. j	markets 149:15 anufactured
67:23 68:16,23 71:1	, 7 _____
74:15 191:14	marlene 112:25
marriott 1:22
rtin 50:25	meaning 14:11 ss 149:8 103:18 104:1
ster 223:4	meaningful 104:2
terial 32:17 49:8	means 9:18,19 34:19 6:16 73:6 118:3 163:2,2 terials 6:24 171:12,24 175:9 6:25 26:12 35:25 179:11
6:1,5,5,6 41:12,20	measure 120:10,12 3:24 64:3 66:6,22 136:10 142:8 227:2
6:3 194:21 219:25	measured 3:14 27:16 228:1 220:23
tter 28:8 29:3,13	measurement 0:2 31:12 39:21 226:16
6:21 78:19 112:9	measuring 141:2
24:4 143:11	media 175:4,21 47:18 179:6 176:5 177:12 15:24 231:13,17 199:21
tters 99:19,20	medical 24:7,7 i 128:4 38:10 99:19 139:6 inery 16:1 37:2 156:5 157:2,11 a 178:23 158:8 178:9 179:2 an 11 -91 SR-9 1 R9*10 1 R^*10
5:15 59:6 64:16	medicine 100:5
9:19 86:14 92:9	195:23
3:11 99:18 100:4	meeker 1:14
03:14 104:20	meet 5:1151:12,13
08:15 110:18	51:18,19
12:7,22 115:8,17	meeting 53:3
16:2,15,22 117:11	member 176:20
19:4 130:21 133:8	182:21 183:3,12
35:17 138:20	184:5 215:17
43:5 144:21	members 184:12,13
46:11 149:17	memo 182:17
50:3 162:22 165:6	201:24,25 202:1,3
67:10 169:15,17	memoranda 174:1
69:19 171:2 176:4	memorized 97:13
76:25 186:7 189:2	memory 97:14
91:11,12 192:25	106:17 107:18
94:6 195:2 199:11	109:12 111:17
99:20 201:10	140:7 189:14 203:9
02:11 203:6	men 150:12
10:19 211:5,8	mendoza 189:13
16:10 224:22	menthol 188:4
191:3,6 192:2
enthols 167:7	46:19 47:22 48:2,24
191:2	64:24 65:17,25
ention 32:21	67:24 68:9,18 70:6
entioned 10:12	72:13 73:20 74:8
17:6 57:19 58:19	76:12 78:4,14 79:23
61:3 74:19 106:11	81:2,16 82:12,20
113:1 144:10	83:6,23 85:13 87:14
180:16 195:19,24	88:24 91:5,9,24
201:20	94:11,18 96:22
entioning 8:12	98:19 99:16 100:15
entionings 58:25	100:23 101:10
entions 144:5	102:14 103:24
erely 41:8	105:11 106:22
essage 114:15	107:8,23 108:2
177:5	110:14 126:18
essages 222:8	127:2,9 129:3 132:9
etaphorically	132:25 133:18,25
166:24	141:12,17 142:24
ethod 47:2,3 65:11	143:13 144:12
89:17 222:9 226:16	146:25 148:1
227:2,8	149:25 150:19
ethnrlnlnpiral	1 59*71 6 1 5'VI R
1 ^ * 1	A w'-T. A 9 A A
ethodologically	159:21 160:13
128:20	161:4 163:13
ethodologies	167:19 168:3 172:9
129:25	173:21 174:15
ethodology 225:20	175:23 177:14
226:4	180:9 181:1,16
ethods 44:21	183:7 186:19
51:17 227:12	187:10,18 190:21
iami 2:20	194:4 195:6 196:18
id 93:21 103:10	198:9 199:8 200:8
120:7 121:6 122:15	201:2,13 203:16,22
123:12 132:22	204:3,12 206:4
175:11 211:23	207:4,12 210:16
212:6 222:6	214:9 216:8,25
iddle 1:2 9:4 12:15	217:4,6,14,19 218:1
13:15,21 90:10	220:10 221:21
105:17	224:1 225:1,13,23
igliori 2:3 3:5 7:9	226:9 227:4,25
7:22 8:4,9 10:19	228:12,14 229:19
16:9 20:6 27:12,20	migrating 40:18
31:8 32:13,24 37:15	41:12 42:11 38:19 44:9 45:13
litary 22:14	91:10,15 96:5,7
Llion 132:8	97:7 98:1,15 100:9
80:12	100:11,22 101:3,21
Llions 115:12	101:25 103:14
16:6 132:3,17	105:1 107:3,16,20
33:22 203:7	108:1 125:10
Iton 208:8	126:15 128:4
id 44:22 57:13 129:21 219:13,16 4:24 149:5 179:12 220:24,24 223:23
95:18 198:12	month 54:23
16:21	months 53:19 54:1
le 20:11 185:21	morning 5:6,7,9,12 nnie 67:3 184:19,25 185:5,10
lor 72:15	morris 2:17 29:20 lority 141:10 201:16
72:6	mothers 144:22 ius 171:6 145:1
lute 181:14	motivation 164:6
06:1 207:23 209:7	motives 160:21
ssissippi 1:24	motley 2:3
0:13 52:17 231:4	motleyrice.com 2:5
^1-14	mntnrrvrle 165-1^
J. Z-. 1 U, 1 /	1UUTI/	I L . ^ i
estates 79:24	82:6 83:16 88:17
1:17	94:1 104:12 131:13
stake 140:21	133:14 147:20
k 218:19	160:9 183:2
sed 46:13	moved 152:2
dern 136:16	movement 136:22 dified 220:15 136:24 137:21,22 gell 1:15 138:4,14
le 180:18,22,23	movements 137:24 81:4 183:17,17 138:17
les 179:1 180:23	movie 112:13,15 ment 66:14 80:24 205:22,24 206:12 5:13 99:4 228:10 206:16 210:2
nday 15:4,11,16	movies 109:23 ndays 51:13,19 112:19 205:13 1:22 53:2 206:23 207:19
netary 231:17	moving 150:8
nica 2:24 4:6	msa 225:9
31:2,23	muddy 35:9
nograph 3:15	mulholland 121:18
9:14,18 86:4,10,19	multi 72:20 154:7 7:8 90:1,5,11,22 154:11
ultimedia 196:2	115:14 116:8,12,14 ultiple 149:10	117:1 134:21 139:9 utually 168:18	144:4,19 146:13,17 yth 209:13 210:2	148:3 155:1,13 n	188:18 197:17 --198:2,25 199:6
une 5:9 13:9 32:22	ne^ 0
184:25 185:22	: 42:11,23 43:8
208:11 210:6	43:10,18 62:19,23
imes 10:25 16:21
22:4 69:3	119:16 187:15
/iooo ioi a	190:2 192:24 193:1
irrow 49:22 121:6
167.13	212:24 213:25
itional 27:6 58:5	214:21 24 25
58:20 78:23 79:15	newer too .
85:20 86:4,11 87:5	, 11
87:11,21 88:19 89:9	31 „5:
92-22 94-3 95-6	197.7 198.4 210.11
q.'q0iq7 '	news 176:3 177:21 96:19,21 97:3
102:10 103:4	zu.i^,id,i/
106:18 138:1	newspaper 175:10
.	npwsnanprs 2<v10
iture 21:4 27:18 . ' ’
28:13 220:15	. „ ,, „
0	nicotine 3:15 23:16 >c 64:2
:i 86:19 89:5 90:12 23:22 31:14 70:20
91:1,14,20 94:16 95:8,22 96:7 126:15 ^ ,8 219-4 7 223-23 226:18
■i's 90:22 95:18	6)4'1,
96:1 107:3	nl§
,011 nineteen 89:12 scessanly 43:11
119-13 219-3 45:10 46:17 167:21	„
non 54:16 57:17
168:7,7,17 *d 5:216:142:16
95:24 96:15 182:18 U'U .
209 6 227 14	nonresponsive 82:7
s •	83:16 88:17 94:1
' .. ' 115,	104:12 131:13
;gative 113:6	. ^	^
■ither 162:6	133:1 7:0
■Ison 13:11,13	183:2
14:8 19:3,10 33:18 norm 114:19’24
ao i-> n c/: t normal 62:22 ;ver 48:12,17 56:7
56:11 67:18 110:21
nialize 112:20	100:24 133:1
'malizing 110:1,4	141:18 159:1
nially 62:18	162:21 195:7
*mative 114:15	198:10 210:17
*th 70:12	220:9 221:11 222:1
'wood 36:8	223:25 224:21
;ary 2:25 4:7	225:11
31:2 232:25	objection 7:20 8:6,8
;e 37:23	8:10 10:20 27:13,21
;ed 164:7	32:14,25 37:16
ice 3:12 7:12	38:20 45:14 46:20
1:12 14:18 16:7,23	47:23 48:3,25 64:25
7:11 18:17 19:1	65:18 66:1 67:25
43:8 227:17	68:10 70:7 72:14
iced 7:13 144:4	73:21 74:9 76:13
18:4,11,21	78:5,15 79:24 81:3
/el 43:25	81:17 82:10,11,21
member 1:24 9:5	83:7,24 87:15 88:25
21:19 231:21	91:25 94:12,19
uber 5:14 8:18	96:23 98:20 99:17
:20,21 39:7 52:3	100:16 103:25
6-9? 90-17 91-6	105-19 106-9^
8:3,6 99:5,6 101:8	126:20 127:3,10
03:8 104:25	129:4 132:10
06:10 111:18	133:19 134:1
18:6 123:23	141:13 142:25,25
32:12,17 139:8,14	143:14 144:13
40:5,7,8 142:8	147:1 148:2 150:1
49:22 171:16,21	150:20 152:8,17
72:23 185:25	153:19 154:2,16
97:3 198:3 199:2	158:19 159:22
05:18 207:22	160:14 161:5
09:2,5 219:12	163:14 167:20
25:2	168:4 172:10
ubered 212:12	173:22 174:16
ubers 7:14	175:24 177:15
19:25 148:24	180:10 181:2 183:8
62:19 169:13	186:20 187:11,19
nerically 148:4	190:22 194:5
o	196:19 199:9 200:9
h v1Q9ai.19	201:3,14 203:20,21
iect 16:10 31:9 4:10 68:19 85:14
225:24 226:10
227:5	officials 75:6 79:19 ►jections 4:11 88:4 138:5 139:6 ►jective 42:7 175:5 155:13 172:23 ►ligations 51:21,24 179:8 220:18
►servation 63:13	oh 35:21 43:9 47:24 108:10,13 109:17 48:12 58:25 109:11 111:5 114:8 118:25 122:9 200:12 202:4 178:6 180:8 202:11
►servations 56:10	okay 6:9 18:25 19:4 ►tain 48:22 19:19 122:2,12 ►tained 48:20 62:5 186:13 203:1 62:14 125:20 205:10 206:9 ►vious 100:4 211:21 212:15,18 casionally 54:16 213:3
cupations 35:12	old 34:1 192:6,6,8 cupied 176:5 192:11,12,17,21 curred 59:21 193:12 197:6,15,18 tober 6:19 8:17 197:24,25 198:11 9:4 12:16 13:15,21 198:15,18,23
13:22 14:25 42:3,7	older 41:2
fer 21:22 24:6	olduvai 50:24
7.5:9. n 15 74 9.6:9.	nip 67-4
29:16 30:6,20 32:2	224:5,9
32:9 44:7 46:18	ones 18:11 34:10
50:21 59:17 78:17	35:4 40:2 186:17
89:21 111:5 112:2,5	198:18
126:13,15 129:8	onward 150:23
135:22,24 136:13	operated 69:11
137:9 138:9,17	operating 179:2
140:15 145:3	180:14
154:23 191:23	opinion 25:9,16,24
207:16	26:2,22 27:3 28:11
fered 85:22 86:12	29:5,7,16 30:6,13
91:23 102:11 103:6	30:20 31:2,17,20
149:1 155:1 191:24	32:2,10 67:20 73:15
fering 17:1 31:2	81:11 82:16 109:20
67:20 73:15 88:12	112:2,5,18 113:25
167:3	114:16 126:13,15
fers 95:12	135:13,16,22,25
fice 173:14	136:13,14,19 137:2
ficial 20:23 91:20	137:9,13 138:8,12
160:11 166:10	138:13,17 140:15
204:19	144:17,23 145:4
149:1 154:23
64:15 173:17,23	overcome 134:3
77:11 178:17	overlap 34:12 56:20
88:17,21 189:12	overly 186:20
05:7 207:11,16	187:19 194:5 195:7
15:15 223:18	196:19 216:9
24:2,4,5,15 229:8	overrepresented
nions 13:2 15:6	110:8
5:12,25 16:3 17:1	owned 69:12
9:13,18 21:23	p
5:14 37:11 44:7,12 -oorT/i-
6:17 47:19 48:5	^ 2 *
8:17 115:11	^
35:23 184:8 185:9	L ,n
85:11 186:16	**** 4 93 2°
87*1 S 190*9 17	Page 3:26:25 19:24
87.15	190.9,17	41:21 44:18 46:1
60:2 77:6’9 79:11
n' ? fi ? 7	85:18 86:7-10-15-22
’	87:6,13 90:2,9,10
iB.ijzzi.j	93:18 95:3,7,9
22:13 .	97:17,24,25 99:5,24
jortumty 194:20	99:24 100:18,21
90 !9	104:25 105:17’23
josite 177-8 9	106:10 118:5,8,24
~~7 '	120:13 122:7,7,10
7	r.124:23 125:24
:!011S 5:25	127:14,17 129:10
.	130:4,10 131:15
. 2	155:6,8 159:6
-amzation 30:4	161:12 164:2,3
-amzations 78:21	168:20 201:19
!®"“ed 52:6	204:16 208:19
212-1113 13 23
ginal 40:20	213^ 14215:5’
02:16 210:13,18	219:12,13 220:5,7
■	231:5 232:8
ginally 214:22	pages 3:1590:1
;“me 1	91:10 101:1,23
Jets 116:3	104:7,8 105:21,24 reach 52*14
.?* A 7,o	106:4,7 199:18,20
;side 54:14 152:8	919.11910.1^
52:17 165:13	'
20*17 229*4	*
,,	Paid 182:9205:23
irall 97:18 149:24	.
206:11
iper 35:7 39:20	172:12 178:23
41:18 156:15	189:6 191:22
219:25	206:19 208:5 209:9
ipers 63:18 64:1,2 212:11 215:13 67:16	222:16 226:12
irachutes 165:14	particularly 52:19 iragraph 60:4 63:22 88:1 99:1 77:9 85:18 90:9 109:23,25 136:11 118:8,13 119:8 150:22 156:8 122:13 123:4 179:25
129:11 130:17	particulars 25:12
159:7 215:6,7 220:6	parties 4:3 220:17
221:22	parts 33:11,15 34:21
irdon 15:24	party 216:12 231:16
ired 7:14	patch 38:4
irt 4:14 7:8 14:13	patience 21:15
20:1 27:24 33:18	pattern 145:6,22 34:16,17 36:25 37:4 149:2,24 150:6,7,14 39:6,18 42:15 44:14 150:16
44:19 46:22 48:1	patterns 126:6 53:7 62:2 66:25 150:3,15
6R-74 6QQ 79.-1115	nanl 119*95
/ ^.1 y	pui	1 . ^ L
84:24 87:25 88:4,9	pdfs 41:19
88:10 105:1 115:20	peak 120:4 121:3
116:4,25 133:5	peaks 120:5 121:3
164:6,24 165:17	pearl 67:3
166:5,12 168:15	peeking 123:2
184:2 188:1 190:24	peer 109:19 114:11
190:24,25 191:5	pemberton 62:20
192:3 213:14,16	penile 76:22
214:3,5,17 215:16	people 31:12 55:18 215:24 229:25 59:7 88:13 93:7,9 irticular 7:1 10:22 93:17 115:13 116:6 15:9 24:14 25:20 116:11,13 124:7,8 32:19 33:5 36:13 132:3,5,6,8,13,13,18 40:16 41:6 44:7 132:19 133:4,4,6,10 56:4 66:19 79:12 134:2 135:2 139:6 84:16 86:10 91:1 139:21 142:13 94:24 101:4 102:6 143:11 146:8,10 107:10 110:22 147:7,10 148:12 114:5,21 116:21,21 149:16 162:14,15 130:24 131:8 162:23 163:21,23 134:12 137:7 141:8 171:16,25 172:4 157:15 167:16 174:2,6,8 179:1,7
22:20 224:25	pertained 190:18
'ceive 168:11,11	pertaining 69:25
77:6	pertains 101:16
'ceived 139:4	peto 141:5,5
'cent 116:12	ph 70:16
17:2 122:20,22,22	ph.d. 1:20 5:1 6:16
41:21 142:2,2	phenomena 48:7
48:21 159:13	phenomenon 56:17 60:25 161:9,21 56:20 154:8
62:2,4,6,9,12,16,20	philip 2:17 29:20 63:7,10,22 171:21 201:16
71:24 172:1,8	phone 217:1,20
*centage 109:7,8	photocopied 43:21
24:7 133:11	photograph 37:22
35:18 140:18	phraseology 158:3
71:8	physically 220:14
'ception 144:18	physician 38:9,11
'feet 40:23	pick 104:7
form 43:16 44:1	piece 47:9
'formed 107:2	piggybacking 'iod 109:25 137:21
19-14 m -10 9^	ninnppr 61-9.5 67*17
w. 1 i I -r. I
34:5,23,25 135:13	pitching 149:17
36:17 137:9 142:9	place 4:5 10:18
47:17 165:10	182:19 231:7
79:25 197:7 207:3	placed 205:24
12:6 224:12	212:25 231:11
'iods 111:10	placement 206:23
'mission 210:5	207:19 210:1
mit 7:20 226:5	places 35:24 158:9
'son 35:17 115:16	plaintiff 15:9 17:2,3
15:18 151:23	146:1,2
52:4,13 194:9	plaintiff's 24:7
•sonal 24:20 26:7	plaintiffs 2:5 11:1
6:9 27:4 61:13,21	16:13 21:1 24:3
44:23	25:19,23,25 30:5
•sonally 27:11	218:11
•spective 177:18	plan 46:12 75:20
17:11 223:19	215:14
•suade 116:11	play 104:9 203:9
33:6 167:1	played 166:23
•suading 31:11	plays 64:5 110:1
•tain 44:6 46:17	pleadings 21:5 91:9
ease 6:1 210:2	182:11 196:17
easurable 110:2 202:18,20 217:15 ural 87:2,10	219:8
us 130:15 164:11	positions 75:23 76:9
171:6	positive 113:8 >int 5:24,25 10:6 115:22 178:4
13:22 26:5 38:25	possessed 215:9
48:19 67:19,19	possession 18:11
83:19 89:19 102:7	possibilities 10:11 125:13 137:6 10:15
142:15 149:19	possible 38:21 39:1 156:19 174:6 44:11 88:7 187:22
179:21 194:13	possibly 40:1
208:15 211:24	post 46:12 49:25 216:19 223:17 136:16
226:12 229:20	potential 55:21 >inted 131:6 182:7 149:9
>ints 171:6,8	powerful 124:8 172:25 195:15
>licies 76:23 184:9	powerpoint 18:1,2 207:18 212:25 213:22 >lirv 906-15 1Q 997-99
^ i u.	Ti.ij
>11 161:17 162:1	67:14
>lling 188:13	practitioner 41:13
>pular 55:15	precise 171:3
>pulation 93:24	196:21
103:13 122:21	predict 37:8
135:17 136:9 142:1	predicted 81:21
149:9 151:1 169:12	prefer 208:23
225:18	preliminary 49:8
>pulations 120:19	preparation 18:21
>rtal 117:25	33:18 37:1 45:3
►rtion 142:1	58:12 59:4,18
148:14 170:7,21,23	prepared 7:10 12:8
171:7 172:3,5,7	12:9 13:5 14:5,23
221:1	15:12 18:15,18,20
►rtions 170:24	19:15 44:4 69:7,8
>sed 194:8	75:2 121:23 200:17
>sition 59:20 76:18	preparing 12:22
76:25 85:8 130:24	59:15
131:9 141:10	preponderance
155:14 160:11	148:25
162:24 173:7,13	presence 113:2 174:11 177:1 181:7
isent 61:9	print 19:23 193:16 isentation 14:2 196:24 197:18 8:3 62:17 102:21 200:15
27:22,23	printed 17:25 20:21
isentations 17:22	printing 41:16 7:23 139:2
isented 49:6	printout 18:25
5:21118:2,2	prior 11:23 15:17 renting 88:12 74:20,22 84:1 89:8 iserved 67:4 90:12 92:3,9 94:4 isident 208:16 96:25 122:3 126:21 09:19 128:3 158:1 172:22 ;ss 116:4,7 148:8 182:21 183:3 73:9,19 174:13 185:12 210:11,12 76:6,7 228:17
issure 34:13	prison 73:12
assures 176:10	prisoners 71:4,5 itty 13:7 46:9 74:16
3:2,8 73:5 100:4	privacy 18:9
01:21117:10	private 18:8 64:23
availed 197:14	privilege 45:22 ‘valenre 10R-19 ??R-Q1^
11:14,15 112:11	probably 19:6 37:8 13:10,14 114:6,12 46:13 54:22 87:24 24:6 134:22,24 90:16 92:7,12 93:1 35:11,12 136:3,4 94:7 129:17 141:20 40:24 141:2,9,20 198:6 199:7 211:16 00:16 218:2
ivalent 70:9	problem 175:5,22
ivent 132:23	problems 143:8
33:16	procedural 7:8 iventing 124:18 14:14
ivious 18:10	procedure 4:8 5:17
4:19 55:12,25	procedures 128:8
2:24 95:1 133:3	proceeded 176:5
39:16	proceeding 217:9
iviously 77:14	proceedings 75:3 87:17 205:11 231:19
ce 72:22	process 10:5 45:3 mary 45:24 58:15 145:13,18 9:16 65:6,12,14,21 166:13 179:5
6:11,15	processed 69:17 ncipally 70:10 72:9,10 74:7
•ocessing 70:1	prohibited 206:22
73:3,10	prohibition 138:1 octor 54:17,21,25 138:14
56:2,5,14 57:11,14	project 210:7
•oduce 20:25 21:3	projecting 110:2
107:6 228:12	prominent 141:5 oduced 33:21,22 145:3
34:10 63:23 127:7	promote 76:5 110:5 229:16 116:4,25
•oducers 206:17	promoted 50:6 •oducing 228:17 131:3
229:23	promotes 47:6
•oduct 61:6,12,22	promoting 31:11 62:22 64:20,22 125:14 167:6,8
66:19 103:20	promotion 3:10 115:21,22,23,24 31:14 50:9 131:25 116:1,21,22 131:4 133:5,24 145:7 146:7 150:13 149:4
164:25 171:14	promotional 123:6 172:15 197:14 123:11 124:14 201:21 205:23 134:18
?0<v?^ 707-19	nrrmintirms 1^?-?1
•oduction 20:1	proper 229:4
209:12 228:6 229:5	properly 228:24
229:13	proportion 122:20
•oducts 47:6 61:14	proposes 164:20
61:17 64:10 88:12	proposition 147:11
116:14,18 124:21	protected 20:10,10 136:6 138:19 20:16 228:4
142:16,19 148:11	protective 81:8 82:1 148:19 149:15,16 82:4 89:16
149:17 205:13	provide 33:19 42:25 206:17 208:22 210:6
221:16 224:13	provided 35:19 •ofessional 54:18 37:21 74:6,14 93:19 145:4 205:7 95:1,15
•ofessionals 58:7	providence 2:4
188:25	providing 75:11,18
•ofessor 50:5	provision 5:24
218:3	public 2:25 3:8 4:7 •ofile 64:14,18 47:6 52:14,20 63:9 •ogram 33:25 34:2 76:6 77:20 79:19 40:18,24 72:24 80:11,12 81:9,19
83:9,14 84:22 88:3
9:12 93:13,14	pursuant 4:7
09:9 135:14 139:6	pursued 137:20
40:2,6,9,12,18	pushed 220:1
44:18 150:22	put 9:7 34:23 35:9
51:14 155:14	37:9 45:15 63:9,15
56:17 159:8 160:1	130:23 140:4
68:24 169:24	142:16,17 164:23
70:7,22 171:8,19	171:20 176:10
71:22 172:23	206:11 217:4 223:5
73:8,18 174:12,19	puts 192:9
75:6,10 176:18,20	putting 45:4 86:22
76:22 177:7,13	96:17
79:8,11,12 188:16	q
88:21 189:12 -,7- ..-A
15:23 219:8	q^hfica ,o„ 170:4
20:18 221:14,19	qU“ !*Cf 93:5
^	qualified 92:18
22:21 223:20,21	H r.. „ , „ ^
’	qualities 73:1,7,16
26:25 231:3	... 1 1 c quality 193:16
32-25
. i• * * io^oioq^ quarter 70:11
blic s 137:3 139:7	..
question 15:24
, „	16:10 35:15 37:17
rihratinn 55 4	. , . . _
u,.. * 1,70.11 76:7 82:23,24 83:25 t>licized 178.11 91*2594‘13 19
78:19 179:16,20	; Q-24
™‘bS55 110:16 112:18 115:1 124:1,8 24:1 22 ;,2	126:21 131:7 133:3
7	7-, „ „ , 138:22 139:13 c fa !:a ™^ ^	156:19 159:3,18,22
kri	160:10 161:18
te “ 86:	167:11 169:7
K.r.r7
78 7^	191:8 215:12 216:1
,cn	218:8,9,25221:5
[ling 45:9	... ^ c
, „ „,	questioning 6:5
rchase 116:23	. , n?iQ
„, ~ ~ ^	questions 4:125:18 rpose 86:22 133:5
67:3 196:8 213:10 “
irwi„_ 53:12 57:4 65:7
?of!o	o	99:18 104:3 106:8
107:17 122:1 93:25 213:4	lg4;19 185;3>9>21
186:1,8 194:8	86:24 87:16 90:6
203:17 204:2,5	92:8 95:13 98:2
206:8 216:24 217:1	100:17,21 101:13
217:16,18,21,24	102:19 104:16,17
219:14 231:12	111:18 114:4
lit 24:12,16,23	121:21 123:9,14
25:2,3,5,6 31:12	125:6,25 126:10
132:4,5,6,8,18,23,24	129:18 130:12
133:4,7,23 167:3	142:7 147:4 163:1
lite 12:14 57:3	208:24 209:14,21
61:23 63:23 109:12	210:7,9 213:2,8,18
129:22 145:18	220:6,11 221:23
161:6 197:18	222:12 232:3
199:15	reader 86:23 97:20
litting 24:20	106:1
132:13,14 133:7,17	reader’s 35:5,11
lote 126:4 203:14	readily 67:10
lotes 118:17	reading 4:9 11:23
r	51:1 52:10 79:25
; 11rt1inn i /,	80:10 86:18 101:7 I. 1:10,11,12,13,14
1:15,16 2:9 5:11	108.8 154.6
__ . . ____renrhnas 51 3
147:5 201:16	, „
.dio 173:9,19	ready 209:8
174’2 5 13 175*3 21	r 89:22
197;1’1’ ' ’	89:22 93:16 186:11
mge 120:6 121:6	2?.4:24t1 ,
141:21171:11,11	reaiity 82:4 104:23
1 on h	realized 224:10
inking 139:7	m-im
inks 139:8 140:6	l2‘l! ' I
...	20:12 33:25 37:6
ipidly 138:5	,M„0.
ite 171:6,15 172:18
ites 131:23 226:18	™ ™
226:19	94:22 99:20,23
itio 120:12 134:21	11(*16 “1:23
. lnc.,n	113:23,24 139:10
aC. . ' 9, 87 ,	174:21 185:5 187:8
ached 38:25 87:6 __________
89:10 221:16	212:18 229:21
u iU n	reason 28:22 107:12
aches 116:12	, _____
n7.1	185:2 218:6
aching 106:19	r“i1 ,126^ 128:2
189 14	131.21 138.7
ad'26:10 30:21	reassurance 222:8
35:6 56:8 86:14,20	re®al!. ^:24 42:6
47:12,15 49:2 85:7
9:7 97:3,5 107:20 100:14 102:3 103:3 07:25 108:13	105:6 169:13 225:6
09:13 144:1 153:2 231:8
86:2 187:3 219:9	reducing 167:12
19:14	reduction 52:21 ailing 94:23 79:20 80:19 81:13 07:10 134:15,16 82:18 83:3,20 84:4 58:6 202:5,8,15 85:9 95:15,19 99:9
12:5	reed 2:12
eived 21:5,8	reefer 113:18
7:17,23 36:16	refer 20:4 97:20 eptive 135:3,14 98:21 120:13 ognize 90:2 157:11 195:8 201:8 16:13,20 201:11
ognizes 115:16	reference 79:12,13 ognizing 58:3 95:7,23 96:10 141:7
ollection 50:1	referenced 19:8 5:6,15 102:6 91:15 94:22 107:5 05:15 106:15 126:24 127:6 11:3 135:7 184:4 128:15 189:16 03:5 211:25 197:21 201:9 n-1Q 914-90 991-4
4:11,18	referencing 107:15 ommendations 195:8204:16
4:21	referred 89:9 105:9 ord 4:4 5:8 7:11 106:1 107:22 :24 8:6,11 17:5 126:11 198:15
1:14 27:25 28:3	referring 15:15,16 1:16 32:2,9 43:15 15:17 55:19 75:7 9:25 79:9 80:1 84:23 96:18 99:5 1:17 108:6 151:17 102:16 117:15 69:5 175:16 213:4 119:23 120:15,16 17:5 220:11 120:19,25 142:10 21:24 222:1 232:5 152:24 164:4 172:6 orded 108:19 173:14 188:22 ords 21:1,4 31:1 216:4
5:23 38:10 66:24	refers 15:9 183:18
7:15	refined 149:18
over 120:22	reflect 104:23
luce 87:24	reformulation 64:13
luced 77:11 88:22	refresh 85:6,15 0:16 92:7,12 93:1 97:14 102:6 104:4 4:7 97:10 98:9,11 105:14 106:14 8:17 99:15 100:3 107:14 109:12
111:17 135:7 184:4	relevance 49:13 203:5 211:25 144:13 154:3
fusing 206:16	relevant 43:11 gard 12:7 14:23 46:11,25 47:8,19 16:16 28:4 30:14 48:21 64:3 110:24 35:16 49:20 51:24 210:25 229:22
56:19 59:10 62:4	reliability 227:11
65:23 78:9 84:11	reliance 33:7,7,11 85:1 95:19 97:7,15 34:24 35:2,16 36:2 98:14 106:10 36:17,23 37:10,13 109:16 110:4 38:18 39:6,25 40:7 111:22 114:6 116:8 40:11 41:4,22 44:4 119:21 123:1 45:4 46:2,16 48:15 138:18 139:18 74:18 96:2 135:10 140:16 142:10 138:23 192:20 143:4 167:15 193:7,22 195:3 169:23 171:3 196:9 200:25 172:20 182:19 219:25
garding 65:15	relied 32:5 109:18 71:18 189:1 207:19 110:23 130:1 166:9
217:6	rely 37:11 38:1 48:4 Pillar 167-? 4Q-16 69*17 77:1 R
inforces 112:8	139:21 194:2 195:5
late 43:12 192:20	196:16 219:18,22
200:16 215:14	221:3,7 222:13
lated 21:1,6 25:1	relying 36:12
28:14 38:3 52:16	113:17 128:13,21
54:19 76:15 156:25	129:2 140:7 194:15
200:15 231:16	194:21 196:10,17
lates 1:8 11:15	remember 13:17
27:5 44:24 48:6	38:2 89:6 143:16
113:20 221:7	185:17,22,24 186:7
lating 71:23 171:3	186:12,23 187:5
200:14 218:7	remembering 69:3
lationship 137:15	184:6
138:15 153:1 182:7	remind 84:15 161:8
182:23 183:5,21	202:16
lationships 153:6	removed 211:22
183:19 184:14	212:1
latively 130:9,20	repeat 44:1
131:19	repeatedly 79:19
lease 163:17 226:7	225:3
leased 118:11	rephrase 65:21
125:20 127:5 128:9
ilacement 31:15 229:20
lort 3:10 6:15,18	reported 2:23 :22,23 7:1,2,8 8:17 117:22 118:15 :25 9:4,6,7,8,14,17 141:25
2:7,9,1113:4 14:5	reporter 2:25 4:7 4:6,17,22,24 15:5 231:1,2
5:8 16:8,12 17:24	reports 7:10 53:14 8:21 19:7,21 20:4 53:17 85:16 90:11 0:11 33:5,19 39:21 119:17 160:4,19,20 0:8 42:19 44:5,8 180:21 200:17
5:11,17 53:13	represent 228:15
7:24 58:2,9,13,17	representation 8:21 59:5,8,12,18 200:4
0:3 67:21 77:6	representations 9:11 85:19 86:18 193:16 221:8 9:13 94:21 95:3,8 224:17
5:12 96:17 97:11	representative 7:13,14,18,21,22 200:1
9:7,12 100:2,9	representatives 02:8,21,23 105:24 75:24 76:10,18,25 13:1 114:13 118:6 88:3 184:7
1 R-10.17.1 Q.9.5	renresenterl 2.2.0-22.
21:4 122:14	reproduced 139:1
23:10,19 125:11	reproduction
26:3,12,16,25	161:25
27:7 128:5 129:12	repurposing 61:15
29:21 131:15	request 209:25
39:2,20 141:25	requested 6:5 17:17
42:11 152:25	requests 206:16
55:6 156:7,11	require 11:25 12:8 59:6,23 160:17 226:20
61:19 162:2	required 9:22 12:2
63:18 164:2 165:3	requires 176:1
68:20 170:20	research 35:22 37:4 88:7 189:19 42:6 43:25 45:25 90:15,18 194:10 46:22 47:1 48:1,21 00:19 201:8,9,12 49:7,16,18 52:7,9 01:16,19 203:13 53:6,11 54:14 56:4 10:12 212:7 215:5 57:1,7,11 60:5,11 16:12,16,20 60:16 61:5 62:4,11 18:14,23 219:4,7 63:18,24 64:4 66:10 19:17,18,19,21 66:16,25 68:4,24 20:4,5 221:2 69:9,24 70:24 75:23 28:17,18,22,22 76:8,14 78:12 79:4
80:16 83:11,18 87:9	respective 4:4
87:18 91:13 93:12	respond 133:11 96:14 97:2 100:8 217:4
104:21 109:16	response 17:11 111:2,10,13 112:6 115:1 161:8 162:8 114:4,5,25 118:1 163:2 216:2 220:16 119:18 125:3,19,25 227:17,20
126:8,24 127:22	responses 21:13
128:11 129:13,25	responsibilities 150:10 151:2 153:5 50:10 52:23 53:8
154:4 156:6,14	responsibility 52:12 157:9,15 158:5,8 177:2
159:12 160:2	responsive 17:7
161:20 166:6,12	responsiveness 4:12
168:13 180:12	restrain 130:22 189:12 190:2,5,11 131:2
192:23 202:22	result 149:3 225:9 213:6 214:16 225:21 228:5
223:14 226:20	resulted 93:21 227:10 103:10,15
searched 24:25	results 103:19 75-7 26-21 2.7-2.R 10d-20 22 106:n
70:19 71:3,16 72:5	171:1,13
73:4,22 74:3,10	retail 66:11
75:15,16 79:2 84:24	retained 8:24 11:19
114:18 115:2,3	11:24 21:22 24:24
143:3 144:14 190:8	30:19
201:23 202:2	retainer 11:25 12:2
207:18	12:9
searcher 141:5	retire 182:18
searchers 88:8	retrospective
108:18 156:4	178:22
157:10 222:25	reveal 83:13 170:24
223:13,13 224:6	224:23
searching 44:15	revealed 72:2 93:10
151:3 157:19	119:19 223:12
serve 53:6	reveals 81:25
served 4:13	reverse 44:22
sidential 22:11	reversing 123:7,11
spect 10:8 27:9	124:15
29:18,20,22,24	review 19:7 47:14
186:16 188:22	88:19 89:5 91:2,14
190:3,4,10 209:25	91:21 94:21 95:18
95:18 96:2,8 105:15
07:3,16,19 131:7 144:9 164:7,11,22 28:11	164:24 165:1,17,20
iewed 16:17,24 165:20,25 168:10 2:1 24:25 25:20 168:15 225:5,18,19 6:12 28:8 29:4,15 226:6
0:5,12 53:14 90:5	risks 3:13 27:1 7:4 101:21 109:19 28:12 72:3 92:4 14:11 127:12 137:3,5 138:18 28:15 129:7 130:2 139:4,5,22,24 iewing 106:15 140:10 164:17 lews 90:12,23 165:4 166:7,15,18 2:3,9 94:4 167:17,24 168:1,9 ised 80:23 168:12 174:20 nolds 1:10,11,12 176:23 178:14 :13,14,15,16 2:9 183:25 189:1,9
:11 29:1,2,12 67:5	rituals 44:19
47:5 201:16	robert 13:11 54:17
)de 2:4	rock 112:17
e 2:3	roffo 156:8
h 65:4,12 66:15	roger 185:22,22,24 7:12 69:5 185:25 186:7,12
hard 46-T6 141-5	rnlp 9.6-1 9.7*7 ^0-9^
hness 60:24	49:12 58:14 61:23
ing 165:14	64:5 110:1 125:13
ht 15:15 20:20	roll 69:18 74:7
2:21 23:25 25:12	room 220:1
4:25 43:6 51:6,7	roper 161:17
2:13 65:13 69:2	rossel 2:19 217:22
0:6 95:1 97:5,20	217:23
7:23 114:12	round 222:25
30:13 142:20	rpr 2:24 231:23
54:17 185:25	rule 20:7,9,16 228:2
02:4 206:25	228:3,24 229:5
12:17,20 214:19	rules 4:8 5:17 7:20
19:16	7:23 39:2,3
is 120:5	run 21:14
k 77:12 83:4 85:2	running 52:23,25
5:9 87:24 88:23	167:10 0:13,16 92:7,10,13 runyon 158:10
2:23 93:1 94:4,7	ruth 192:11
5:19 97:9 98:8,10	s
8:17 99:13 100:12 -—-
02:2 103:2 105:5	S '
38:24 140:2,3,13
fe 99:1 135:19,20	scholarship 114:11
fer 88:5,13,14,15	school 50:16 144:11 100:3 224:24 188:9 195:13,23 lary 182:9 204:22
le 117:4,6,14,17	schroeder 2:24 4:6 119:22 120:24 231:2,23
137:18	science 44:21 78:17 lems 191:5 176:11
les 117:8 120:3,3	scientific 77:21,23 120:11,16,20,25 78:12 79:6 83:14 121:2 213:6 214:16 88:8 156:13 157:10 n 2:8 223:11 160:5
t 67:18	scientifically 183:25
ve 17:13 37:20	scientist 78:16 79:8 39:9,13,23 41:15,18 156:12 176:25
ved 39:24 47:18	scientists 159:25 192:25 177:6 178:3 226:5
w 30:2141:5	scope 152:9,18 137:24 159:13 189:22
161:21178:3	scott 3:18 208:8
ying 13:24 89:11	scroll 43:20
105-T4 11 R-Q 11Q-R	srrnllina 909-4
159:18 171:7	search 43:19
173:24,25 178:21	searched 43:7
182:1 190:23 212:3	searches 43:15,25
214:5,10,15	second 6:25 41:24
ys 7:2 33:11 40:12	52:6 90:9 208:18
92:8,9 93:6 94:25	secondly 166:24
122:18 125:2	178:25
127:18,21 130:5	secretive 65:9
140:20 143:16	section 101:17
144:7 162:2,4,8	124:25 155:8
164:20 165:7 166:2	see 6:16 7:1,3 11:13
174:5,5,7 180:1	11:15,16,18 33:12
206:11 208:10,19	35:21 42:4 46:4
209:18 213:4,5	48:19 49:13 60:9,10
214:15	77:12 79:15 85:23
an 37:22	86:1,5 90:11,19
are 118:16,19	91:16 98:6,12
enes 176:16	104:18 105:7 118:8
holarly 43:13 47:9	118:22 121:19,21
57:1 124:10 144:23	122:9,11,16,17,23
holars 55:24	123:8 124:25 125:5
125:24 126:9
27:18,24 129:17	sent 13:3,6 19:7,12 30:9,13,17 136:10 36:2,8 147:5 173:25
49:7,8 151:7	sentence 60:3 77:10 55:18,21 159:9,14 85:19 86:17 102:19 61:22 164:13,21 105:2 118:13 65:11 169:2 170:9 122:18 123:5 125:2 77:8,10,18,20 127:21 129:11 89:18 193:7,21 130:5,14 131:15 08:13 210:12 155:12 159:11 16:5 164:3 168:23 170:3 ing 229:10 170:6,9,12,12 k 48:22 221:23
king 137:17	separate 40:6 45:5 n 28:16 34:8 87:4 115:10
3:24 72:4 115:13	September 13:17 21:22,24 157:25 15:13 37:1
66:4 172:21 173:6	serendipity 43:19
73:10,12 175:2,7	series 21:11,13 51:3 78:15,16 189:11 124:1 186:8
92:25 205:16,22	serious 172:15,16 06:10,13 208:3,5 179:10 215:11
09-77 7^ 717-?>	served 77-14 5R-R
,111^111/ XW^.X/^X^	y . /
68:2	service 160:1
;ments 149:10	services 168:14
69:12	serving 139:16
set 197:10,19,20	set 4:6 36:13,14 87:6
scted 200:20	108:18 149:14,16
acting 181:10	149:17 227:21
ling 75:12	228:7
is 47:6	setting 187:13
nester 50:16,18	settlement 223:4
0:19 51:5,9,10,14	seven 7:13 8:13
1:20 53:2	11:16,20 14:17,23
nesters 50:15	16:7,22 18:16 21:2
ninar 50:22 51:1	21:9,19,23 22:2
1:17	24:22 25:10,25 26:3
id 13:1	27:9 31:21 32:5
ise 55:17 67:6,7	46:2 95:22 145:19
7:2 95:24 103:17	218:10
04:19 113:25	shameful 182:20
23:18 144:23	shape 62:12
45:24 160:3	shaped 38:14 47:3
64:10 177:16	61:11 16:3
[aping 177:21	signing 4:9 10:2
Lare 17:25 52:20	similar 21:13 48:14 64:6 72:16 195:15 111:9
221:19	similarly 29:7 Lared 40:10 93:11 152:13
191:6	simple 158:3
Led 49:2	simply 34:13 37:20 eet 161:14,15 39:10 42:11 45:23
ield 47:5	sink 34:6
ielded 47:4	sir 69:13
ift 150:5	sit 30:9 33:1 46:7 Look 2:16 47:13 85:7 89:6 Lort 52:5 95:21 111:16 112:6 Lortcomings 227:9 128:19 143:15 low 45:2 158:14 144:8 184:5 189:2,5 195:10 198:17,18 192:20 193:25 198:20 204:5 220:1 194:13,24 195:18 220:3 199:4 212:2 213:3 Lowed 119:6 213:11215:1216:5 197:23 198:19 216:15
219:11	site 193:15 196:23 owinQ 167-5 1Q7-1Q
Lown 80:16 83:11 199:19,24
155:15 172:21	situation 24:19 27:3 223:23 229:24 30:7 165:8 166:2
lows 112:6 178:2	situations 23:14 205:13 25:1,8,21 26:22 le 34:5 27:14
les 166:23	six 53:19 54:1 ^nature 19:24 163:17 218:10
231:20	sizeable 129:14
*ned 6:18 8:16	skill 231:10
19:22,25 209:15	slides 18:1,3 229:22
*nificance 34:15	slogan 115:17 34:18 107:21 171:4 116:20
177:9,25 183:15	slogans 116:13,17
*nificant 103:18	slow 192:7
103:19,23 104:15	slowly 169:1,19
104:19,22 106:13	small 129:17 135:17 106:21 107:7 125:4 135:18 172:8
125:13 126:1 127:8	smaller 148:14 170:7,21,23 171:2,7 189:15
171:12 172:2,5,7	smiling 33:15,17
oke 76:20 80:14	smokes 122:21
4:19 109:10 124:7	142:1
26:9 146:9,10,12	smoking 3:9,14
46:16 147:12	22:17,20 23:1,19,21
48:12,13 158:4	24:12,13,16,23 25:3
74:7 177:21	26:5,20 27:1,6,19
19:20 220:21	28:13 31:5,5,5,11
oked 22:24 23:2	31:22,22,23 49:5
3:5,24 24:1 80:20	72:3 77:3 80:13
2:2 83:4,21 84:5	81:13 82:3,18 84:12
5:10 89:21 90:18	108:10,19,21
2:14 93:3,7,9,16	109:23 110:1,2,5
4:9 224:24	111:6,14,15,24,25
oker 24:15 25:11	112:3,7,8,24 113:2
2:22 41:25 42:18	114:9,14,15 118:10
4:22 77:1,12	118:17,20 122:14
15:18 149:13	123:22 124:6
78:14 227:3	127:18,23 130:6,20
okers 16:6,13,16	131:3,3,16,23 132:4
6:18,22 21:24 22:7	132:5,8,24 133:17
2:10,13,17,20 23:9	133:23 139:11,24
'VI? IS IQ 9.4	140:9.4.8 10.1Q
—r. i i . —r	± • 1 ' ?
6:10,15,19,25	150:22 151:14,24
7:17 28:4,11,16,21	152:5,14 154:23,24
8:25 29:9 30:9,21	155:2,10,14,17
1:4,21 32:5 82:2	156:1,22 157:7,9,16
4:5,18 85:10 89:20	158:2,17 159:8,13
0:17 92:13 93:2,23	159:19 160:11,18
4:8 97:10 98:9,11	160:24 161:1,16,21
8:17 99:14 100:13	164:6,7,8,17,18
02:3 103:3,12	165:1,5,20,25 166:8
05:6 109:8 115:14	166:15,18 167:6,17
16:9 132:23	167:24 168:1,10,12
33:16,20,22	170:7,8,22 174:2,6
41:15,16 145:8,17	174:20 176:4,23
45:19 146:6,12,16	178:1,11,19 179:9
46:20 147:21	179:16 180:2 182:3
49:7,8,9,9 150:24	182:16 184:1 188:2
51:1,4,12 159:13	189:1 204:11,20
60:25 161:16,21	226:15
67:2 179:24	sngeise 2:9
15:11 220:21	social 44:21114:19
21:16 224:9 225:6	114:24
daily 113:8	specialist 156:12
114:14	specialty 66:8
cieties 137:17	specific 11:6 15:10 ciety 108:11,21 16:12,18,25 18:14 109:22 110:8,13 18:16 21:12,23 24:2 111:6,15 112:3,12 24:5 27:25 28:2 113:10 114:7 30:22,22 32:6,16,21 ft 61:8,10 62:5,6 35:14 36:4,6 44:12 62:11,15,25 63:4,8 45:1 55:25,25 57:9 64:5,9 65:16,23 84:16 86:7 105:24 66:19 106:4,5 117:23 Id 71:5 72:17 146:1,2 174:13,17 123:24 147:17 186:22 191:14,20 148:5,11,25 157:12 192:5,19 201:4,9 le 41:13 216:6,18
mebody 35:20	specifically 4:10 39:11 183:18 170:17 190:9
mewhat 90:16	specifics 22:22 92:7,13 93:2 94:8 186:6
phisticated 126:5	spectrum 167:10
phistication	spend 53:1,5
151*1^	snenrlinp 1^4-1R.1Q
"J
142:4 172:15	spoke 166:21
220:24	sponsor 158:11
ught 4:15 23:16	sponsoring 208:20
130:22 131:1	spring 51:14,20
unds 43:1 45:3	squarely 229:3
71:3	stabilization 72:24
urce 49:16 67:12	staff 41:14 52:15
117:20 193:24	stan 109:1111:17
urces 45:24 65:6	stand 82:24 83:25
65:12,14,21 66:15	94:13 96:25
uth 52:17 68:16	standard 13:4 39:21
70:11	50:21 170:25
utheastern 70:11	171:16
uthern 50:13	standing 210:3
60:15	stands 205:8
ade 37:7	Stanford 193:13
eak 54:16 78:2	195:20,23 196:15
88:13 166:22,24	196:23 197:19
'eaking 166:25	198:5
167:5	stanton 108:17
ecial 49:23 190:11	start 31:4,22 33:8
50:24 137:8 164:6
78:21 218:2	statistical 103:20 22:18,19 229:11 107:21 126:5 171:2 rted 6:4 22:17,20 171:4,5,14
rts 105:2 118:9	statistically 103:19 te 15:3 68:23 103:23 104:15,22 9:10,12,24 71:17 106:13,20 107:6 1:22 72:1,8 73:2,5 127:7 171:12
3:8,17,25 74:6	statistics 141:4
5:10,17,24 76:9,17	stayed 7:16 8:13
6:24 102:9 125:18	steel 60:15 61:3
26:3,16 188:15	steve 5:10
04:9 223:3 231:3	steven 2:7
31:14	stic 49:23
ted 79:3 231:8	stick 81:5
tement 8:11	stimulant 125:4 0:22 32:6 81:18 126:2
6:17 87:12 90:22	stipulate 101:11
2:19 94:23 99:6	stipulated 4:2
01:7 102:1,12,13	stipulation 4:1
02:22,25 103:4	stop 31:5,23 174:6
08:25 117:16,19	stopped 151:20
1 R-1 R 174-1 ^	storaae 41
29:19 131:20	stored 34:21 201:7
48:10 158:7	stories 35:5
71:23 173:6,12	story 38:7 49:23
74:14,18 175:2,7,9	61:17 62:19,24
76:1 178:7,9,15,16	72:20 110:1,23
79:14 181:18	138:11 150:23
82:16 222:12	151:12 158:11
25:3,7	191:6 213:14,15,18
tements 8:5 29:3	229:25 230:1
9:14 30:1,25 78:19	strategies 137:20
8:21,25 84:8,16,25	strategy 34:6 49:4
5:4 88:7 89:5 90:8	straw 52:5
25:23 128:3	street 2:4
72:22 177:4 182:3	stress 165:4,12
83:25 192:1	166:14 169:21
tes 1:1 3:10 50:20	stressing 164:16
2:22 98:6 122:14	165:20,25 166:7
22:15 123:5,10,13	167:24
24:6 129:12	strike 82:6 83:16
31:15 141:11	88:17 94:1 104:12
53:16,24 178:10	131:13 133:14
147:20 160:9 183:2
rips 67:4	53:15,18 75:2
rong 188:5 193:18	subscribed 232:22
udent 188:10	subsequent 80:16 195:14 204:22 83:11
udents 51:2 53:4	subset 223:7
61:19 66:24 144:11	substance 56:3,5
168:10	substantive 13:18
udied 68:15,22	successful 64:20 93:8 121:25 124:18 177:4 191:3
udies 44:18 80:6,9	succinct 195:14
97:9 98:7,10,16,21	sued 75:11
98:22 99:13 100:11	suffered 24:3
102:1 103:1 104:21	sufficient 196:20
105:3,9,10 106:11	suggest 19:16 106:12,20 107:4,6 129:15
107:14,22 126:5,6	suggested 115:9 126:11,12,14,24 165:3
127:6 128:12,15,21	suggestion 166:14
129:1 130:3 156:10	suite 2:8,20
188:18,24 189:8	summarize 141:6
225:4,17 226:22	summarized 98:24 ndv 65-4 n 66-15 161 -6 704-1Q 7^
KJ I . ! 1 WU. 1 W•,z— i	OUllllliail^t^	^
109:1,12,14,19	summarizing 111:7,17 114:10 170:19 204:9
135:5 171:5 225:17	summary 86:20 225:21 226:4,12 96:5 122:6,11 nff 47:8 143:22 127:15 142:6
191:18	summer 36:25 52:19 nhan 46:4,6 57:20
ib 148:7	summertime 37:6
ibcategories 167:7	supervision 231:9
bchapter 101:15	supplied 35:13
bcommittee 79:13	supply 50:1 210:1 bgroups 171:20 213:1
bject 7:13 44:16	support 32:12 87:12 45:21 56:21 65:4,13 92:19 117:18
66:15 73:14 74:10	supported 34:2 114:21 228:2,13 72:22
bjects 66:25	supports 93:17
bmarkets 149:22	sure 11:21 17:12 149:23 20:15 38:1 46:7 bmit 9:4,6,8,13 54:22 56:18 68:11 bmitted 6:23 9:16 73:6 80:22 81:4 14:7,8,25 19:21 84:9,21,22 89:1
5:23 96:13 101:2	switched 23:9,12
13:12 114:17	90:19 92:15 93:4
16:24 130:12,24	94:10
32:12,13,17,19	switching 87:22
43:2,17 144:3,7	88:20 90:13,15
46:8,19 168:22	91:22 92:4,6,10,12
76:11 181:13	92:24 93:1 94:5,7
84:16 187:1	149:2
01:15 202:24	sworn 5:2 232:22
07:15 212:10	synonymous 103:22
13:9	104:14,16
geon 57:24 58:2	synonyms 202:20
8:9,12,17,21 59:4	synopsis 86:18
9:11,18 80:18,22	97:18
0:25 81:12 82:16	system 41:3,3,8,10
3:2,10,18,19 84:3	41:11
4:11,17,25 85:4,8	systematic 66:3 67:7
9:13 118:10 119:5	113:19,23
19:10120:21	systematically
21:4 123:18 124:3	140:25
25:11 126:16	t
2R-5 19.9:9.1 119-1	——-
S-iusm?14	tacelosky 223:6
S'I	take 6:1 10:18 17:10
80:21 181:8	34-122059'24
83:11 219:18,19	62.A9]23 69:23
20.3	221 2	70.15 71:8 16 74.5
■prise 154:6	75:22 80:9 102:12
prisingly 159:7	n9:4 125:10 144:4
•rounding 201:23	149:20151:16 02-2
u *	182:19 184:10
™y, '	185:6 193:10 206:5 59:12 161:20
62:25 188:14	. , '
, „	taken 1:22 4:5 5:14
'veyed 163:7	21:9 75:24 76:10,18
■veys 141:1	76:25 99:24 177:3 71 -21
. \	212:23 227:25
tamed 138:20	231-7 232-4
39-12	* *
. .	talk 14:2120:22
taming 125:14	27;23 28;17 29;212
itch 146:13,17,20	29:25 30:24 31:10 47-22
^/,zz	38:17 46:12 47:20
54:18 56:3,24 61:13	team 108:17
62:18 69:7 95:4	techniques 151:3
114:13 136:20,21	technology 42:23 137:10 183:9 61:15 67:11 219:24
185:11,15 189:18	tecum 3:12 11:13 Iked 12:12 15:5 17:7
48:10 54:20 56:7,15	tedder 2:11,13 3:4 59:19 137:1 145:6 184:23 185:1 170:20 189:22,23 186:25 187:12 189:25 210:10 194:12 198:13 219:7 221:5 199:12 200:23 Iking 13:13 58:25 201:5,17 203:19 78:7 110:10 147:9 204:1,7,15 205:17 147:17 183:10,14 205:20 206:6 207:8 200:10 220:12 207:17 209:4 221:24 223:16 210:21 214:13 Iks 78:18 149:12 216:14,22
r 3:14 23:16,22	teenagers 164:12,18 71:13 77:10 80:3 164:20 165:2,5,19
85:21 86:12 88:11	teens 165:2
102:11 103:5	telephone 2:15,19
790-91 991-1R	telenhnnerl 9-1
226:18	television 26:15 rget 151:9,14 174:1 192:13,15 155:4 193:3 196:25 rgeting 151:6 197:19 200:2,5,16
165:2	telford 3:21 209:15 rgets 149:6 209:18,24
rs 80:8 81:7 89:16	tell 40:1 143:7 194:1 97:12 99:2 100:2 199:4 229:25
124:22 167:4	telling 143:15 224:24 214:17 216:17
ste 200:2	tells 209:24
x 18:7	temperance 137:17 ach 51:15 137:22,24 138:5
aching 50:12,17	temporally 145:12 50:19,22 51:9,16,21 146:6
52:21 53:1,4,9	temporarily 218:5
ague 155:21 164:4	ten 171:24 172:1 164:9 165:6,22,24 178:12,20 179:17 168:12 180:3
ague’s 156:11	tend 35:4 37:20 164:15 166:10,14 56:24
ded 113:6 159:8	testing 89:17 213:19 dencies 147:15 227:1,12
s 115:12 116:6	textbooks 144:11
m 103:21 104:13	textile 60:21 61:4
04:15,24 116:7	textured 61:2
64:22 169:9 171:3	thank 6:3,10 50:8 72:17 130:16 216:24 ms 7:20 57:1 217:24
1:16 94:24 103:17	theft 18:9
12:24 114:12	theory 19:5 164:15
20:9 136:16	therapies 31:15
57:21 158:4 160:3	thereof 4:14
63:5 191:17	thing 17:19 19:3 94:18 199:20 45:1 178:3 191:12 00:5 226:4 229:12 200:20 213:12 t 203:9 220:2 227:14 228:25
ted 64:19	things 35:5,11 37:22 tified 5:3 17:18 38:2 42:13 43:10,18 6:14 38:6 42:20 43:20 44:13 54:14 7:14 78:1 117:3,13 56:25 57:6 62:10 20:23 152:24 65:2 66:13,23 80:15 7V11 1R7-1 m-?1 140-14
92:2 222:15	165:15 170:17
tify 9:23 19:17	176:14 195:18
7:5 44:13 75:21	197:11,22 199:24
8:24 128:18	226:13 229:24
40:12 154:19	think 7:19,23 14:15
10:14,23 211:11	15:5 16:5 36:11
11:12 215:15	49:15 50:3 57:9
tifying 9:21	79:14 88:9 89:8
timony 8:23 10:7	96:4,4 97:5,15
0:10 11:4,7,24	102:25 110:23
5:4,13 24:7,25	111:1 112:13,15
5:19,23 32:22	117:3 122:7 124:19
7:11 48:5 53:22	137:14 140:17
4:2,5 108:8 113:16	141:19,19 144:25
13:17 119:21	153:13 156:18
46:1,2 148:18	157:18 161:19
53:2 185:12 194:3	162:17 163:24
94:18 200:9	171:10 180:18,19
05:11 210:11,13	184:18 185:5,20
11:6,19 218:22	187:16 189:25
19:9 231:6 232:4,6	195:14 199:1
201:15 205:10,23
208:6 209:5 212:11 184:21 185:7,16 214:10 216:23	186:18,24 194:13
227:14 228:23	195:12 197:14
229:7 230:3	202:9,11,14 206:5
inking 38:15,25 231:7
56:25 81:5 113:18	times 5:14 24:16 189:7 33:21 34:10 54:20 ird 97:25 118:13 118:14 119:16 179:4 139:3 143:24 159:3 irds 148:22 169:2,8,10,14,15,17 ompson 63:19,22 170:9,12,18 192:24 oroughly 67:8 193:1 212:24 214:1 ought 12:17 20:22 214:21,24,25
38:23 47:18	tire 30:17 190:25 oughts 55:10 215:17 216:13,17
ousands 38:13	title 42:16,17 55:8,9 196:5,5,14,14 55:16,17,20,21 199:18,18,23 203:8 101:1 202:14,19
reat 167:13	titles 55:25
ree 33:14 34:21,23	tobacco 1:10,11,12 45:5,9 51:19,21 1:13,14,15,16 2:10 91-10 nO-15 9-14 “VQ 5-11 Q-9.1
211:15 229:4	30:10,22 31:6,11,24
ursday 15:17,20	32:6 36:18 41:24
ursdays 53:5	42:15 43:3 45:1
161:7 190:25	46:10,23 47:3,9
215:21 216:4,13,17	49:4 54:3,6,10 55:5
iht 136:23	56:16 57:16 58:5,20
ne 4:5,13 8:16	60:6,14,25 65:2,24
12:17 13:14 17:13	66:6,7,12,14 68:3,8
17:19 34:4,12,13,14	68:17 69:5,11,17
36:7,14 43:7,10	70:2,4,8,9,10,16,21
51:4 52:24,25 73:3	71:4,9 72:6,10,11
73:9,18 80:9,24	72:23,23 73:3,10,13
85:1 89:9 108:3	74:7,20 76:3 77:19
111:25 112:14	78:23 88:6 109:3
123:25 131:11	110:23 118:1
132:2,16,18,22	123:20 128:14
134:5,23,25 135:13	141:5 150:21
137:6,7 138:16	151:19 155:13
145:13,13 158:1,5	156:3,16 157:1,5,23
167:1 168:16	158:15 159:12
169:20 172:25	161:17,20 165:4
177:1 181:21	166:17,21 176:9
80:14 181:5,9	total 117:6,7,10 82:10,23 183:5,21 120:2,3,10,16,20,25 85:2,13 186:16 121:2 123:23
87:9,16 190:18,19	touch 67:1
91:10 193:14,17	tough 165:13
96:2 199:14	track 41:12,19 02:12 204:10,19 43:25
04:20 208:22	trade 95:4 117:22
09:16 215:7,18	transcript 231:6 18:18 219:20 232:3
20:17 221:14	transcription 231:9
22:3,4,6,17,22	transition 33:24 23:10,20 224:5 34:1 145:8 146:5,7
25:7 228:19,20	transitional 145:22 •accodocument... 146:21
23:7	trend 123:17 148:18
lay 6:1,6 12:3	trends 134:22,24 4:21 18:17 21:20 138:17 146:23 0:9 85:7 128:19 147:3,25 148:5,7
45:20 148:25	trial 9:23 15:12 58:24 189:5 38:17 47:21 48:21 97:70 19V7S 49-71 54-5 1 58* n
v-r. x-r i s s .-r	1 ' i s ± s
00:4,25 212:3	215:15
13:3,11215:2	trials 48:11 172:22
16:5,15 218:14,22	tried 48:13
23:17 227:18	true 5:22,23 44:5
28:2	78:16 86:9 106:8
i	50:3 99:4	115:15 116:10,14
01:20 174:2	123:18 133:2,20
75:11,12 192:21	134:2 146:19,24
99:17	153:21 166:20
crated 144:25	184:12 206:24
nes 55:13	210:1,6,6 231:5
igue 52:5	232:5
ling 43:18	truth 179:6 215:24
i	130:16 204:16	truthfully 231:12
07:25 208:18	try 24:15 38:21 39:9
09:18 213:5	40:4 41:18 53:5
iic 79:3,5 137:9	183:23 188:24
57:25	trying 12:24 39:17
lies 49:20 59:10	43:3 113:21 167:1
3:21	179:8 186:23
res 2:19	187:14 205:4
211:10 212:21
213:24	unaware 170:8
esdays 53:4	uncomfortable
rn 129:10 164:1 67:19
184:20 201:18	underlying 94:21 rns 199:17 162:25
173:9,20 174:13	understand 6:21 175:3,21 205:13 9:13,20 10:8,13,16 ice 34:19 58:1 112:7 118:24 ro 51:8 53:9,9 139:17 165:24 56:10 57:5 79:17 194:19 196:4,8 101:1 105:21 111:4 208:15 214:5,21 119:25,25 120:10 217:15 222:21 135:6 138:9,19 226:6
148:22 156:9	understanding 8:18 161:14 162:19 8:21 14:16 44:20,25 163:4 186:5 195:19 45:24 103:21 104:5 196:4,22 197:16 136:11 138:11 198:12 199:24 139:22 179:19 228:15 189:1 217:8
pe 48:22 147:12	understood 13:19 215:21 216:4 174:20 220:17 nes 70-8 80-Q 7.7.7-1
197:13	149:8
pewritten 231:8	unfiltered 80:21
pically 11:23	81:14 82:19 83:5,21
33:22 180:23	84:6,12,20 85:11
183:18	87:22 88:21 90:14
po 169:3	92:5,10,24 94:5
u	145:9,22 146:9,12
s 90-12 153-14	147:16,22 148:12
' , ' '	148:15,19,20149:2 160:1
>iquitous 134:7	*
:sf 39:8 222:5	unfolding 177.7
l	64:12 75:9 77:8	178:3 _ _
117:21118:7 125:1	umform 129:12
155:7 191:16	umque 17:2
. nn ~	united 1:1 3:10 tmiate 77:2
tra 80:8 81:8	,
145:10,23 146:17	}o
147:23 148:3,17	153:15,23 208:8
149:11 150:11	UIllverse 13:25
..	38:10
lambiguous	. . _ _
125:22 179:3 181:6	50:10’13
51:25 52:3,6 63:18
3:25 67:14 156:5	variance 126:17
93:13 195:23	128:4
23:10	variation 146:11
known 183:20	147:4,14,16 148:11
successful 123:7	148:16
23:11 124:15,17	variations 146:8
usual 64:21 65:1	variety 138:6
late 17:20	167:12
i	2:17 217:4	various 129:13,25
ible 42:25	137:16,19 220:14
ige 113:5 115:7	vast 148:25
; 10:7 12:25 20:3	venue 61:16
2:23 60:8 66:24	version 19:6 55:7,8
03:12,17 110:11	56:6
10:12 113:10,14	versus 34:16 52:25
13:20 114:1,19,19	62:23 135:25 172:6
14:23,24 116:4,14	vested 231:13
16:22 117:1	vi 122:7 123:5
23:21 134:23,24	141:25 142:5
35:11,12,18,20	vice 209:19 36:5 137:4,5,18,19 video 10:6,9
^9-9 1VVR 17 90	videos 19V4
A »./ i • •, -L ^	f IvlV/U v A Vy« 1 /
95:1 201:7 205:5	videotaped 14:2
05:12 206:17	view 55:7 130:8,19
08:21 210:4,5	131:18 151:13
15:14	159:8 228:21
;ful 188:14	viewed 150:22
;rs 135:18 172:17	viewing 26:15
n 50:15	views 223:22
v	viii 127:14,16,17
1:10,11,12,13,14	virSinia 156:4’5
: 15,16 122:5	157:2’12 158:9
41:24 142:5	182.11
id 104:21 105:10	™suals 208:8
06:20 107:5	vltae 17:15’16
26:12,14,25	voice 184:8
62:18 163:25	volume 141:3
00.9c	voluminous 85:4,16
’	101-22 idity 107:21
2Q.2	voluntary 152:21
U1 ,nc ,	volunteered 162:8 uable 175:6
77:13	63:
w	130:23 138:20
ait 181:14	139:12 158:7
aived 4:10	159:18 160:16
alked 92:18	164:23 165:12,15
alter 63:19,22	165:22 171:10,10
ant 12:25 20:22 172:18 174:19 21:11 33:6 37:19	175:6,10 177:9,13
61:23 65:18 82:22 179:23 187:8’23 90:7 94:20111:16 193:15 206:20 114:16 126:19 208:20 221:6 150:5,7,12 162:23 223:21
165:4 168:20	ways 52:19 64:19 185:11,15 187:21 93:7,7,8 104:20 194:18 201:18 114:13 120:10
203:8,24 212:15,17 131:4 141:2 142:8 217-4 229-11	177:7 178:4 220:14
anted 14:13 19:6	we've 56:7 59:23 126:20 212:7 110:19 195:11
ar 136:17 138:2 223:16
amed 142:22	web 43:22 193:11
arning 142:12,18 197:16 _______website ^9-R 14
144:2,7 164:10
165:7 166:3	63:9,14
arnings 74:6,13	Wednesdays 51:13
142:15 143:3	53:3
arns 142:13	week 15:216:4
atched 108:18	17:2151:11,21
ave 7:2,15 8:14,19	143:24
9:10,15,17 10:1,9	weekend 17:19
10:25 11:1 14:7	143:23
19-1153-15	weekends 53:10
avered 155:13	weeks 55:3
ay 20:23 28:23	wellt 5:837:3
32:15 41:19 43:22	wet 35:8
44:20 49:3 58:4	1:6,10,11,12,13
59:17 61:10,15,24	1:14,15,16
62:21 71:25 73:23	w|de 87:18 167:12
74:11 75:14 76:23	Wldely 72:17 179:20
77:4 78:20 82:22	}93:4 202:12
84:9 106:25 107:10	Wlder 108:21
113:3,13,15,23,24	widespread 145:15
114:25 127:11	155:16
128:23 129:7	wilder 36:9
liamson 29:10,13	written 29:1,9 30:10
iconsin 63:25	46:3 208:7
7:14	wrong 147:11
ip 88:5,6	177:11,16,23
hdrawing 228:5	178:18 179:13,17
hers 138:4	179:19 180:4,6
ness 47:24 48:5	wrote 49:3,22
17:16 229:2 231:6	118:24 161:19
31:11,20	164:5 204:21 215:6
nesses 7:10 36:17	x
4:9,14 57:15	^
xerox 61:23,24
men 111:24	-?-
50:10,10151:7	_I_
rd 179:8	y 169:4
rds 104:18 205:5	yeah 104:1
05:6	year 52:6 57:17,20
rk 12:18 37:7	57:23 84:9,14,16
3:13 48:23 52:8	120:15 130:24
3:5,10 54:18 61:7	131:8 141:8 142:17
1:14,18,19 64:1	142:18 213:17,21
3:12 84:24 104:17	years 18:13 36:7
94-11 141-R	38:14 40:21 42:20
81:9,25 182:14	111:18,19 151:23
88:17,21 190:2	152:4,13 163:11,17
24:23 228:4	178:12,20 179:17
rked 48:16 81:23	180:3 186:5 211:15
31:5 133:9,9	yesterday 43:9
rking 45:7 88:2	yield 80:4 87:22,23
49:16 150:12	88:21,22 90:14,15
57:2 159:25 167:9	90:19 91:22 92:5,6
81:5 182:1	92:11,11,15,24,25
rks 58:2 115:19	93:4 94:5,6,10
15:21,21 116:10	95:20 97:10 98:9,11
24:10 181:24	98:17 99:15 100:3
rid 50:22,23	100:14 102:3 103:3
36:17 138:2	104:22 105:6
rried 229:10	220:23 225:6
ite 60:4 85:20	yielded 106:12
6:25 118:14 147:7	yields 3:14
55:12 159:7,11	york 118:14 119:16
70:6 204:18 215:6	192:24 193:1
iters 176:11	212:24 214:1,21,24
iting 52:15 53:6	214:25 9:15 118:20 164:9
»ung 41:25 42:18 178:13
»uth 31:13 125:16 127:23 151:9,10 153:1,6,15,24 154:5 154:22 166:1,8,15 166:18 167:5,15,18 167:25 191:17 195:16 204:11,20 205:3,9
>uths 126:8 127:18 153:20 155:4,4 z
itero 40:19,22 41:8 41:11