THE IN CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA IN AND FOR HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY
CIVIL DIVISION
CASE NO.: 08-CA-9153 DIVISION: D
IN RE ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION
Pertains to: Rodiguez, Winell as Personal Representative for the Estate of Gilbert Rodriguez.
_/
DEPOSITION OF LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
(VOLUME I)
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2009 BOIES, SCHILLER & FLEXNER 121 SOUTH ORANGE AVENUE, SUITE 84 0 ORLANDO, FLORIDA 328 01
9:00 a.m - 7:03 p.m.
REPORTED BY:
Jennifer B. Sanders
Notary Public, State of Florida
APPEARANCES:
BRENT R. BIGGER, ESQUIRE ABRAHAMSON, UITERWYK & BARNES 900 West Platt Street Tampa, Florida 33606
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF WINELL RODRIGUEZ
CHRISTINE LAWSON, ATTORNEY AT LAW JONES DAY
1420 Peachtree Street, N.E., Suite 800 Atlanta, Georgia 30309-3053
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO DAVID M. WOODS, ESQUIRE
ANGELA SPLITTGERBER, ATTORNEY AT LAW (via telephone)
SHOOK, HARDY & BACON, LLP
2555 Grand Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64108-2613
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF LORILLARD TOBACCO
MITKA TAMARA LYNN BAKER, ATTORNEY AT LAW (via telephone)
DLA PIPER, LLP
500 Eighth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF PHILIP MORRIS USA
INDEX
TESTIMONY OF LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
Direct Examination by Mr. Bigger	4 Cross-Examination (None)
CERTIFICATE OF REPORTER	188
ERRATA	18 9
SUBSCRIPTION OF DEPONENT	190
'k'k'k'k'k'k'k'k
EXHIBITS
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 1	10
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 2	10
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 3	12
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 4	23
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 5	40
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 6	121
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 7	122
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 27	27
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 28	28
Deposition taken before Jennifer B. Sanders, Court Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, in the above cause.
Thereupon,
LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D., having first been duly sworn or affirmed, was examined and testified as follows:
DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Good morning, Doctor.
A. Good morning.
Q. Can I call you Doctor? Is that all right?
A. Martinez.
Q. Or professor?
A. Either way is fine.
Q. Martinez? You're easy to anything.
My name is Brent Bigger. I'm with the law firm of Abrahamson, Uiterwyk & Barnes. We're in Tampa. And you are here today on the deposition in a case of Winell Rodriguez, as personal representative for the estate of Gilbert Rodriguez. Are you aware of all that?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. And you are aware that you have been listed as an expert witness in that case?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The Gilbert Rodriguez case is what's known as an Engle Progeny case. Have you ever heard that term before?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. What's your understanding of that term?
A. My understanding is that this was part of a class-action suit and that, however, that cases are being tried individually. That's the extent of my knowledge. And it has to do, of course, with tobacco and health.
Q. How do you come to that understanding?
A. I've seen some of the information. Actually, at one point, I searched it in the Internet and that's how I learned about these details.
Q. What did you search on the Internet?
A. Where?
Q. What did you search?
A. Engle case.
Q. Just in Google, or where?
A. Probably, Yahoo search.
Q. Did anyone else communicate to you or say anything to you that helped form that understanding of what an Engle Progeny case is?
A. In conversations with the lawyers, that has come up and there was an explanation of that, yes.
Q. Who provided that explanation?
A. Christine Lawson.
Q. Anyone else?
A. Not that I can remember, no.
Q. When did that communication take place?
A. It took place when we started talking about Florida cases, and this must have been in 2002, early on.
Q. You began talking about your serving as an expert witness in Florida cases in 2002?
A. I began to prepare for those cases, yes. 2007, I
say.
Q. Oh, 2007?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So 2007 was the first time you had any communication about Engle Progeny cases?
A. That’s correct.
Q. Did you do any of the searching you talked about on the Internet, before at that time?
A. No, I didn’t. That was more recent.
Q. So the first time you were aware of Engle Progeny cases was in 2007?
A. Yes.
Q. Was that the first time you were aware of the Engle class action?
A. Well, I had read in the news about that, a class-action lawsuit in Florida, and I had heard about the word -- the term Engle cases, but I wasn’t aware of what
that consisted of.
Q. When was the first time you read in the news about the Engle class action?
MS. LAWSON: Just a second. I'm going to object.
I don't know how any of this is relevant, but I guess you can proceed in your line of questioning, if you like, but none of this is relevant to Mr. Rodriguez or anything having to do with this case that we're about today.
Q. When was the first time you read in the newspaper about the Engle class action?
A. I can't put a finger on a date.
Q. It was before you communicated with the lawyers about serving as an expert witness in these cases, though?
A. I'm not sure about that. Because I had been working on other cases in Puerto Rico related to tobacco, so, you know, those kinds of news were things that I paid attention to. So I'm not sure whether it was before or after, really, our first conversation about Engle case.
Q. Okay. We'll get to the Puerto Rico case in just a minute. Have you read the Supreme Court of Florida Engle decision?
MS. LAWSON: Again, if I can object. If I can just have a running objection to any sort of generalized Engle questions, if you don't mind.
MR. BIGGER: Sure. It's a form objection, I guess is what you're saying.
MS. LAWSON: That's fine.
MR. WOODS: Join. Just to make that clear for the record, one objection is the objection for all.
MR. BIGGER: Unless otherwise noted for some reason. That's fine.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Have you at any time to read the Supreme Court of Florida Engle decision?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you at any time to read or reviewed any testimony from the Engle class action?
A. Not that I'm aware of, no.
Q. No depositions — no deposition transcripts or trial transcripts from the Engle class action?
A. By that — by that, do you mean specific cases, or the Engle cases as a class action?
Q. Let's start with the Engle — the class action itself. Before decertification, did you read any deposition or trial transcripts from testimony provided in the Engle class action?
A. No.
Q. I take it from your answer that you have read deposition or trial transcripts from cases that derived from
the Engle class action?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. We'll get to those in a second, as well.
Other than the communications you said you had with the lawyers about the Engle Progeny cases to help form your understanding of what Engle Progeny cases are, have you had any other background or other information provided on Engle by anyone?
A. Engle, in general?
Q. The Engle class action, yes.
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. So the extent of your knowledge in the Engle class action is the communications you had with the lawyers and the search you have done on the Internet about the class action?
A. That's correct.
Q. I think, as well, I guess some of the newspaper articles or stories that you read?
A. Yes.
Q. Just for the record, you stated you were aware you were disclosed as an expert in this case?
A. In this case or —
Q. The Rodriguez case?
A. Yes, I did say that.
Q. Just to mark Exhibit 1, this is the expert witness
list from R.J. Reynolds, which, if you'll note, you are listed as number six; is that correct?
A. I can see that, yes.
Q. Because you were listed as an expert witness, we provided a notice for your deposition today. Have you seen that notice?
A. You mean the subpoena?
Q. Well, you received a notice — there was a notice that was provided and there was also a subpoena that was provided. Right now, I'm just talking about the notice.
MR. BIGGER: Mark this as Exhibit 2.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit Nos. 1 and 2 were was marked
for identification.)
Q. That's a copy of notice of taking deposition duces tecum, and you see down at the bottom of the page, you are listed, Luis Martinez-Fernandez. I think it says M.D., which I think is incorrect. You're not an M.D., are you?
A. No. I'm a Ph.D.
Q. That's our mistake. I apologize. Have you reviewed this document at any time?
A. Unless I received it from Ms. Lawson or somebody else at the firm, I'm not sure. It doesn't look familiar, honestly, when I look at the type and the little box. I'm not sure I have seen this but — it does not look familiar.
Q. When you say "the firm," you're referring to the
firms Jones Day — the law firm of Jones Day?
A. That's correct.
Q. Did the firm provide you with this notice?
A. I have to check. I don't think so. That's — I'm not a hundred percent sure, but it doesn't look familiar.
Q. So, sitting here today, this is the first time you've seen this notice?
A. I can't tell you a hundred — with 100 percent certainty, but it does not look familiar.
Q. Okay. Your best recollection is this is the first time you've seen it?
A. The best recollection, yes.
Q. Okay. If you'll look at the attachment to that notice, Exhibit No. 2, you'll see there's an Exhibit A which requests that you provide certain documents at the time of your deposition.
If you haven't seen the notice — your best recollection is you hadn't seen this notice before. I presume you haven't seen Exhibit A before, that was attached to the notice?
A. I have seen similar information in another document or it may be in this one, if I actually did get to see this one.
Q. Let me hand you what we're going to mark as Exhibit 3, and this is the subpoena duces tecum for this
deposition. Maybe this is the document that you'd thought you'd seen before.
It's — in the subpoena is a list of items that you're subpoenaed to bring here today and it's very similar if not the same as the exhibit that was attached to the notice. Is this the document — the list you recall seeing? A. Yes.
Q. So you were provided this document?
A. Yes, I was.
Q. It was served upon you?
A. I first received an electronic copy from Ms. Lawson and then I received the actual subpoena. If that's what it's called.
MS. LAWSON: If I can interject one thing just to clear up confusion, what he's talking about in the electronic copy is actually the notice.
MR. BIGGER: Okay. For the record, counsel has indicated that the notice of deposition was e-mailed to the witness for his review.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 3 was marked for identification.)
Q. And, again, like I stated, the notice and what's attached as Exhibit A is substantially similar if not the same as the items that were contained on the subpoena.
Did you receive the subpoena?
A. I did, yes.
Q. And you understand that the subpoena compels you to bring information contained within it to the deposition today?
A. Yes, I understand that.
Q. Did you bring the information contained in the subpoena to the deposition today?
A. I sat down with Ms. Lawson and we had prepared a packet of information based on the previous case, and then I — anything that pertains to this case, I've also put together and those have been brought here today, yes.
Q. Okay. Just briefly go through this subpoena, just quickly, just kind of do a global shot of what you brought with you today.
Number one asks for a copy of your most current curriculum vitae. Did you bring that with you today?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. We were provided with a copy of that in your — with your expert disclosure, which was marked as Exhibit 1, back in September. Has your curriculum vitae changed since September 2008?
A. So this is September 2008. There may have been some minor changes. I can't think right now of any of them. Because I'm looking in the publications, for example, nothing substantive really.
Q. Let me give you — let me give you a document we can mark Exhibit 4. This is a copy of your — do you mind if I call it CV? Is that easier?
A. That's fine.
Q. My Latin is not that good. This is a copy of your CV provided with your expert disclosure, which is marked as Exhibit 1. You can briefly glance through it and see if it's — if there have been any changes, please let me know what they are. This is the one we were provided in September of 2008.
A. (Peruses document.) There's nothing new, I believe, in the area of publications.
Q. Okay. What about in the section titled Works Accepted for Publication or in Progress? I think it's page four of your CV. Have any of those works been published since that time?
A. I'm not 100 percent sure, but I believe that the top one, the "Bay of Pigs," is now on the other section. It has been published.
Q. Are there any other works that are currently in progress or accepted for publication not listed on this page four of Exhibit 4?
A. Yes. There is — there is a scholarly article that I presented in Puerto Rico in October, and, since then, I have submitted that for consideration for publication.
Q.	What was that article on?
A.	It was on Puerto Rican population in Orlando.
Q.	Was it on anything tobacco related?
A.	No. Had nothing to do with that.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Then in the area of conferences and symposiums, I just mentioned the paper that I gave in Puerto Rico.
Q.	Okay. Any other additional conferences or symposiums?
A.	Yes. In New York City, the American Historical Association meeting in January of this year.
Q.	What was the substance of your presentation?
A.	The Cuban revolution.
Q.	Nothing tobacco related in that presentation?
A.	Not at all.
Q.	Anything less?
A.	As far as I can --
Q.	As far as conferences and symposiums. I'm sorry.
A.	Not that I can think of, no.
Q.	What about invited presentations?
A.	Yes. Actually, one this week at the Winter Park Library.
Q.	What was the substance of that presentation?
A.	Puerto Ricans in Orlando.
Q.	Anything tobacco related in that presentation?
A. No, nothing.
Q. Anything else that was additional in invited presentations?
A. Not that I can recall.
Q. Any additional editorial boards that you have been selected to serve on?
A. Not officially, no. I received sort of an inquiry whether I would be willing to participate in another one.
Q. If you're not at liberty to say, I understand, but which board is that?
A. It's Inter America — I forget the exact name but it's a journal out of the Inter America University in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Q. Okay. The focus of that journal was like most of your other professional experience, Hispanic, Carribean history, that sort of thing?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes.
Q. Anything tobacco related that that journal focuses on publishing?
A. I'm not aware of — I believe it's a new journal that will be starting.
Q. Any additional board memberships since September of 2008?
A. No.
Q. What about any other items that you1ve added to other professional service, since September of 2008?
A. I may — I have reviewed at least one — at least one book manuscript for a publisher and probably I have reviewed one article manuscript for publication. That's my recollection.
Q. Okay. Any other professional affiliations and offices held — I'm sorry. Let me back up a second.
Either of those two items you just mentioned that you've added to other professional service, were those tobacco-related items or tobacco-related service?
A. No, they were not.
Q. What about under professional affiliations and offices held, any additions since September of 2008 to that section of your CV?
A. I don't recall any change in that area at all.
Q. Have you learned any additional language skills?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Is your CV intended to be an exhaustive list of your professional experience and accomplishments, or is it selective?
A. It is — well, CVs vary depending on what the purpose is. If I were to apply to a — say a teaching post, maybe I would include a section on that. For example, work experience, before the university — well, before Augusta
State University, I taught for a year at Inter-American University in Puerto Rico. That's not there because I consider that to be pre-Ph.D.
So in that regard, my desire's to make it as extensive as possible. But there are things, for example, that may be included in some CVs, some faculty members include all the students that have written master thesis or dissertations under their supervision. That's something that I usually don't include.
Q. Under work experience, though, you consider that to be an extensive list of your professional work experience since obtaining your Ph.D.?
A. Work experience. Okay. Well, this is my academic work experience.
Q. Is there other work experience that's not included on there? Aside from what you said — let me rephrase the question.
Is there other professional work experience, since obtaining your Ph.D., that's not included on there.
A. Yes, I would say so. For example, I taught at the Warton School of the University of Pennsylvania, some courses. That's not included here.
Q. Were any of those courses that you taught — was the substance of any of those courses you taught, tobacco-related material?
A. These were courses about Cuba and Latin America, and to the extent that tobacco is an important crop, I'm pretty sure that would — that was mentioned, but it would be a small component of those classes.
Q. The component — the small component of those classes, was any of that related to the U.S. tobacco industry?
A. The courses were not about the U.S., no.
Q. Okay.
A. But probably because there was a strong link, first, between Cuba and Key West and then Tampa, as far as tobacco leaves being sent from Cuba to Florida, tobacco workers migrating back and forth. So there is that connection and that is — that has been part of my work.
Actually, in one of my books, I pay specific attention to that tobacco — that cigar-making community in Key West and perhaps a little bit on Tampa. So, to that extent, there is a relation.
And if I may add, most of my courses, because they deal with the Carribean, they deal with Latin America, the United States is an important presence, with a great influence on the United States — on — I should say on Latin America and the Carribean. And they are — this — my belief is that in order to fully understand Latin America, you have to have a good understanding of U.S. foreign
policy, transformations in the economy.
And I would say that many, if not most, of my works on Latin America and the Carribean have had to do to some extent with the United States, and, certainly, the bulk of my archival research has been in the United States, in places like the Library of Congress, for example.
Q. The bulk of your archival research, throughout your professional career, has been in the United States?
A. As far as time, yes. I wouldn't hesitate to say that it's — that's — that would be the case, yes.
You also asked me about — you were asking me about other professional. I don't include here the — my work with the law firm Jones Day. That's not here.
Q. Yes. That was notably absent from the CV. Do you have a CV that has that information on it?
A. No.
Q. Do you maintain a CV that has that information on
it?
A. There may be a broader CV that includes consulting. I'm not sure whether that's still the case.
Q. You could — in any event, you could easily create a CV that has your consulting experience on it?
A. Yes, I could.
MR. BIGGER: Counsel, could you produce that CV,
responsive to the subpoena?
MS. LAWSON: I don't think we're required to create something that doesn't exist.
MR. BIGGER: Well, the doctor's testified there's other experience that's potentially relevant to his testimony. We're asking for a copy of his most recent CV. That suggests we want all of his relevant experience.
MS. LAWSON: Well, I understand that. And he told you he brought you his most recent CV. I think he also told you he'd have to create a CV that includes that and I don't think anything in your subpoena or your duces tecum requires us to create a document that doesn't exist.
MR. BIGGER: He said he maintains different CVs and uses different CVs for different purposes. How am I supposed to know this is what he — he defines this as his current CV but it's obviously a decision that he makes.
So I'm asking that you provide the CV that contains all of his information on it, including the work experience he's done for your law firm and any other consulting experience.
If you're not willing to do that, that's fine. We'll fight about it later. I just want to know if you're willing to do it.
MS. LAWSON: No. I'm telling you: We're not going to create a document. If he has a document already in existence that's different than this, that's fine, we can go back and look. But I'm not going to ask him to create a document.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. You will go back and look through your records and see if at any time you created a CV that has that consulting experience on it?
A. I will.
Q. And you have that CV available?
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. And if you find that CV, you will provide it?
A. Actually, I'm sure I have it.
Q. You're sure you have it?
A. Yes.
Q. So you'll provide that to counsel who will provide it to us?
A. If she requires me to do that.
MS. LAWSON: Well, as I told you, I will ask him to search and see what he has, and if he has one in existence, that's fine.
MR. BIGGER: He just said he has it. The witness just stated he has it.
Q. So will you provide her with whatever you have —
MS. LAWSON: I just want to make it clear for the record, we said we were happy to have him go look at what he has available. I don't know if what he has available is exactly what you're looking for. I'm happy to provide what he has available.
Q. Why don't you just produce whatever you have available, which you indicated you have a CV that has that experience on it, provide it to counsel and she will provide to us. Is that okay, Doctor?
A. If I get that request, I'll be glad to comply.
Q. I'm making that request.
MR. BIGGER: And we've made it as far as the subpoena, as well, I believe, but I guess that's your interpretation.
MS. LAWSON: Well, let the record reflect, you asked for a copy of the witness's most current curriculum vitae, not for all his curriculum vitae.
MR. BIGGER: That's fine.
MS. LAWSON: As I have told you, we're happy to go back and see what he has.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 4 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Thank you, Doctor. I appreciate you providing that for us.
Number two on the subpoena duces tecum for deposition is all facts and data for which you base any opinion.
A. That's exhibit —
Q. I'm sorry. Exhibit 3, the subpoena duces tecum for deposition.
MS. LAWSON: And let me state for the record, we did have objections to your duces tecum and specifically with regard to that one. We told you we objected, that we provided his reliance materials to you. I think you already have a copy of that. We have another copy here today, if you'd like those. But that's what we're producing in response to that item.
Q. Your position is — doctor, your position is that the reliance materials provided to us by the law firm Jones Day, those are all facts and data upon which you base your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. We sat down and looked at everything I had and those were provided to you and that's the extent of my knowledge about that.
Q. There's no other facts, data, research that you're basing your opinions on in this case?
A. Well, there are — there are some new materials that I have looked at and I did — notes, for example, that I took.
Q. So you took some notes?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Did you produce those notes today?
A. I have them here with me.
Q. Okay. Where are they?
MS. LAWSON: If I can state for the record, I have copies of the notes, except for, I think he took one page of notes this morning that I don't have a copy of, but I — if you want them, we have copies that we can provide to you.
MR. BIGGER: That's fine.
MS. LAWSON: I just wanted him to have his original so he could refer to them.
MR. BIGGER: That's not a problem. Why don't you just hand me the copies.
MS. LAWSON: Sure.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Now, by notes — I know this initially came up in the Cohen deposition, if you recall — I don't want what you deem as notes being photocopies of things you've read and that sort of thing. I would like your handwritten notes. That's what I'm looking for.
You brought with you copies of your handwritten notes that you made in review of your reliance materials or other documents for this case?
A. That's correct.
Q. That's what I'd like to see, the handwritten notes.
MS. LAWSON: We have — and, again, just so the record can reflect accurately what we have — I have a box here that has a number of his notes and things like that. He also has notes that are specific to this case and that's what I have here.
MR. BIGGER: Okay.
MS. LAWSON: These are generalized notes. These are more specific.
MR. BIGGER: And those are the notes for this
case?
MS. LAWSON: Yes.
MR. BIGGER: We'll start with those.
Q. Again, this is just your handwritten notes?
A. That's correct.
MS. LAWSON: And I understand this looks like newspaper articles. He was circling things on here. There's more generalia in here. Those, we considered his notes, so, in fairness to you, I wanted to produce those. It wasn't meant to be voluminous. It was just meant to be fulsome.
Q. Doctor, your counsel just handed me a stack of documents that is your complete copy of your handwritten
notes, notes you've made and review of materials preparing for this case.
One of the documents she hand me, for example, is a photocopy of — it appears to be some particulars from a newspaper. At the top of that page, there is some handwritten markings that say TT.0CT.17, 1962 p 5B, column 4. You wrote those words on the top of that page?
A. No, I did not write those words.
Q. So those were not your notes.
A. That one in particular is not my note, no.
Q. Okay. Who wrote that on there?
A. I'm not exactly sure who did. I know the providence of those materials.
Q. We'll get to that in a minute. You're not aware who wrote that on that document?
A. No, I'm not.
MR. BIGGER: Why don't we have this marked as — that's going to throw my numbering all off. Do you have an objection to marking this as document No. 27?
MS. LAWSON: That's fine with me. If it's fine with the court reporter.
MR. BIGGER: And so we don't get off here, we'll just come back and put it at the end of wherever it is. For now, we'll mark this as Exhibit 27.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 27 was marked for
identification.)
Q. This was the document I just read to you.
A. Now that I can see it in front of me, what you read that appears on top, that — I did not write that. However, the circling that appears there, that is my writing. That's my hand.
Q. So the circling was your handwriting?
A. That's correct.
Q. What was the significance, in your mind, of circling that? What does that note mean to you? I guess is what I'm asking.
A. What it means to me? That I would like to — this is what happened: The papers that you have with you there, they run — and that's my notes that I'm referring to — they run, I believe, up to 1957. And after that date, what I tried to do is to circle parts that I could come later to see them as they appear in the newspaper.
Q. What is the significance of 1957 — that your notes only run to 1957?
A. There's no significance other than I was working on them, taking notes as usual, but I was — I wanted to finish reading those, and it was faster to read them without taking the notes at the time and coming back to them at a later time to either write them or transcribe them.
Q. Within the stack of documents that you have
provided to me today that are all your handwritten notes, there1s another photocopy of what appears to be newspaper articles. At the top, it has what appears to be a photocopy of a sticker that was placed on this page and it reads TT, November 10, 1962, page 1A, column two to three. I don't see any circle around that number on this document.
MR. BIGGER: We'll have it marked as 28.
Q. I'm going to hand to you.
MR. BIGGER: I obviously don't have a copy for counsel, but I'm sure you have it.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 28 was marked for identification.)
MS. LAWSON: That's all right.
A. And the question is . . .?
Q. Where are your handwritten notes on that?
A. Okay. I don't have handwritten notes or haven't made circles. The reason being is that I did not do that for every article. But rather than separate the ones that I did and didn't, I wanted to make sure that the whole stack stayed together. So the circling, for example, appears only in a portion of these newspaper articles.
Q. So when I was handed this and told this was copy of your handwritten notes, on some of these documents, you, in fact, did not mark anything on them at all?
A. That's correct.
Q. But you're thinking those are handwritten notes — that's your understanding of your handwritten notes?
When I say I want all your handwritten notes, to you, that document you're holding in your hand, Exhibit 28, is a handwritten note?
A. Not by me, no.
Q. Okay.
A. But as I stated earlier, rather than divide them and miss the order of the articles, my strategy was to have them all together, in the order of publication, and to mark the ones that I decided to come back to at a later time.
Q. So all these documents are documents that you felt were significant for this case that you wanted to come back to at a later time, and they're also your actual handwritten notes about this case; is that correct?
A. No. That's not what I said. At one point, before seeing them, they were all significant. And, to some degree, they all continue to be significant, as well, because I may want to go back to all of them. But the ones that I marked, I found to be the most significant or — yes.
So I didn't mark a lot of them because, even though the stories may have been relevant, perhaps they were repetitious — repetitive, I should say.
Q. So that document, you did not mark at all, correct?
A. This one, I did not, no.
Q. So is it safe to conclude, then, that that one is of less significance than one that you did mark or circle the descriptive number on?
A. I would say to some extent, but I would argue that they are all significant, but, at this time, the ones that I marked were the ones that I wanted to look at again, one more time and, you know, actually take notes.
Q. Have you looked at them again, one more time?
A. No, I have not.
And, by the way, that's the same method that I use for the other — the ones that you have the hand notes from —
Q. When were you planning on looking at them again?
A. It all depends on whether I need to look at them again based on going back to a Tampa case, for example.
Q. Have you looked at enough of these documents, these materials, to form your opinions today?
A. I have looked at all of them.
Q. You don't need to look at any further information?
A. Further information? Well, there's always a possibility that new information will show up.
Q. I'm sorry. Just to save us time: Not new information. You told me that you circled certain documents because they were significant enough, you may want to review
them again. And you also indicated that you have not done that yet.
When, after this deposition, do you believe you will review those documents again to assist in presenting your opinions in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't have any immediate plans to do that because, as I said, I read them — I read all of them thoroughly. And it's the same method that I use when I'm working on my own historical research. You know, you read a lot of different materials but you circle some of it and you take notes of some of it. That doesn't mean that I have discarded them, but these are the ones that, at the time, I want to focus on.
Q. All right. That's not what I'm asking, Doctor.
I'm saying you suggested — you stated that you circled certain documents because you wanted to go back and review them again; is that correct?
A. Back and review them or take actual notes.
Q. Okay. Did you take actual notes on those documents that you made markings on?
A. No, not yet. I got as far as 1957.
Q. When do you plan to make those notes on those other documents?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I really can't tell you that I have a plan for a specific date or moment.
Q. You understand that if you review additional materials that change or affect your opinions, you can be deposed again?
A. Can you repeat the question?
Q. Sure. You understand that if you go back and review these documents that you have marked on, take additional notes and use that information to change or affect your opinions, you'll have to be called back for another deposition or you won't be allowed to testify on that information at trial?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, for one thing, you know, it all depends on what the interpretation of that is. They are not new materials. They're materials that I have already looked at and I have circled.
If notes or transcriptions of those materials are actually created and that is deemed as new information and — and I am asked to be deposed again, I guess if that's how it works, I'll do it.
Q. Are you — have you fully formed your opinions that you intend to offer in this case?
A. I have, yes.
Q. Do you need any additional information in order to
present those opinions in this case?
A. There's always the possibility that some other thing may — may come up. But, as far as I know, I have worked extensively on U.S. materials, on Florida materials, Tampa materials, that I feel comfortable that there's a strong — there's strong evidence that I have looked at that I don't anticipate, given the extent of the materials that I have looked at, not just for Tampa but elsewhere in Florida, that will alter, to any degree, the major conclusions, no.
Q. So you have no intention to further review these materials to alter or affect your opinions that you're going to offer in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. When you mean "review," do you mean read them again?
Q. You tell me, Doctor. I mean, you said you made markings on certain documents that you wanted to review again and that you may take notes on those documents.
A. That's true, yes.
Q. Will those notes affect your opinions in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't think so, because I already read the materials.
Q. So you have, as you said, fully formed your
opinions in this case as we sit here today?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. "Fully formed," I mean, if you mean 100 percent, I can tell you that there may be some areas that will provide additional information and additional details, but as far as the major conclusions, I don't anticipate that happening, no .
Q. All the — well, we'll get to that.
Referring back to Exhibit No.3, the subpoena, number three asked for all documents and other materials of any sort you referred to or relied upon in order to arrive at any opinions or conclusions concerning those issues — excuse me — concerning the issues involved in these cases generally and the specific cases identified above.
MS. LAWSON: Okay. Again, let me state for the record, we objected to your duces tecum and we you told we were providing his reliance list. You have a copy of that, I think. I have other copies today, if you'd like it.
Q. Is it your position today that the reliance materials are provided to counsel are all the materials of any sort that you referred to and relied upon to arrive at the opinions and conclusions concerning this case?
A. Yes. That's my opinion.
Q. Nothing else? Excuse me. No other documents or
materials? I guess I should say.
A. I have provided them with everything.
Q. Okay. The question four asked for all reports, summaries, impressions, evaluations relating to these cases generally and the specific cases identified above. It also asks about testing. I presume you didn't do any testing in these cases?
A. Testing?
Q. Testing. Did you conduct any testing as part of your preparation to serve as an expert in these cases?
A. Testing in what sense?
Q. Did you interview anyone?
A. Interview anyone? No, I haven't done that.
Q. As a historian, what kind of testing would you ordinarily do to perform research of this kind? Is there any testing you can do?
A. Well, all the materials are being tested as I do the research. I make decisions about, you know, which are the most relevant. I make decisions about which areas to go into, which libraries and depositories.
So if you mean these kinds of selective decisions, calling them tests, I do that throughout my research, yes.
Q. Are you generally referring to that as historical method? You've heard that term before?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Is that's generally what you're speaking to there, the use of historical method when conducting research?
A. That's part of the historical method, yes.
Q. Anything else other than that, any other kind of testing that you would ordinarily conduct?
A. The word testing is not really a word that we use —
Q. What word would you use?
A. — or reference.
I would say analysis, evaluation. There are different methods that can be applied.
Q. For any analysis, evaluation you have done in this case, did you prepare a report?
A. A report?
Q. Or a summary?
MS. LAWSON: If I can just object again for the record. We did object to — if you're on item four now —
MR. BIGGER: Uh-huh.
MS. LAWSON: — to your duces tecum. We told you we were providing his reliance list. I also referred you to his notes that we have over here in the box and there was — again, in the interest of full disclosure, there was one page of notes that we didn't have copies of .
MR. BIGGER: Can we get a copy of that, too?
MS. LAWSON: Yes. At a break, we'll get a copy. That's fine.
MR. BIGGER: Those notes you were referring to, counsel, those were — (inaudible) — reliance materials to us?
THE COURT REPORTER: Wait. Slow down.
"The notes you . . ."?
MR. BIGGER: I'm sorry.
The notes you just referred to in the banker's box, were those provided as part of the reliance materials ?
MS. LAWSON: No. The notes were not provided as part of the reliance materials, although there are a few documents scattered here and there among the notes that might be included in the reliance list and the reliance materials, but these are predominately notes.
MR. BIGGER: What about the stack of documents you provided me earlier, are these items included in the reliance materials you provided?
MS. LAWSON: Not the handwritten notes but the newspaper articles would be.
MR. BIGGER: All these articles are included in the reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Uh-huh.
MR. BIGGER: But there are additional articles over there in that other banker's box, that I haven't seen yet, that were not included in the reliance materials ?
MS. LAWSON: No. It's my understanding that the other documents in here would also be included in the reliance materials.
MR. BIGGER: They are?
MS. LAWSON: It is my understanding, yes.
MR. BIGGER: Or they were, I guess I should say.
MS. LAWSON: They are or they were, is my understanding.
MR. BIGGER: Other than any additional handwritten notes; is that correct?
MS. LAWSON: Yes. And I didn't personally prepare the reliance list, but it's my understanding that any of the documents in this box that are not handwritten notes would be included — or not handwritten or transcribed notes would be included on the reliance list.
MR. BIGGER: Okay.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Did you prepare a report summarizing your analysis and evaluations in this case?
A. There is a — I believe it's called a disclosure.
Q. I think you're referring to your expert disclosure which was provided with the document that was marked as Exhibit 1, where you were listed as an expert witness in this case?
A. That's my understanding.
Q. Is that your understanding?
Let me just hand you Exhibit 5.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 5 was marked for
identification.)
Q. Just take a moment and review that.
Is this the document to which you were just referring as your report that was part of your disclosure?
A. Yes, this is it.
Q. This is the report you prepared that summarizes your analysis and evaluations for this case?
A. I prepared it. I participated, of course, in the preparation, but the actual document as it's typed and format, that was done by Jones Day.
Q. You didn't draft it?
A. Well —
Q. You didn't physically type it yourself? I guess to clarify.
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Did you dictate it?
A. I wouldn't characterize it as a dictation, but
this is my understanding that this is based from an earlier report. And, of course, my participation, I sat down with Ms. Lawson and I made sure that my ideas were there. And I would characterize it more as a — as a discussion in which I presented the ideas verbally and then this was produced.
Q. So this was essentially a summary of a discussion you had with the lawyers regarding your evaluation and analysis in this case?
A. Well, it's based on more than one meeting and one conversation, yes.
Q. How many meetings?
A. Well, I have been working on these cases since the year 2001, beginning in Puerto Rico, so —
Q. When you say "these cases," are you referring generally to tobacco litigation, smoking and health litigation, or are you talking about the Engle Progeny cases?
A. I'm referring in general to tobacco cases.
Q. Okay. And it's your — you said this was based on an earlier report. Is that a report you're referring to that dates back to those meetings from 2001, when you first began working on tobacco litigation?
A. Probably not 2001. Probably 2003 or 4. I can't pin down the dates.
Q. But a report that dates — predates your
understanding of when you became involved in the Engle Progeny cases, which I believe you said was 2007?
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. Okay. Do you have a copy of that earlier report?
A. Not with me, no.
Q. Do you have copies of earlier reports that you've done for those other cases?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Did you provide them to counsel?
A. They have them. I believe so.
Q. And did you produce those as part of the reports or summaries on the subpoena?
MS. LAWSON: No, we did not. That's pursuant to our objection. We don't believe those are relevant to this particular one and most of them are public record because they have been filed in various cases.
MR. BIGGER: So you sound like you're referring to sworn affidavits, that sort of thing.
MS. LAWSON: He has done —
MR. BIGGER: Which I'll get in with him. I'm just saying that's what you're talking about.
MS. LAWSON: He's done sworn affidavits. He's done disclosures because he's been disclosed in several cases for us.
THE WITNESS: If I may add something to clarify
this —
MR. BIGGER: Hold on a second, Doctor.
MS. LAWSON: Well, if you would, let him finish —
MR. BIGGER: There's no question out there. He can certainly clarify a question. There's no question pending. I'm not going to let him just talk.
MS. LAWSON: Well, I think he's trying to correct any misapprehension that you may be having.
MR. BIGGER: I will give you an opportunity to do that in just one second. Let me just finish this point.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. You stated that this disclosure in this case, Exhibit 5, was based upon an earlier report or reports?
A. Well, the correct term is not really "based," if that's the one that I used. There's been an evolution as far as information that's available, but the roots — in other words, I see, in this document, I find the roots for this document going back to conversations we had about other cases.
Of course, this is different. It pertains to a different case and the particulars are different, but in terms of the general findings which, at the time, applied mostly to Puerto Rico, they stand.
Q. So, in your mind, there is a connection or there's
a similarity between those earlier reports that you provided in other cases and the report in this case?
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
A. I'd have to see those in order to be able to compare them.
Q. I'm not asking you to compare them. You told me that "based" may be the wrong word, but that the general information contained in this disclosure comes from the general information and the work you did in those Puerto Rico cases and in other cases.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I do establish that link. However, there have been many years that have transpired while I've been doing this research. And if I recall correctly — well, in this case, of course, there's mention of Mr. Rodriguez, I believe, but the general findings about information being widely disseminated about the risks associated with smoking, information about in the media and elsewhere that smoking can be difficult to quit, these are the same basic assumptions.
So I see this as a manifestation or document reflecting things that I found early on, but, of course, with a benefit of many more years of research.
Q. Those earlier reports and that earlier research serve as a foundation for this report; is that fair?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I wouldn't call it foundation, no.
Q. What would you call it, in one sentence or short explanation?
A. Well, for example, if I can present an analogy from the academic world. One day, I make a presentation. From those notes, that develops into an article that is far more polished and then eventually probably becomes a book, if I expand it. So when I mean the origins, that's what I'm — what I'm referring to.
Q. You're building upon your earlier work in research?
A. That's true.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. We'll come back to this disclosure later on.
Jumping ahead on the subpoena, which is Exhibit 3, skipping past questions five, six, and seven, looking at question eight: All documents that alone, or together, reflect the scope of your employment, general litigation experience, and approximation of the portion of your work as an expert witness.
Some of this information is contained in the disclosure we were just talking about. Is it your understanding that the information in that disclosure is the extent of information that would be responsive to that
question number eight?
A. Oh, question number eight.
Q. Well, let me back up.
Did you bring any documents that are responsive to question number eight?
MS. LAWSON: And I'm going to state, just for the
record, that we did object to this and we stated that
we previously identified the scope of his employment in
our disclosure. But you may answer the question.
A. I'd like to take a minute to read it carefully so I can respond.
Q. That's fine. Go ahead.
A. (Peruses document.) I finished reading it.
Q. Okay. Did you provide — subject to counsel's objection that she stated earlier, did you provide any documents that are responsive to this request? Did you bring any of them with you today?
A. I brought some of them. But, previously, I gave them to Ms. Lawson.
Q. Which documents did you bring with you today that are responsive to question number eight?
A. (No response.)
Q. Do you understand what's being asked for in question number eight?
A. I'm reading it again.
Q. Okay.
A. As documents, I believe several of these are included in what is available here in this box. There may be some updates. For example, I spent some time last week specifically working on these cases, on this Rodriguez case, reading the materials, taking notes. So that's something that I have not yet produced in terms of a document, but I can — I can speak to that.
Q. Are you talking about invoices for your time or billing for your time? Is that what you're referring to?
A. I haven't made new invoices, no.
Q. Okay. What documents were you just referring to about the Rodriguez case?
A. Well, I keep a record of the hours.
Q. Okay. I think that's something that would be responsive to question number ten, which we haven't gotten to yet, which asks for copies of all times records reflecting the time you spent on these cases.
But do you have any documents or did you provide any documents today that reflect either the scope of your employment in this case or these Engle Progeny cases, generally, your general litigation experience, including the percentage of work performed for plaintiffs and defendants, and an approximation of the portion of your involvement as an expert witness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form. I'll have the same objection as I stated before.
A. My understanding is that some of the documents, again, referring to the box, do reflect this information to some extent.
MS. LAWSON: If I can, just to clarify, I think he's referring to invoices and times records and things like that, and we do have that available for you.
Q. Other than the documents contained in that box, as you sit here today, are there any documents you feel are responsive to this request that you did not bring with you?
A. I believe that the time sheets have been updated very recently and that is something that I do have with me but I did not bring here today.
Q. Do you have an employment agreement that you have entered into to perform the work as an expert witness in these cases?
A. Employment agreement?
Q. Or consulting agreement. An agreement of some kind between yourself and either Jones Day or R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
MS. LAWSON: Let me object to the form.
A. As far as I know, there's nothing in writing.
There is an agreement that, you know, this is ongoing work and I'll continue to do it as long as my expertise is
needed.
Q. They call you or they send you stuff and you work on it, but there's no agreement defining the scope of your employment?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. No written agreement defining the scope of your employment?
A. As far as written, no, nothing that I recall.
Q. Okay. Nothing you recall signing?
A. No. I signed the invoices.
Q. Sure. I understand that. And, again, I guess, jumping ahead, it sounds like you produced documents that are responsive to question number ten: Copies of all time records reflecting the time you spent on these cases. Those are contained within the banker's box of documents you have brought with you today?
A. Yes. But there is some updating that is not included and that would — you know, I've been working on these until last — I was reading these documents on Sunday and even some of them earlier this week, so . . .
Q. When you produce an updated invoice for that time, would you provide it to counsel who will provide to us?
A. Yes, I will.
Q. Thank you. Question nine asked for a list identifying all cases in which you have testified at
deposition or trial for the five years preceding the date of this notice and designating which ones were for deposition or trial. Did you provide that list today?
MS. LAWSON: And let me say we have — we had — for the record, we had an objection to the duces tecum, that it was responsive. To state for the record, he's testified once at trial and once by deposition and I think you were probably aware of both of those.
Q. The answer, I guess, to the question is: You did not bring a list that identifies those cases?
A. An actual physical list, no.
Q. Right.
A. I can say that within the last five years, my only deposition has been — because you're referring to the last five years?
Q. That is correct.
A. — was recently, I believe, in February.
Q. Was in the Cohen case?
A. In the Cohen case.
Q. And testified at trial, counsel reflected you testified one time at trial in the last five years. Which case was that?
MS. LAWSON: It would not have been in the last five years.
MR. BIGGER: Sorry.
Q. Okay. So in the last five years, you have not testified at trial.
A. I have not.
Q. And you've provided one deposition in the last five years?
A. One deposition.
Q. Okay. I didn't say this at the beginning but if at any time you need a break, of course just let us know.
A. Thank you.
Q. And I also didn't say this at the beginning, but if at any time you don't understand my question, you need to let me know, or if you need clarification, let me know, because if you begin to answer or answer my question, I'm going to assume you understood it. Fair?
A. I understand that, yes.
Q. Okay. You said 2001 was the first time you were retained by a tobacco company or a law firm representing a tobacco company to provide expert witness services?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not sure that the word retained applies.
Q. What word would you use?
A. We started having conversations about the cases and I started the research.
Q. That was in 2001?
A. 2001.
Q. Which law firm contacted you?
A. Jones Day. Well, let me step back a little bit.
Q. Sure.
A. The first call that I received was from a law firm in Puerto Rico. Fiddler Gonzalez.
Q. Was it your understanding that that law firm was working with the law firm of Jones Day?
A. At the time, yes.
Q. Other than that initial contact, did most of your communications at the outset take place with the law firm of Jones Day?
A. Yes. But if I recall that, if not in all, at least most of the meetings and conversations we had, there was somebody representing the law firm from Puerto Rico.
Q. Okay. Did they tell you which tobacco company they were representing? This would be Jones Day.
A. Yes, they did.
Q. Which tobacco company was it?
A. Reynolds.
Q. R.J. Reynolds?
A. That's correct.
Q. How many cases since 2001 have you been retained to serve as an expert witness in cases for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. There have been several. I can give you an
estimate —
Q. Why —
A. — if that works.
Q. You can't give me an exact number of cases that you've been retained in to serve as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds?
A. Not without looking at the materials again. I do have a general sense, an estimate that I can give you.
Q. Is it a large number?
A. I would — this is my estimate which is not to be seen as completely accurate, but I would say that —
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the extent that you're calling for speculation. You know, he can testify to the best of his recollection, but I'd ask you not to speculate.
MR. BIGGER: You're instructing your witness not to speculate?
MS. LAWSON: I'm asking him not to speculate. I'm asking him to answer to the best of his recollection.
MR. BIGGER: I'm going to — anyways, that's fine. BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. I said — the question was, Doctor: Was it a large number? Is it a large number of cases that you've been retained to serve as an expert witness for the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company since 2001?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I’m not sure what you mean by large. And, also, I’m not sure that I can answer that question because there were different levels of engagement in cases.
Q. I'm talking about any engagement whatsoever since 2001, which was eight years ago at most. As you sit here today, you cannot recall how many cases you served as an expert witness in any capacity for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. The number? No.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don’t know that.
Q. Can you give me an estimate?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I’d rather not give you an estimate because I’d rather give you a complete answer.
Q. Can you do additional — can you review materials that you have to give me a complete answer?
A. Yes, I can do that.
Q. Will you do so?
A. If that is something that I must do, I’ll be glad to do it.
Q. I think an understanding of how many cases you've been retained to serve as an expert witness for R.J. Reynolds is the kind of thing that you'd be familiar with
when you1 re being deposed in a case where you1 re serving as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds.
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. Anyway. All right. When was the first time you testified — provided any sworn testimony in a case on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Must have been an affidavit. May have been 2002. I'm not 100 percent sure.
Q. Is this the Puerto Rico case?
A. It would have been a Puerto Rico case, yes.
Q. Was there more than one Puerto Rico case?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. How many cases in Puerto Rico did you serve as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. I don't have that exact number.
Q. You don't know how many cases limited just to Puerto Rico.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I don't. Off the top of my head, no.
Q. How many times have you given — sorry. I guess the testimony earlier was that you've given testimony in deposition on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company just one time?
A. One deposition, yes.
Q. And the testimony you provided earlier was that you've given testimony in trial on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company one time?
A. That's correct.
Q. There are other cases where you provided expert witness services to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, it was neither deposition testimony or trial testimony, but you don't know how many times that was?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. With exactitude, I don't know, no.
Q. And you can't provide an estimate of how many times that was?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'd rather have the opportunity to look at the records and give you an exact number, if that's what — if that's what you want.
Q. Do you have those records with you today?
A. No, not with me.
Q. Do you have access to those records today?
A. Today? Probably. Although, once the Puerto Rico cases were gone, I returned boxes with those Puerto Rico materials to Jones Day.
Q. But you said you have access to materials or there are materials that you could review that would enable you to
answer the question of how many cases you provided expert witness services on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. — is that correct?
A. I do have. I believe I kept a file on Puerto Rico, but I'm not sure that that includes everything.
Q. But it would — okay. Do you have access to review that file today?
A. Yes, I could do that.
Q. Could you review that over lunch break, perhaps?
A. It would entail going back home.
Q. Other than going home and getting the file itself, there's no way you could determine that today?
A. No. And even if I look at what I have at home,
I'm not 100 percent sure that that's reflective of all the cases. As I said, I sent a box with Puerto Rico materials to Jones Day, maybe two or three years ago.
Q. Okay. In cases where you were retained but didn't provide testimony by deposition or trial testimony, what services did you provide?
A. Okay. I believe — well, to begin with, the general research on Puerto Rico that I was doing applied to all the cases on the island. So there was that research aspect to it.
I read depositions pertaining to those particular cases. I took notes on those materials.
Q. Doctor, let me just stop you for a second because I think maybe you misunderstood my question, unless you're telling me that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company hired you or retained you to serve as an expert witness to simply read depositions.
What expert services were you retained to provide on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, I think the list that I was providing is responsive to that. I started by saying that there was research that was being done.
Q. So — okay. Conducting research?
A. Yes. I also read depositions.
Q. Was the reading of depositions done in preparation for your other expert services, or were you simply hired to read depositions?
A. I wasn't hired to do one particular thing. I received the depositions and I read them. So that was part of the research because it gives me also —
Q. That's what I'm suggesting, sir. Part of the research —
MS. LAWSON: If you'd let him finish his answer.
A. It's part of the research because most of the materials speak generally to Puerto Rico at that time, but then the knowledge of particular individuals, as it is reflected through the depositions, was also helpful in the research process.
Q. So conducting research. Any other services you were hired to provide, aside from deposition or trial testimony?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I guess — I guess producing the reports would be another thing.
Q. By reports, are you referring to affidavits, sworn testimony, or unsworn testimony reports like the one you provided in this case that we reviewed today that was marked as Exhibit 5?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If I recall correctly, in Puerto Rico cases, the affidavit — the documents were notarized, if that's the correct term.
Q. So you did — your understanding is that you did file or prepare affidavits on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you still have copies of those affidavits?
A. I'm pretty sure I have copies of some of them, but others may have gone back with the box that I sent to Jones Day.
Q. The copies that you're pretty sure you have some of, did you provide those today in response to the subpoena duces tecum for deposition question —
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to that question on the same basis that we objected to your duces tecum. We told you we were providing them, and I don't see how those are relevant to his opinions here today about this case, but, whatever.
Q. Did you provide those to counsel? Are they in the banker's box of information?
A. This box right here?
Q. Yes.
A. They have received those documents, yes. But if I read this subpoena, it had to do with — with the Rodriguez case.
Q. It also asks for documents for these cases generally. I think, as we talked about, that information and the research that you have done in prior cases is all part and parcel for the work you're doing on these cases, as well.
But your understanding is that you provided them to counsel. You're not sure if they're in that box of
information; is that correct?
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the form.
A. Counsel has received all of my documents.
Q. Okay. You don't know if they're in that box, but counsel's received them?
A. Yes. Now, the decision as to whether the materials are responsive or relevant, not being a lawyer, it's a decision that I can't make by myself.
Q. I understand that. Have you ever been retained by any other tobacco companies, other than R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. I don't believe I've been retained by the Reynolds Company. I have had no connection or conversation with anybody from that company.
Q. You understand that Jones Day, the law firm of Jones Day, represents R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in these Engle Progeny cases, specifically in this Rodriguez case?
A. Yes, I do know that.
Q. Do you understand that as part of the representation of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, they have retained you and listed you as an expert witness in these Engle Progeny cases generally, and, specifically, in this Rodriguez case?
A. When you say "they," you mean —
Q. I'm talking, in that situation, about Jones Day.
A. Jones Day? Yes, I’m aware.
Q. On behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
A. I know that.
Q. I’m just skipping a step, but if that’s problematic for you, I understand. I’m happy to use Jones Day instead. I'm sure Ms. Lawson would prefer her law firm name not in the deposition that often.
Can we simply say that if I talk about R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and I'm talking about being retained on their behalf, that it was in fact Jones Day who engaged you on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, can we just have that understanding?
A. Now that you've added that qualifier ’’on behalf of,’’ that’s something that I can certainly agree with.
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
Q. So you understand what I'm saying when I say R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company retained you as an expert witness in this case, based upon what we just discussed?
A. If you mean retained by the tobacco company that means that I have been retained by a law firm --Q. Who represents —
A. -- that represents them, then I would agree with
that.
Q. Yes.
A. It's not the wording that I would use.
Q. Sure. You've been retained by a representative of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in this case, their law firm Jones Day?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have any other law firms on behalf of any other tobacco companies retained you?
A. No.
Q. Only Jones Day?
A. Only Jones Day. Well —
Q. With the caveat of the Puerto Rico firm you mentioned earlier?
A. Yes. That's what I was —
Q. Aside from that, no one else?
A. No one else.
Q. What about any other companies that were associated or are associated with the tobacco industry, not tobacco companies, but any other organizations?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Have you been retained by any other organizations or law firms on behalf of organizations related to the tobacco industry?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I'm thinking. But, no.
Q. Have you served as an expert witness in any non-tobacco cases?
Q. Okay. So the extent of your expert witness service has been exclusively in tobacco cases?
A. Yes, that's true.
Q. And that has been exclusively through the law firm of Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Yes. And adding, also, the relationship with the law firm in Puerto Rico.
Q. Sure. Other than the — other than Puerto Rico and Florida, have you been retained to serve as an expert witness in any other state or territory?
A. I have not.
Q. Your trial testimony you mentioned earlier, that was provided in Puerto Rico?
A. At trial, yes.
Q. You've not provided trial testimony at any case in the state of Florida?
A. I have not.
Q. When Jones Day first retained you on behalf of R.J. Reynolds in 2001, what were you told was the nature and scope of your work?
A. First, I was explained — given explanations about the nature of the cases, if I recall that correctly. It's been several years ago. So I gained some familiarity with that.
And, secondly, the research program was presented to me as doing research on public information, awareness among the public in terms of information that may have been out there pertaining to the possible health risks associated with smoking, and, also, information that would be out there, available to the general public, pertaining to the issue that cigarette smoking can be difficult to quit.
That's my recollection of what was laid out in terms of research and then I took it from there.
Q. Other than what you just told me in response to my question, were any other scope or limits placed upon the nature of your work for which you were retained —
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
Q. — by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. My understanding is that there were no limits, whatever I thought pertinent to answer these central questions. So there was no limitation in terms of — I wasn't told about any limitations.
The same way, as a historian, I can start working on a particular project and then I see a branch that may lead me in some other direction. So those are the decisions that I make as an historian. But as far as limitations, no.
Q. No limitations placed upon the scope of your
research?
Q. Has that changed at all over time?
A. No, it hasn't.
Q. So it1s still your understanding of the scope of your representation in this case?
A. That's correct.
Q. Who was the attorney from Jones Day with which you had your initial contact?
A. From Jones Day? Christine Lawson was present at that first meeting. There was another lawyer from Jones Day. Her last name — Roosevelt (ph), I believe she was there, and then there was another lawyer from Puerto Rico.
Q. No other lawyers from Jones Day?
A. I'm visualizing that first meeting and I believe it was just the ones I've mentioned and myself.
Q. Was your first contact with the lawyers from Jones Day an in-person meeting, or was it a telephone call?
A. The first contact with Jones Day was in a meeting.
Q. And that was in Puerto Rico?
A. No. The meeting took place in New York City.
Q. In New York City. What was communicated to you at that meeting regarding expectations about the nature of your work?
A. As far as expectations or directives of any sort,
no. I mean, there was the — the unspoken estimation that the work that I would do would be professional and thorough. But as far as guidelines or things of that sort, no.
Actually, I started in my mind, right away, putting together a universe of possible areas for research and I followed those.
Q. Have you ever deviated from those initial research plans?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have added new materials.
Q. So they 1ve expanded?
A. I've expanded, yes. And by "new materials," I mean new categories of materials.
Q. New sources?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you familiar with the term sources?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Your understanding of the term sources is what?
A. Well, the source, the way historians view that is any material, whether written or visual or even oral history or some recording, that the historian uses for the purpose of his or her research.
Q. Specifically — well, strike that.
Did you seek any clarification about the specific focus or goal of your work at that initial meeting?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I think it was very clear from that first conversation what the — what the scope of my research was, so I didn't seek any further clarifications.
Q. So your understanding from that initial meeting was that it was to research — unlimited research on the public dissemination of information regarding smoking and health and the addictiveness or difficulty of quitting smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that a fair characterization?
A. Yes. And understanding the dissemination in its broadest sense, which could include, you know, oral history and the — or fractional —
Q. Like I said, unlimited universe of information?
A. Yes.
Q. Did that project seem daunting at the time?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It was a new project. It dealt with materials that I had used previously in my experience as a historian of contemporary Puerto Rico at the time, so it — it didn't seem daunting. I just realized that it would take a long time to visit all of these archives and depositories.
Q. Had you ever done — at that time or prior to that time, had you ever done research that was that — well,
At that time or prior to that time, had you ever had a research project where the scope was so large or unlimited, as you said?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Scope unlimited. Well, I guess the historian has to place the limits of what he or she decides what to pursue. For example, my first major work was my dissertation, which later became a book, and that took, you know, several years of work. And as a historian, I made —
I made my own limitations.
For example, I decided to cut the dissertation, as far as the chronology, from 1840 to 1868. Then I decided for the book to extend that chronology to 1878.
Q. Was your dissertation related to tobacco at all?
A. It included — a good part of it dealt with trade relations between the United States — I should say between the Hispanic Carribean and the United States and Europe, and tobacco was one of the main staples in some of these islands and that figured in that trade, so I did read on trade statistics.
Q. Other than the tobacco trade?
A. Tobacco trade. Maybe tariffs pertaining to the tobacco, things like that.
Q. Anything else?
A. I would have to see, but I don't recall at this point —
Q. Okay.
A. — anything else.
Q. Before you began this research project — and I think you said that at the time that scope was communicated to you, you began formulating plans for conducting the research — did you have any preconceived hypothesis, if you will, about what the research would lead to?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. At that point, not having been — not having thought about pursuing that research, I wasn't really sure how much I would find.
I did have a sense that information of that sort has been available. That was my own personal sense. But it was the sources that told the story after I saw them.
Q. The sources that you selected to research?
A. That's correct.
Q. What percent of your total annual income comes from testifying in legal matters or serving as an expert witness — make it broader.
What percentage of your total annual income comes from serving as an expert witness in legal matters on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Yes. That has changed over time. But if I were
to look at the entire period, I would say the average of — and this is just speculation. I would need to look at the records, so I can't give you an absolute —
Q. I'm not looking for an absolute. Just give me your best estimate.
A. Again, it has changed over time. But if I were to estimate — and, again, it's a rough estimate — I would say that maybe the amount has been about 35 to 40,000 a year. Now, my salary has also changed, so . . .
Q. Your salary that's derived from other matters, your professional experience that's listed on your CV —
A. That's correct.
Q. — things of that nature?
A. That's correct.
Q. You Say that the amount has varied over time?
A. Which amount are you referring to?
Q. The amount that you acquire from your expert services in tobacco-related cases on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
A. It has changed.
Q. Is that a product of the number of cases that you're working on?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It's not based on a number of cases. It's based on the number of hours.
Q. I guess what I'm asking is: If you're working on more cases, presumably you're spending more time. Is that a fair assumption?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Not necessarily, no.
Q. Okay. So it's not related to the number of cases you're working on?
A. There may be some correlation but it's all based on the amount of hours that I spend doing work for the law firm.
Q. So the variation over time is simply related to the number of hours you spend doing the work and that is not necessarily correlated to the number of cases you're working on?
A. Not necessarily.
Q. For example, you could have one case you're spending an enormous amount of time on, or four cases that you're not spending much time on. Is that essentially what you're saying?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would agree with that, yes.
Q. How many cases are you currently working on right
now?
A. I can provide you with a rough estimate.
Q. Sure.
A. And I would say that at the time, maybe, I've been approached about or officially disclosed as an expert in maybe ten cases. Some of the cases are withdrawn by some — for whatever reason. But I would say that it would be in the ballpark of ten to 12.
Q. That you're currently working on right now?
A. Yes.
Q. And those are all Engle Progeny cases, or are there some other case that are not Engle Progeny cases?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Right now, my belief is that they're all Engle.
Q. Are you working on any more cases in Puerto Rico?
A. No.
Q. Are all the cases, to your understanding, in Florida?
A. The ones that I'm working on, yes.
Q. Okay. The Cohen case is obviously one of those cases?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's correct.
Q. And this case, the Rodriguez case?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you know the names of some of the other cases?
A. I can provide you with some off the top of my head. There's a Kapland (ph) case. There's an O'Hala (ph)
case. There's a Brown case. There are a few others. Those are the ones that come to mind at this point.
Q. Okay. Other than your position at the University of Central Florida, which is listed on your CV, your serving as an expert witness in these Engle Progeny cases, do you derive income from any other sources?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. What other sources?
A. I'm — I work as a consultant for the college board in New York City.
Q. What do you do as a consultant for the college board?
A. I participate in several committees and planning committees. Most of them, it's on a volunteer basis.
There's one, however, for which I get remuneration and that is the academic — the history advisory committee.
Q. What's the remuneration?
A. It's $2,000 per year.
Q. What do you charge per hour for expert witness services?
A. With Jones Day?
Q. Is there — you said you haven't worked for anyone
else.
A. That's right.
Q. So, yes. What do you charge for expert witnesses
services?
Q. Do you have different charges for different services? For example, do you have a charge that is different for consulting services versus your deposition here today, or is it $225 across the board?
A. I don't think I've had any communications about different charges. So I just keep a record of the hours and it's — as far as I know, you know, we haven't had any communications about that.
Q. Who decides how much your time is worth? Did you set the price of $225 per hour?
A. I asked for that fee, yes.
Q. That's what you requested?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that the same as what you requested in 2001, when you began doing this?
A. No. It was less.
Q. It's gone up over time?
A. Yes, it has.
Q. And you submit your invoices to Jones Day?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you do your time yourself, or does someone else itemize your time?
A. I take care of the time records.
Q. And when I say that, I mean, you don't have an assistant or someone else who does that?
A. No, I don't.
Q. No one through the university does that?
A. No.
Q. Is that the same as what you charge for your trial testimony?
A. Back then —
Q. Let me clarify.
A. The fee was lower.
Q. Today, what do you charge now?
A. For trial testimony?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I haven't had any conversation about different rates for other things, so my assumption is that it's the same.
Q. So as far as you know, if you're called to testify in this case, you'll be billing Jones Day and R.J. Reynolds, for your time, $225 an hour?
A. I haven't —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That is the assumption under which I'm operating.
I don't have plans to change the fees.
Q. Did you change the fees the one time you testified at trial previously, or was it the same as you were charging
in that case before testifying at trial?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It was the same.
Q. Okay.
MS. LAWSON: When you get to a stopping point, can we take a break? We've been going for about an hour and 45 minutes.
MR. BIGGER: That's fine.
MS. LAWSON: I want him to be able to get up and walk around because he had back surgery.
MR. BIGGER: Sure. Let me just go through this real quick. Another minute. Is that all right?
THE WITNESS: That's fine.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Do you know the total amount of your charges for the Puerto Rico case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't have that off the top of my head, no.
Q. What about your total charges today for the Cohen case?
A. The Cohen case? That would be easier to get. But I must say something and that is that there are times when I can determine, fully, these hours went to this case in particular. There are times when the research may be broader and not specifically related to one case.
Q. What do you do in that circumstance?
A. In that circumstance — in those circumstances, I don't differentiate.
Q. So you just charge — let's say it's eight hours — you don't charge eight hours to each case, you just charge eight hours and it's allocated across all the cases, the total amount?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That has been the practice, yes.
Q. Okay.
A. And if I may explain why. It's very difficult to do that, because, let's say, that I'm at a library conducting research and I find other materials that relate to other cases as well, so it's — and I'm working on both at the same time, so it's hard to separate that. Sometimes it can be done.
For example, when I spent the hours working on the Rodriguez materials, I took note of that, that it was specifically Rodriguez.
Q. And the amount of time you've charged to date on this case, other than what you testified to earlier that there's some time you haven't yet invoiced, that's contained on the documents you produced today?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not sure. They may be a last one that I — a
last invoice that is not there.
Q. I think you said that. There's some time you spent Sunday and even, perhaps, this morning that's not — other than that, other than the time Sunday or this morning that hasn't been captured yet, the rest of the time you have spent on this case, to date, is contained in those time statements or invoices that you produced?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There was an invoice — I'm not 100 percent sure.
I think — I think they're all there. There was an invoice that I sent in January and I believe it would be here.
Q. So how many invoices do you have for this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. For this case?
Q. Yes. How many invoices have you sent Jones Day for your time spent on this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can't be specific —
MR. BIGGER: Are those the invoices?
MS. LAWSON: Yes.
MR. BIGGER: Just let me see them.
MS. LAWSON: Some of them are invoices and some of them are time sheets because he didn't keep the invoices back all the way to 2007.
MR. BIGGER: Okay. This top sheet, is this like a
MS. LAWSON: Well, it's a summary of time up to a certain period and then we have invoices after that.
MR. BIGGER: And this is time spent on this case.
MS. LAWSON: I can't say it's specific to this case necessarily because it might have broader applications, as he was trying to explain to you.
MR. BIGGER: I understand that. But, in any event, this is the time you've allocated to this case, and if it helps — or it applies to other cases, as well, that's how it's going to be allocated?
MS. LAWSON: Again, I don't know if I can agree specifically with allocated to this case, but it would certainly include information that could be relevant to this case.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Is it your representation, Doctor, that this figure of 185.96 minutes is the amount of time you spent on this case to date?
MS. LAWSON: Let me correct. I think that would be hours.
MR. BIGGER: Sorry. Yes. Let me say that again. Q. Is it your representation that 185.96 hours is the amount of time you spent on the Rodriguez case?
MS. LAWSON: And if you would let him look at the
documents. And I think there are some invoices behind that, that are current up through January.
MR. BIGGER: I'm just asking about that summary figure on the second page there.
A. No, that's not accurate. Here, there are hours for several cases, some of it may be Rodriguez related, although, I think I heard about Rodriguez in the following year, 2008. That's my belief.
And so when you're asking me about those 185.96 hours, it's hard for me to tell because this was time devoted, for the most part, to Florida.
Q. To all cases?
A. Yes.
Q. So that's not broken down by just the Rodriguez case or any other particular case?
A. No, it's not.
Q. Okay. Let me see that back.
Do you know the total amount of money you've made over the course of your time testifying as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The times — well, I testified in Puerto Rico, that court case, and the deposition counts as testimony, then I could figure that out.
Q. You don't know off the top of your head?
A. Well, the court case on the island, I think we would start at maybe 9:00 and then I think my part was over before noon, actually. So that would have been maybe three, four hours.
And then for the Cohen deposition, I started at 9:30 and — I believe it was 9:30, I may be off by some minutes — and I think that by 4:00 or 4:30, we were done.
Q. So how much time is that, total? You don't have to write it out. If you don't know, it's okay. The record's got it. We can add it back up.
Let me just — you don't know off the top of your head how much money you have earned testifying as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You can figure it out but you just don't know the figure off the top of your head?
A. That's correct. I can figure it out but I don't know it.
Q. And with the invoices, obviously, we can figure it out, too.
A. That's true.
Q. Just seeing if you knew it off the top of your
head.
A. Well, the invoices — it's possible — well, certainly, the one for Puerto Rico is not there, because
that was the years before.
Q. I understand. Yes. I was just speaking generally.
A. Uh-huh.
MR. BIGGER: We can take a break now.
(A brief recess was taken.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Doctor, go back — I'm going to go through your qualifications, your practice, your background, just briefly real quick.
You obtained your Ph.D. in history from Duke University in 1990?
A. That is correct.
Q. Since 1990 — and I guess, perhaps, before — but since 1990, you've considered yourself a historian?
A. I would say that I became a historian before the Ph.D. in terms of, I mean, this is how I — I teach a history and historians course and I tell my students that you become a historian when you begin to think like a historian and are able to formulate the kinds of historian — the kinds of questions that historians do.
Usually — I mean, there are many people without the Ph.D. that are historians, so — but within the academic world, the Ph.D. is sort of the entry card into a universe.
Q. The rest of your education was obtained in Puerto
Rico?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
A. You mean higher education?
Q. Yes. Your undergraduate and your master's — you received a master's degree?
A. That's correct. From the University of Puerto
Rico .
Q. Okay. Since obtaining your Ph.D. in 1990, you have taught at various universities across the United States?
A. That's true.
Q. Since 2004, you've been a professor here in Orlando at the University of Central Florida?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you consider yourself a scholar?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. What is a scholar? What is your understanding of what it means to be a scholar?
A. A scholar is much more than the actual credentials of the degree. A scholar is a person who devotes his or her life to the serious study of realities and makes that — and somebody who's active and is productive, as in say a historian or biologist.
Q. You've heard of the term scholarship?
A. Yes, I have.
A. Well, I think it has two meanings, one is when you get a scholarship which is sort of a fund to study, and the other definition of scholarship is the work that is produced by a scholar.
Q. Is the purpose or part of the purpose of scholarship, the second definition you gave, the work produced by a scholar, is part of the purpose of that work to make the world a valid and trustworthy place?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that a fair characterization?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I wouldn't use that as a part of that definition,
no .
Q. Okay. So you think it's just a work performed by the scholars?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes. And some of it may lead to what you just described but it is not —
Q. It's not the focus of scholarship?
A. — a requirement —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Focus of scholarship? I think the focus of scholarship is the search for truth.
Q. That's fair. The bulk of your professional
experience since obtaining your Ph.D. has focused on modern and colonial Hispanic history?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Latin American and Carribean.
Q. Latin American?
A. And, also, in their relations with the northern Atlantic, particularly the United States. But I guess you used the word the bulk?
Q. Yes. It’s the word I think you used before.
A. Yes.
Q. So your understanding of the bulk is most or majority — I guess I should ask: What is your understanding of the word bulk?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. As you’ve used it today and in other depositions?
A. It’s not necessarily a precise word, but I would -- similar to what people say the lion’s share. But, again, with a qualifier that my work -- and it’s actually one of the things that’s characterized it -- is that it deals with transnational matters, political connections, diplomatic relations, trade, migration.
For example, some of my work on Florida has to do with the Cuban population and Key West -- so it is -although -- although the primary focus is the understanding of Latin America and the Carribean, it is a -- it is
Q. The bulk of your professorial or your professional focus has been on, as you stated, the Carribean history, histories of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The bulk? Yes.
Q. Okay. Have you ever taught courses on modern or colonial U.S. history?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Which courses?
A. I taught both the — what's called the first half until the Civil War, and then the second half. I taught those at Augusta College. And related to that, I have — I have taught courses on U.S. relations with Latin America. And, actually, currently, I'm teaching a course on Latinos in the United States.
Q. Where are you teaching that course? At University of Central Florida?
A. That's correct.
Q. When did you first begin teaching that course?
A. It's a course that's being taught for the first time, this semester, so January.
Q. Okay. Other than at Augusta College when you taught U.S. history, have you taught U.S. history at any other — during any other professorships at Rutgers or the
University of Central Florida?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. At Colgate, I taught a course on U.S. and Latin America relations.
Q. Okay.
A. And I'm trying to think what else.
Q. Was that current, Latin — U.S. and Latin America relations, or was that historical?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. 19th and 20th Century up to the present.
Q. Okay. Have you ever taught any courses on the history of the southern or southeastern United States?
A. Taught courses — not with that focus, no.
Q. Have you ever taught any courses on the history of Florida?
A. Not on the history of Florida, no.
Q. Have you ever taught any courses on the U.S. Tobacco Industry?
A. I have not.
Q. What about the — have you taught any courses on the tobacco industry in any other parts of the world?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That is a component — certainly, when I teach the history of the Carribean or the history of Cuba, that is a component. But as far as a course focusing on that, no, I
have not.
Q. Have you ever taught a course on the tobacco industry as it relates specifically to Florida?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I have not.
Q. Aside from courses or lectures you may have taught in the academic world, have you ever taught a course or lectured anywhere to anyone on the history of the tobacco industry?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Are you referring to the history of the tobacco industry in the United States?
Q. Yes.
A. I have made presentations, for example, dealing with the Key West/Cuba community in the 19th Century, and that is one of the salient aspects of that story because a large percentage of that population was engaged in cigar making.
Q. Have you ever presented or taught a course to lawyers from Jones Day on the history of the U.S. Tobacco Industry?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. For Jones Day?
Q. Yes.
A. No, I have not.
Q. For any other lawyers?
A. Not for other lawyers, no.
Q. Prior to being contacted in 2001 by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, what tobacco-related research had you conducted at that time?
A. By that time, I had done research on that in preparation for my courses. And, again, in the case of Cuba, tobacco has a great importance, not just as an economic activity but as part of a culture, and I had done research on tobacco exports and imports to the United States for my dissertation that then became my first book by an academic press.
Q. Narrowing the focus from tobacco research to research on cigarettes or the cigarette manufacturers, had you done any research on that prior to being contacted by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds in 2001?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Information, for example, on the cigarette-making machine was something that came up as I was doing my research. And, also, actually, I wrote a small book that I had to do with a municipality in Puerto Rico and there was a presence in that area of a U.S. cigar-making company, and that presence altered the social and economic circumstances in that part of the island.
Q. Prior to being contacted by Jones Day on behalf of
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, had you conducted any research on the public dissemination of information regarding smoking and health?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Not on smoking and health but on other matters,
yes .
Q. What other matters are you referring to?
A. For example, politics and surveys and things of that sort.
Q. Not related to smoking and health?
A. Not related to smoking and health.
Q. So surveys generally? I mean, surveys related to the tobacco industry, like, what are you talking about when you say "surveys"?
A. Political surveys taken in Puerto Rico.
Q. Okay. Certainly, that's not anything having to do with smoking and health, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, it was not related to that.
Q. Prior to being contacted by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, had you conducted any research on the public dissemination of information regarding whether cigarettes were addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. Not before 2001.
Q. Okay. You don 11 purport to be an expert in polling or statistics?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I'm not an expert on polls and statistics, but, as a historian, I am trained to evaluate materials and have an understanding of what they mean.
Q. Is that because polls are an important source, as we talked about earlier?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That could be the case in some research projects.
Q. Polls are a source. Would you agree with that?
A. I agree with that, yes.
Q. So in the course of forming historical research, you may or — choose to evaluate polls as a source?
A. Yes.
Q. You don't purport to be an expert in epidemiology?
A. Certainly not.
Q. You don't purport to be an expert in cigarette design?
A. No.
Q. You don't purport to be an expert in addiction?
A. No.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You don't purport to be an expert in advertising or marketing?
Q. And you don't purport to be an expert in public relations or mass media?
A. No.
Q. Your CV that was disclosed to us September 2008, listed 33 scholarly publications. And I think you said that one of the works contained in the section "works in progress" has now been published, so maybe that number is 34 now. Does that sound about right?
A. That's my belief. I haven't seen a copy of it.
And maybe — I'm not even sure on that, but maybe a book review that I published in some journal.
Q. None of those publications are on the issue of common knowledge and awareness of the health effects of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. They're not.
Q. None of those publications are on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. They're not.
Q. None of those publications are on the issues of smoking and health, generally?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. None of those publications are on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of any health hazard at all?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's correct.
Q. You have not written or published on the issue of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have not published. I've written reports associated with these cases for Jones Day. But writing in the sense of something scholarly with the intention to publish, no.
Q. You've not written anything that would be peer reviewed on the issue of smoking?
A. No.
Q. Other than the reports that you reference that you've prepared in the course of your service as an expert witness, you haven't written anything else on the issue of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, if taking notes counts as writing, yes.
Q. Other than your notes and the reports, you haven't written anything else on the issue of smoking?
A. No.
Q. You have not written or published on the issue of
how marketing or advertising influences consumer behavior?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have not.
Q. Whether that was consumer behavior relating to tobacco products or any product?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. So the question is if I have written on that?
Q. Yes. Whether you have written or published on the issue of how marketing and advertising influences consumer behavior for tobacco products.
A. No.
Q. You've not written and published on the issue of how marketing or advertising influences consumer behavior for any product?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No.
Q. Your CV lists 40 — at the time that we were disclosed, on September of 2008, your CV listed 40 conferences and symposiums which you presented, and I believe we clarified earlier that there's a few additional ones to that.
A. There may be a couple more, yes.
Q. I think you also clarified that none of those additional conferences or symposiums were related to tobacco, smoking and health, or anything of that nature?
Q. None of the presentations on your CV were on the issue of common knowledge or the awareness of health effects of smoking?
A. None of them.
Q. None of the presentations or symposiums are on the issues of common knowledge or awareness of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. None of them.
Q. None of the presentations were on the issues of smoking and health?
A. None of them.
Q. None of the presentations were on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of any health hazard at all?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's correct.
Q. You have never done a presentation, conference or symposium on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I never have done that.
Q. Your CV listed at the time, September of 2008, 55 invited presentations. I believe we clarified earlier this morning that there are a few additional ones to that as
well —
Q. — is that correct?
I think we also clarified that none of the additional presentations were related to smoking and health or tobacco?
A. That's correct.
Q. None of the presentations — the other 55 presentations were on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of the health effects of smoking?
A. That's correct.
Q. None of those presentations were on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
A. Correct.
Q. None of those presentations were on the issues of smoking and health?
A. That's correct.
Q. None of those presentations were on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of any health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Any health hazard? Well, I have done presentations in the past having to do with health issues in the Carribean.
Q. Let me ask the question again.
None of the presentations on your September 2008 CV were on the issue of common knowledge or awareness of a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. I also note from your CV, you received several awards from various organizations. Is it safe to say that none of those related to research you'd done regarding smoking and health?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is the CV that you disclosed in September of 2008, your — let me back up.
I believe you stated that you have, from time to time, used different variations of your CV?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes. It is an evolving document.
Q. When I say that, I mean you may include some information one time and you may exclude information another time. Is that fair?
A. That's fair to say.
Q. But the CV you disclosed in September of 2008, the one we used as Exhibit 4, I believe — yes — Exhibit 4, that's your standard or primary CV?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know whether to call it standard because
it depends on the purpose. If you are applying for a teaching job or if you are applying for a fellowship or if you just, for any other reason, you know — usually, it is my understanding that CV takes different shapes.
But, in essence, this is my — this is — this reflects my work, my experience, my teaching, publications and the like.
Q. If you were asked ten times to produce your CV or provide your CV, the bulk of the time, the CV attached as Exhibit 4 is the one you'd provide?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This one?
Q. Yes.
A. It depends. In some instances — for example, I taught — it has to do with length. Sometimes there are limitations. You're asked to provide a CV, no more than ten pages, for example. So, in that case, for example, when we look at the top category, work experience, if I believe that it is relevant, I would include maybe information on, you know, my first teaching job many years ago in Puerto Rico.
Q. Why did you believe that the information included on this CV was relevant and therefore disclosed it with your expert disclosures in September of 2008?
A. Well, generally speaking, when I have my — my CV, it includes the post Ph.D. teaching experience.
Q. Let me back up a second.
Is it your understanding that the CV that was produced to us in September of 2008 with your expert disclosure, contained all the relevant information at that time?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It depends on what you mean "relevant" for. And there are things that I — let's say, sometimes if it's pertinent, because it's related to something having to do with the media, I may want to include information on interviews that I've had. That's something that usually is not included in CVs.
Q. You provided that CV to Jones Day?
A. That's correct.
Q. Presumably, you provided it sometime prior to the time it was disclosed to us in September of 2008; is that fair?
A. Yes.
Q. Were you aware at the time you provided that CV to Jones Day that it was going to be disclosed with your expert — your disclosure as an expert witness in an Engle Progeny case?
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. So do you make a determination that that CV
contained all the relevant information on it related to your service as an expert witness in this Engle Progeny case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That — that's — I didn't seek nor receive any directives in terms of what to include or what not to include.
Q. Well, what was told —
A. I've seen — I have seen, for example, CVs from other historians that are very specific with information about, you know, each case and dates and things of that sort.
Q. Jones Day simply contacted you and said "we need your CV." is that fair?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you produced that CV?
A. That's correct.
Q. Were you aware that it was being produced to Jones Day related to your service as an expert witness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection; asked and answered.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And I'm sorry to belabor this point, but I asked this — I'm just trying to clarify — because your previous experience as an expert witness was not included on that CV, correct?
A. Here?
Q. Yes. And you can review the document just to be sure. If I have missed it, please point it out to me.
A. (Peruses document.) It's not here, and it's not in any form of CV that I've ever produced for any purposes. It's not here.
Q. So you have never put your experience serving as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company on a CV?
A. In terms of cases —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. — and things like that?
Q. Just the experience of working as an expert witness or consultant on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There may have been a version in which I mention that under — yes. There may have been a version that did include that.
Q. But it's rare for you to include that information?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would say so, yes.
Q. Do you not consider your service as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company as an accomplishment or —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. It's certainly work experience, but, again, going back to the first category of work experience, I've been working since — since I was 16. Of course, you have to make decisions as to what to include and what not to include. If I were writing a — I don't think that would be of major importance, say, if I was applying for a job.
Q. You've testified that you've done considerable research as part of your service as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you consider that work to be scholarly research?
A. It is scholarly in terms of the rigor, the methodology that I apply, but I don't consider that part of my scholarship. It is not something meant to be disseminated, for example. So I draw that distinction.
Q. You haven't omitted your service as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company purposely, have you, doctor?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, I made the decisions when I was putting this together, so --
Q. You just didn't consider it relevant?
A. Well, I understood, for one thing, that all of that — a lot of that material was available already through the documents in the box. And, as I said earlier, I usually don't include that sort of information in CVs for any purpose.
Q. Other than the reliance materials which formed the basis of your opinions in this case, what other materials have you reviewed in connection with serving as an expert witness in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, it's a big collection, and I can try to go over that.
Q. I don't want to talk about, at this time, any of the materials that were provided to us which are considered your reliance materials.
Do you understand what I mean when I use the term reliance materials?
A. Those are the ones included in that list. I understand that.
Q. Right. We received a list of — three lists, actually. One list contained 4,980 documents. The two other lists had, I guess we'll call them media, there was video and some audio clips. That's what I'm talking about when I refer to your reliance materials.
Q. Sure. Other than those materials, your reliance materials which were provided to us, what other materials have you reviewed in connection with your service as an expert witness in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. For example, materials from Puerto Rico.
Q. Which are not included in the reliance materials?
A. I'm not 100 percent sure. I don't think they're there.
Q. Why would you review those materials in connection with your service as an expert witness in this case?
A. In this case?
Q. Yes.
A. It's part of the general background that I have gained of information over the years, so it's information that I — that I handle.
Q. Did you bring those materials with you today?
A. Which ones in particular?
Q. The ones you just told me you reviewed, the materials from Puerto Rico cases, that you reviewed in connection with service as an expert witness in this case.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, I think there's a — something that needs to be clarified. I mean, when you say "in connection," they're
not in direct connection to this particular case, but they connect indirectly because they're part of that body of knowledge that I've been gaining for eight years now.
Q. And those materials are related to Puerto Rico?
A. Those materials are related to Puerto Rico cases,
yes .
Q. Are they related to Florida?
A. No.
Q. Are you aware whether Gilbert Rodriguez ever visited Puerto Rico?
A. From the depositions, which is the only basis that I have to make that judgment, that is not mentioned.
Q. Why did you review documents that are related to Puerto Rico in connection with your deposition in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I did not.
Q. Sorry. In connection with your expert witness service in this case, I should clarify.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The reason for that was that the first cases were in Puerto Rico and had to do with people that lived in Puerto Rico at some point.
Q. So what documents did you review from Puerto Rico in connection with your service as an expert witness in this case?
A. Let me give you an example. When I was starting the research for the Puerto Rico cases, the fact that Puerto Rico is part of the U.S. law system and that federal laws apply in Puerto Rico, I looked at legislative materials from congress that were pertinent to Puerto Rico.
Now, that's information that has become part of my body of knowledge. It was done originally for Puerto Rico cases but it certainly has application for other cases in the states of the union.
Q. What is the application of those materials in this
case?
A. Well, for example, I need to know the progress of legislation. I need to know when the warning labels came out. So, in that sense, that information that I looked at years ago is helpful not because it touches upon Rodriguez or his family, but because it's part of the broad story and the background that I need to have in order to be able to contextualize the experiences of this particular case.
Q. Is it your understanding that those materials that you reviewed that related to Puerto Rico were included on the reliance materials provided to us?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This is what happened: I'm not — I wasn't prepared to make my own decision in terms of what's relevant
to the Rodriguez case. That's something that I provided the information to Ms. Lawson, and based on her knowledge of what that actually means, her professional knowledge, were those materials were produced and I was aware of those materials.
Q. I understand you're aware of them. Obviously, materials that you reviewed, that you feel are important to form the basis of your opinions in this case, are important materials. Would you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. They're important? Well, it depends. You know, there are books on tobacco that I read as an undergraduate, Tobacco in Puerto Rico, that has been part of my training and part of the body of knowledge that I have gained. But I don't see a direct connection.
Q. This all started from me asking you a question of what materials did you specifically review in connection with your service as an expert witness in this case. And in response to that, you indicated you reviewed some materials from Puerto Rico.
A. Years ago, yes.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Years ago. So is it your statement today that years ago you reviewed materials from Puerto Rico in connection with your service as an expert witness in this
case?
A. Well, back then, they were not in connection because I wasn't aware that I would be working in Florida cases years later.
Q. Specifically in connection with your service in this case, what materials have you reviewed to — other than your reliance materials which I've already got — what materials have you reviewed in connection with serving as an expert witness in the Rodriguez case?
Not what have you reviewed years ago before the Rodriguez case was even filed, but in connection with the time — from the time you were notified you would be serving as an expert witness in this Rodriguez case —
A. Uh-huh.
Q. — other than the materials that have been disclosed as your reliance materials, what materials have you reviewed?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I believe that the reliance list is comprehensive.
Q. Okay.
A. And I have brought with me — the materials, actually, this is something that has been on the reliance list for a long time. The only reason I brought them was because I did make some notes, so that it's a different
document.
A. On the other hand, the notes I have taken recently, from my reading of the Tampa Tribune, other than that, everything is included, at the very least, in my — in my list of documents that I've been working on.
Q. Did you review any depositions from other historians that have testified on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Whose depositions did you review?
A. There was I believe Lacy Ford, I read one of his. And I may have read one more, recently.
Q. Was that Michael Shawlers (ph)?
A. That sounds familiar.
Q. Okay. Do you know which cases those depositions were taken?
A. I can't recall the exact names of the cases.
Q. Why did you review those depositions prior to testifying today?
A. Well, those were materials that were provided to me and I believed that, not having had experience with depositions before, that these documents would begin to give me a sense of the kinds of questions that are asked and the — in similar situations, so I found that to be helpful.
Q. Did you also believe they would give you guidance on how to answer the questions?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. Because my answers are my answers, and they’re based on my -- on my knowledge and the information that I have worked with. So they may or may not be similar to those of other historians.
Q. So you just wanted to review those depositions to get a preview of the type of questions to expect?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The type -- the type of questions, yes. And, also, you know, the general format of the procedure.
Q. Who provided those documents to you? You said they were provided to you.
A. By Jones Day.
Q. Was that at your request, or their direction?
A. I don’t recall having requested them.
Q. So your understanding is that Jones Day sent you those depositions?
A. The same way they’ve been sending me -MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. -- the depositions for many years pertaining to the cases.
Q. Did the depositions just show up in the mail or e-mail, or was there instructions along with the
depositions?
A. No instructions. Business card attached.
Q. Just a deposition transcript with a business card attached?
A. That's correct.
Q. And no further instructions on what to do with
them?
A. No.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. So you just assumed it meant you're supposed to read it?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have a practice of reading everything that I receive from the law firm, yes.
Q. What did you learn from reading those depositions?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Again, the same type of — the questions that I would possibly be asked, things having to do with, you know, methods, methodology, things having to do with my professional background, questions pertaining to awareness. Some of the questions pertain to particular documents that were presented to the historian and they were asked to comment on it.
Q. Were there — were there questions about documents
in those depositions that related to documents you had never seen or heard of before?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There may have been a few, yes. I would have to reread them again, but sometimes there was mention of documents that I have not looked at.
Q. Since reading about those documents in those depositions, have you yourself looked at the documents?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I may have come across them, yes.
Q. Did you specifically go out and seek out those documents?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Not unless I thought that they were relevant, because it's a lawyer posing those questions. But I, as a historian, make the determination whether this is something that I should pursue.
And, of course, there are priorities, given time limitations, so I don't recall having — I may have pursued one or two of them. I can't really tell you whether I did or not.
Q. In the event that you did pursue one or two of those documents, did you request them from the lawyers at Jones Day, or did you conduct independent research to find those documents?
A. I conducted the independent research.
Q. So you — rather than request the documents from Jones Day, would you go out and seek out the document yourself?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I believe that I’ve never requested sources from Jones Day.
Q. You’ve never requested sources from Jones Day?
A. That’s my recollection.
Q. While reading those depositions, Lacy Ford and Michael Shawler, did you read the opinions that they held?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As they were expressed in those documents, yes.
Q. As they expressed during the depositions?
A. That’s correct.
Q. Did you read any opinions by either Lacy Ford or Michael Shawler with which you disagree?
A. I don’t recall that. I mean, obviously, since we’re operating each on our own and our answers will vary, but in terms of major contradictions, I don’t recall that.
Q. You reviewed the deposition of Winell Rodriguez which was taken in this case?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Did you review any other fact witness depositions
which were taken in this case?
A. Other witness deposition? Yes, I have.
Q. Which depositions?
A. All of them here.
Q. You reviewed all of them?
A. Yes, I did. I read them, actually.
Q. So you read the depositions of each fact witness in this case?
A. Fact witness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know what fact witness means.
Q. Why don't you read me the names of the depositions you have there.
A. Okay. Winell Rodriguez, volume one, volume two.
Q. You understand Winell Rodriguez is the plaintiff in this case?
A. Yes, I do. Winell Rodriguez, volume three. These are other documents. This is plaintiff's verified worksheet; second amendment notice; second amendment — Ronald Rodriguez; Mark Wayne Borror, B-O-R-R-O-R; Denise Lynette Hodgen, H-O-D-G-E-N; Joyce Cruz, C-R-U-Z; Nancy Fuentez(ph); Anthony Cruz Sr.; Johny (ph) MacRaley, R-A-L-E-Y, Jr; Betty Levering, L-O-V-E-R-I-N-G; Dana Christina Luz, L-U-Z, Rodriguez; Gary M. Rodriguez; and Rolando Rodriguez.
Q. Were all those deposition transcripts you just referenced provided to you by Jones Day?
A. Yes, they were.
Q. Were they provided at your request?
A. I didn't request them, no.
Q. So you didn't request that any of these deposition transcripts be provided to you?
A. No. It's been a common practice that, whenever I'm working on a case, that I get the depositions.
Q. Like the deposition transcripts of Lacy Ford and Michael Shawler, did they just arrive with a business card?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Sometimes with a business card, sometimes with just a Post-it with my name on them.
Q. No instructions, though?
A. No instructions.
Q. Any additional material that you've requested from R.J. Reynolds specific to this case that you have not yet received?
A. No.
Q. Any additional materials you think you need in order to give your full and complete opinions?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, "full and complete" is — is a — you know, not — these are terms that have to be defined. In all of
my research experience, even after the book has come out, I can find information that would further complete that research in terms of more — more information.
So it depends on what we call fair — full and complete, because there comes a time in some types of research where you decide "I have enough."
Q. Do you need any additional materials to enable you to provide your opinions related to this case?
A. There may be some, because, as I was reviewing and reading the newspapers, in some cases there are allusions to other sources.
For example, in a Hillsborough school, there's a news item that says students will be watching this film on tobacco and smoking, and if that's a film that I don't have, I think that that would be relevant.
Q. Are you prepared to give your opinions in this case as you sit here today?
A. If I'm prepared?
Q. Are you prepared to give your opinions as it relates to this case, as you sit here today?
A. I came prepared for the deposition. I did not come prepared for a full report, neither I come — and I wasn't prepared either for, you know, for the full narrative.
I'm working on several other cases, so I — and by
"prepare," I mean, the same thing that I do every day in before class. I'm prepared to teach a class, but, before I start the class, my practice is to read my notes and that is what I mean "full preparation."
Q. Let me just stop you there. This is not like your class. Are you prepared to give your trial testimony and your trial opinions in this case, as you sit here today?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Or is there additional work that you need to do?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I'm prepared. But my practice is that before, say, giving testimony, that I would sit down with the materials and look over them again and be prepared in that way.
So I guess my — what I was saying about the classroom is really the same practice that I have. I've been prepared to teach the history of Puerto Rico for a long time. Now, when I — when I walk into the classroom, although I'm prepared, I want to be fully prepared in terms of having read my notes and having that information fresh in my mind.
The same thing when I'm giving a presentation or presenting at a — some scholarly event.
Q. Do you plan to do any additional research or work before giving your trial testimony in this case?
A. As I said before, if there's information in these materials that leads me to some source that I think is important which I haven't looked at yet or maybe I looked at a long time ago, I would call that research, yes.
Q. So the answer is yes?
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. BIGGER: Let's break in like 30 minutes or something like that.
MS. LAWSON: Okay.
Q. I want to turn to your reliance materials now. We probably won't get through all of this before lunch but we'll try to get through as much as we can.
Again, it will help all of us get through the day faster and quicker if we simply focus the answers on the questions.
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the form of the instruction.
MR. BIGGER: That's fine.
Q. We've discussed what I mean when we talk about reliance materials. Do you understand what I mean when I refer to reliance materials?
A. I believe I do, and that is the listing put together by Jones Day of the materials that I have reviewed. And I have a copy of that in front of me.
Q. It was the list of — it was the materials that are provided to us, along with an index, that form the basis of your opinions in this case. Is that your understanding, Doctor?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form. I'm not sure which index you're talking about, because he probably does not have the index that you got just earlier this week.
MR. BIGGER: He's got something there.
MS. LAWSON: I think he has a reliance list from his expert disclosure.
MR. BIGGER: Okay.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Your expert disclosure included a reliance list with it. Do you understand that that reliance list has been expanded since September 2008?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. In other words, do you understand that since September of 2008, additional documents have been added to your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. Since September, I've found or worked on new materials.
Q. Do you remember how many documents were listed on your reliance list at the time you were disclosed as an
expert in this case, which, as we discussed, was in September of 2008?
A. The exact number, no.
Q. Let me show you Exhibit 6.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 6 was marked for
identification.)
MS. LAWSON: This is just the first and last page
of the —
MR. BIGGER: Yes. I was going to explain that.
Q. Doctor, I've handed you a document which we marked as Exhibit 6, and this is simply an excerpt of your index. It's the first and last page of the reliance list that was provided to us with your expert disclosures.
A. Yes. I have that with me.
Q. And, at the time, we were not provided with the materials but simply the list of materials. You understand that?
A. I'm not sure whether you were provided with the actual materials.
Q. You don't know?
A. No.
Q. If you look at the second page, the last number there is —
MS. LAWSON: Just to reflect, the second page is
actually the last page.
Q. The second page of this Exhibit No. 6, which is the last page of the original reliance list, and it's number 3514. Do you see that, doctor?
A. I see that.
Q. Let me hand you a document which we'll mark as Exhibit 7.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 7 was marked for
identification.)
Q. You see that document, Doctor?
A. Yes. I have it in front of me.
Q. And this is similar to Exhibit 6. This is an excerpt that includes the first and the last page of the reliance list that was provided to us, along with the reliance materials, on April 3, 2009.
A. Well, I see a discrepancy here, because Exhibit 6 is — page 105 is the end, and they're both the same. I mean, they're not the same but they're both the last page.
Q. Your discrepancy is exactly correct, Doctor. If you look, the second page of Exhibit 7, which is the last page of the reliance list we were provided on April 3, the last number on that page is 4980. You see that?
A. I see that, yes.
Q. So there was roughly an additional 1500 documents that were added to your reliance materials between September
of 2008 and April of 2009?
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the form of that. If you'll notice many of these are sort of generalized categories of documents — and I honestly don't know — but some of the things here may be more specific entries on some of these categories.
MR. BIGGER: Okay.
MS. LAWSON: You can go ahead and answer, Doctor. A. Can you please repeat the question.
Q. Sure. You noted a discrepancy between these two exhibits, Exhibit 6 and Exhibit 7, because, at first glance, they appear very similar but there's a difference in the — for example, as you noted, the number — page number at the bottom of Exhibit 6, the second page is 105. The number at the bottom of Exhibit 7, second page, is 162.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. And the difference, just based upon the numbering on the reliance lists from the one disclosed in September 2008 and the one disclosed in April of 2009 is about 1500.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You see where the second page, Exhibit 6, shows 3,514 documents, whereas, the second page on Exhibit 7 shows 4,980 documents?
A. Yes. I can see that.
Q. So that's about 1500. Which is the reason that
there is —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Additional itemized documents on this reliance
list.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I see some that are not itemized.
Q. What do you mean by "not itemized"?
A. Well, there's a big difference, I would say, if we look at Exhibit 6, number 3510, "Various Religious Materials," that's not itemized to the extent that we see, say, on Exhibit 7 where it says "The Pleasures of Tobacco," Harpers Weekly, and it has a date. So that's what I mean.
And it's hard for me to judge, not having compared the two lists, whether what you're asking — because you asked a question about numbers, whether that means that there are more documents in one than the other.
Q. Doctor, I apologize for the difficulty in sorting through some of the stuff in these indexes, but they're not always extraordinarily clear.
But let me show you two additional pages. These were pages from the reliance list provided on April 3, 2009, and they're not the first and last page. They're within the pages that were include in that excerpt.
Here is pages 159 and 160, which were just a few pages before the last page. And you can take a look at those and you'll see that there are, within those, also a series of items that are listed as various documents or compilations.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Do you see that there are documents listed on the most recent reliance list that, like you say, are not necessarily itemized?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. Here, I have two pages from April 3, 2009, so in order to provide any information on how these may be different from another one, I'd have to look at the other set.
Q. I'm not asking you whether they're different or asking you to provide information where they're different. I'm simply showing you on the reliance we received in April 2009, we had items on that reliance list that were listed as various — let me see — if you let me see, I'll show what you I'm talking about.
For example, 4893 is "Various Television News Archive Clips. 4894 is "Various Federal Government Public Service Announcements." 4905 is "Various Voluntary Health Organization Materials."
Now, I haven't done a detailed analysis of this
but, if you'll look at Exhibit 6, page two, again, and you look at item number 3500, you'll see that that is also called Various Federal Government Public Service Announcements, just like in the April 2009 reliance list where we had item 4894, Various Federal Government Public Service Announcements. And, unfortunately, this reliance list we received in September doesn't have the unique identifying numbers, the image numbers of the one we received in April, so we can't compare quickly and be certain that's the same document.
But you have reason to believe that the April 2009 reliance list also contains what may be compilations of additional documents. Is that fair?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
A. I wouldn't come to the conclusion that there are additional items. It may vary in terms of the description. For example, in one instance, it may appear as Various Tampa Tribune Articles, and in the other one — I don't know — they may appear as individual articles, so I can't make the judgment that they're necessarily reflective, in the most recent edition, of new materials.
Q. Are you familiar with this reliance list?
A. Yes, sir. I have received it and I've looked through it, yes.
Q. Have you reviewed it to be sure that it accurately
depicts the reliance materials that you have in this case?
A. I haven't gone item by item to doing that, no, I have not done that.
Q. And you didn't prepare the reliance list; is that correct?
A. As it stands here, I did not prepare it. However, over time I've been in communications with lawyers from Jones Day giving them information about new materials that I find. It's an update that I provide.
Q. By way of clarification, when I use the term reliance lists for the purpose of this deposition, I'm going to refer to any reliance list that was used.
If there's a reason it needs to be clarified that my comment or question should refer to only one or the other reliance list, please let me know. I mean, these are your reliance lists for your reliance materials and I don't purport to be an expert on them. So let me know if that needs to be clarified, that I should refer only to the September 2008 reliance list in my questions. Okay?
A. Okay.
Q. Do you know how many items, including documents,
TV clips, audio clips, everything, do you know how many items are contained within your reliance materials?
A. I have not — the only way I can judge, and I don't know whether this is the correct thing to do, again,
because some of them appear as broad categories, is that if this is the last page, one of them comes up to 4,980 items, whether that's documents or that's compilations of documents, I really can't tell.
Q. So you don't know? The answer is you don't know how many items are contained within your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Specific items? No, I don't know.
Q. Do you know how many pages comprise your reliance materials?
A. Pages?
Q. Because I'll represent to you that many of those documents are more than one page.
A. That's correct.
Q. So you understand that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know how many pages of documents are contained within your reliance list?
A. I have boxes. I have many boxes, and, probably — and I also have file cabinets. In terms of boxes, I must have maybe — and when I say "boxes," I'm referring to the size that you have there.
Q. Standard banker's box?
A. That's correct. Maybe 18 or 17, plus I have files. There is some overlap between — because there's
some materials that I have — for some reason, I have more than one set.
Q. How many files?
A. Files?
Q. Like, are we talking about filing cabinets?
A. Yes. Let me try to visualize.
Q. How many — say, a standard four-drawer filing cabinet. How many filing cabinets worth of materials do you have? More than one?
A. At this point, it's about three.
Q. And, again, I'm speaking specifically to your reliance materials not to other materials. For example, not to your materials related to your teaching at the University of Central Florida or anything like that.
A. No. They're separate.
Q. Just to your reliance materials. You have more than one filing cabinet worth, in addition to the 18 banker's boxes?
A. More than one?
Q. (Counsel nods head.)
A. Yes.
Q. More than two?
A. It's about three. And it's hard to tell you because some of them are stackable ones, so it's not the standard four-drawer one.
Q. Roughly, you have — and this is at your home? Is this at your office? Where are these maintained?
A. I keep those at home.
Q. At home. You have 18 banker's boxes and three filing cabinets of information that — of your reliance materials that you maintain at your home?
A. The numbers are an approximation.
Q. Approximation, sure.
A. Yes.
Q. Give or take a banker's box or —
A. Yes. I also have a box on my desk that has to do with the tobacco cases. And I may have, also, in my closet, some materials that are stacked up on the floor.
Q. Is it your understanding that all of the items, documents listed on your reliance list are contained within those 18 banker's boxes and three filing cabinets?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Those —
Q. In other words — let me ask this another way.
You maintain your own personal collection of your reliance materials?
A. That's correct.
Q. They are not maintained for you at Jones Day or somewhere else?
A. No. I have my collection with the exception of
those Puerto Rico materials that, for the sake of space, I asked them if they could keep those.
Q. And those — the Puerto Rico materials are not listed on your reliance list for this case, correct?
A. The ones that I sent?
Q. Yes.
A. I don't believe they are.
But let me say this: For example, in the Puerto Rico cases, I used some early publications like Columbus's log, for example.
Q. There may be some overlap?
A. That's correct.
Q. I understand that. Have you personally read or reviewed all of these items that are contained on your reliance list?
A. I have not read all of them. I have reviewed them. I've — and, again, it's — I believe that some of them, I have — I am familiar with what I have. I have looked through them. I have a general sense of what types of documents they are. I have focused on some of them. I don't know that answers your question.
Q. Well, have you read all the documents contained on your reliance list, the 4,980 documents?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Let me start with number one.
Q. This could take a while if we're going to go through all of them.
A. No. Just one.
Q. Sure.
A. The "Diario De Bordo" -MR. BIGGER: It's that first line.
A. It is
Q. Have you read all of the documents contained on your reliance list?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
A. "Read," as having read them fully?
Q. I mean, you wouldn't put something on your reliance list which is — that forms the basis of your opinions in this case without having read it fully, would you?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There's different ways of reading. I go back to my materials all the time. And books that I've read early in a research stage, I go back to them. Sometimes I just scan through them. Sometimes I read them quickly.
Sometimes I read them in major detail.
But I was -- I think the example that I was about to make may illustrate the answer that I want to give. And here I see a document which is -- these are the logs of Columbus, and I'm looking at the top of Exhibit 7 -- I am
familiar with that source. I don't think that is the edition with that title that I looked at. It's another one that I have.
Q. So you've not read or reviewed the edition of this document that is contained on your reliance list?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that what you're saying, Doctor?
A. Based on the title, because these documents have been given different titles by different publishers, it sounds different. It may be the same but it sounds different.
Q. Have you read all of the documents contained in your reliance list at some point in your research into the smoking and health issues?
MS. LAWSON: Objection; asked and answered.
MR. BIGGER: I don't think it has been answered.
MS. LAWSON: I think it has.
THE WITNESS: Sorry?
MS. LAWSON: Go ahead.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Go ahead. That was a sidebar.
A. Have I read all of them? I have not read all of
them.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed all of them?
A. Yes. I have reviewed all of them.
Q. So your eyes, at some point, have fallen upon the document?
A. Yes. But, for example, there's a huge file and I have scanned through them. It doesn't mean that I have looked at every single page but I do get a sense of paging through the set —
MR. BIGGER: And let the record reflect that the doctor was taking a binder-clipped, multi-page, half-inch thick document and was flipping through it several pages at a time.
Q. Which was reflective of how you have reviewed some of the materials on your reliance list.
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to that characterization.
A. No. That's not the way I've done it.
Q. Well, why don't you —
A. In some instances, for example, there's various sets of documents and I see that, you know, these are very relevant materials so I read them as carefully as I can.
In other instances, going back to the half-inch-or-so stack of papers that you just mentioned, if I get a sense that, you know, these things are — I'm becoming familiar with what they are, I'm looking at the headlines or the titles. But in some instances, I may look at them, you know, quickly and I — so it varies depending
on my judgment of those documents.
Q. So it1s a judgment call, when you look at the document, on how detailed your review of that document will be?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that fair?
A. (No response.)
Q. Sometimes you review it quickly. Other times, you review it more methodically and slowly.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It's the same way in which I carry my — carry out my research for my own scholarship. Sometimes you come across — say you're in an archive and they hand you a bundle of documents and this is — this is a jewel in terms of very relevant, high-quality information. I can spend days looking at it.
Sometimes I receive a bundle in which I say, you know, "Gee, I thought this would pertain but it really doesn't. Let me take a brief look at it," and then return it and probably not even use it at all.
Q. Okay. But it's your testimony today that at some point you have — your eyes have fallen upon every document that's listed upon your reliance list?
A. Every document? Not necessarily every document,
no .
Q. So you may not have even seen every document that is on your reliance list?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well —
Q. That's what you just said, right?
A. Yes. But it depends what you mean by "document." Because let's say one of the materials —
Q. Let me clarify. By "document" I mean each individual item, one through 4,980, that is contained on your reliance list.
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
Q. Can you say as you sit here today that you've seen each of those documents —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. — at some point in your research in the smoking and health issues?
A. The issue is that a stack could include more than one document. It could be, you know —
Q. In other words, item nine —
A. — two reports.
Q. Item nine could be a compilation of several documents. Is that what you're saying?
A. Yes. That they're together.
Q. Can you say with certainty today that you have seen every document that is listed from one to 4,980 on this
list, even if some of those were a compilations of documents and you may not have seen every page or every document within that number, can you say you've seen all 4,980 of these documents?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The best way in which I could give you that answer is to sit down and look at them and check them against what I have.
Q. Well, what — would you allow them to be placed on your reliance list if you hadn't seen the document?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have seen the documents. I am familiar with the documents. I have not read every single document.
Q. Have you gone through this list to be sure that this is accurate, that these are in fact the materials that you're relying upon and base your opinions upon?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have not gone over the list item by item. I have not done that. But from looking at it, these are materials that I — I know I have.
You know, it's very hard to answer a question in which you use the word all, because we're looking at so many documents compiled over so many years. Some of them may have been, you know, misplaced, for example. So I can't really say "all."
Q. You understand, though, that when you're testifying in a court of law as an expert witness, the Court has to determine and be certain that you are in fact qualified as an expert and that the methodologies that you used in reaching your opinions are sound and accurate? You understand that?
A. Of course. I understand that.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I understand that. Of course.
MR. BIGGER: Just a couple more quick questions
and then we'll take a break for lunch.
Q. Is there any significance in the number of documents that are included in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't understand the question. What do you mean by significance of the number?
Q. Is there a significance in the volume of documents that are included in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. To you, is there any significance to the volume of documents and the volume of items that were included in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It may or it may not, depending on the quality of the documents. If there's a document that may be for one
Q. But there's no correlation between the number of documents or items and the ability to prove whether or not there was common knowledge. Fair?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would say that, generally speaking, the more items you have, the more support you have for that contention, generally speaking.
Q. So, generally speaking, it's better to get all the items that are available in the public domain when evaluating whether or not it was common knowledge?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that fair?
A. Again, I have a problem with the usage of the word all, because, in research, you never get all of the documents.
Q. Better to get as many as you can. Is that fair?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I wouldn't talk in terms of quantity alone. I would talk in terms of diversity of documents. That may be more important than volume.
Q. Many sources? Getting documents across many sources?
A. Yes. Different voices.
Q. So many documents across many sources. That is an
important determination in conducting this research?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It depends — it depends on the research. You could be writing on one topic and just use one book and be able to do something on that one document.
Q. Do you think you could do that in this case?
A. In this case?
Q. Yes.
A. Certainly not.
Q. Okay. Are all the documents contained on this reliance list important in forming the basis of your opinion in this case?
And I know you don't like the word all, but they're listed on your reliance list and I need to know:
Does that mean, to you, that they're important in forming the basis of your opinion in this case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would say no. Because I'm not sure that all of them apply directly to this case. Some may apply more to others. Again, it's safer to have more information in this list.
But, you know, I don't think in this particular case, the mention by Columbus of the first sight of indigenous inhabitants smoking may have that relevance. I don't know.
Q. You understand that you put it on your reliance list, correct, Doctor?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You determined that that document should be on this reliance list?
A. This reliance list was put together by the lawyers, in great measure, based on the materials that I've been giving them.
Q. Right. But it was at your direction that this list was assembled? I mean, the lawyers didn't prepare your reliance materials. They didn't decide what was going to be on your list of reliance materials, did they?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If they decided? I can't answer to that, no. I don't know.
Q. So you don't know who decided what was going to be on this reliance list?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This is a reliance list that was put together by the lawyers based on materials that I have, and that's my understanding. And they are aware of those materials that I have, so this list reflects that.
Q. So this list is essentially an inventory of all the possible reliance materials that you have in your possession. Is that what you're saying?
A. I can't —
Q. Because if it wasn't done at your direction, I would like to know whose direction this list was — whose direction was this list created or upon whose direction. Whatever the right preposition is.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, I have an issue with the word direction and what it means fully, because this is a list that I physically did not put together. I didn't come up with these numbers, for example.
Q. I didn't think that you came up with the numbering system or the identification system. I don't even believe that you were the one that typed this list up.
But deciding which documents were important to the basis of your opinion is something that I think you would be doing as the expert.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. And you're telling me some of these documents, as you look at this list now, you don't think are relevant to form the basis of your opinion.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I said that they may or may not be relevant.
Q. Well, who makes that determination? I mean, who is supposed to decide what on here is and is not relevant to
forming the basis of your opinion?
A. This is what I can tell you. I have been providing this list, having not analyzed it, this list is a reflection of the materials that I have.
Q. So it1s your understanding that this list is an inventory of the materials that are in your possession?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that fair?
A. I would say that, generally speaking, that's true. I can't say that, you know, some of them may not. I mean, this is, as you said, this is a huge list.
Q. But you can't say that as you sit here today that all the materials on this list are relevant to forming the basis of your opinions that you intend to give in the Rodriguez case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, that varies, because I have to be prepared to — if there's a question about Columbus — well, you know, since when were Europeans aware of tobacco? I don't know that for a fact — I can't tell you whether it's relevant or not. I can tell you that I'm prepared to say that if I'm asked that question, say, at trial or a deposition.
So in that sense, I'm not absolutely — I'm not absolutely convinced that all of them will be relevant to a
particular situation on a particular case. What I can tell you is that they're — there — they're part — they're the materials I have looked at, and, in some way, they form my knowledge about the general topic of tobacco and cigarettes and health.
Q. Is this reliance list different in any way from the reliance list you disclosed in the Cohen case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have not examined them next to each other, no.
Q. Do you have any reason to believe it's different from the reliance list you have disclosed in the Cohen case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't have any reason, no.
Q. I mean, did you tell someone or direct someone at Jones Day, when producing the reliance list for the Rodriguez case, to include or not include certain information on here?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. What the difference is is that one reliance list is older than the other and there are some new materials.
Q. Aside from the new materials, did you direct or tell anyone at Jones Day to include or not include material on this reliance list?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Right. Aside from the new materials, though.
A. No. I haven't done that, no.
Q. This letter from John Quincy Adams to Reverend Cox, in Exhibit 7, number five, are you aware of the substance of what that letter is about?
A. Yes. I'm not —
Q. What is the substance of that letter?
A. It has to do with smoking and health. I don't remember whether it was specifically a testimony or how it had affected him — Quincy, I mean — or whether it had some visceral — the exact content of that.
Q. All you recall or all you know as you sit here today is that it was relevant to the issue of smoking and health?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes, it was.
Q. Do you know if it's relevant in any way to the Rodriguez case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, let me put it in these terms: There's a history of awareness in this country that goes back to — I mean, in some cases even to the 1700's — late 1700's, that there are these links between smoking and disease —
Q. Other than generally —
response.
A. And, therefore, this is part of that projectory of growing information. And, as I would do with any historical project, it is important for me to provide appropriate background.
In other words, this is not information that came out to the public until 1964, and that's when they first found out about these connections. No. There is a long history, and it's part of my methodology as a historian. I think it's important to keep that in mind because the information, over time, expands, becomes more sophisticated, it reaches more people.
Q. So there are items on here that are solely for the purpose of context — contextual items?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I wouldn't reduce them to just contextual. It may
be
Q. May be not just that purpose but —
MS. LAWSON: If you would let him answer.
Q. That's one of the purposes, is for context, to understand, as you say, the length of time that information was out there?
A. Many of these sources provide context, yes, they
do.
Q. And you have no idea whether Gilbert Rodriguez ever heard of or read the letter from John Quincy Adams to Reverend Cox?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I cannot say that. But this is not how historians operate. When I'm looking at the issue of information that may have reached him, that was available to him, the fact that this particular letter — which, you're right, probably he never had access to that one — doesn't take away from my point, and, that is, looking at the universe of materials beginning with information received at home, information received at church, schools, advertising, public service announcements, news stories. Based on that is what I can build my position on, not any one particular document.
MR. BIGGER: Why don't we go ahead and break for
lunch.
(A lunch recess was taken.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Welcome back, Doctor.
A. Thank you.
Q. We're back on the record. When we left, we were talking about your reliance materials and the reliance list that accompanies those materials. Do you recall talking about that before lunch?
A. About that over lunch?
Q. No. Talking — do you recall talking about that before lunch?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Okay. Speaking of lunch, did you talk about your deposition over lunch with your attorneys — or with the attorneys from Jones Day or Shook, Hardy & Bacon?
A. Yes. We had — we spoke about several things and one of the topics that came up was pertaining to the deposition.
Q. The deposition?
A. Yes.
Q. What was discussed?
A. It was essentially about the reliance list and that I want to make sure that — it had to do basically with the notion of being clear in my language as to what this is and to be clear about — because some of the questions I received had to do with, you know, whether they're relevant or not, some of these materials. And just to keep in mind that, you know, that they are, to some extent, relevant to all the cases. Some of them.
But, of course, this is a document that varies from case to case and some materials — when you asked about, for example, whether these were different for other cases, and, you know, essentially, they are the same but it depends on the geography, for example.
If somebody lives in Tampa but — and this is just something I'm coming up with as an example — but grew up in Chicago, then the reliance would — the reliance list would be different.
Q. This was information that was communicated to you by the lawyers, over lunch?
A. Not in those words, no.
Q. What words was it communicated?
A. That this was a line of questions that I could expect to see more — and, again, I'm not 100 percent sure that these were their words because I didn't — but, in essence, that I had to be clear about this, which I'm clear, but in my responses to you that I not be — and this is — this is what actually was at the heart of it — I tend to be very precise in my use of language, for example, with the word all, but I need to — it's important to avoid being — because of precision and my insistence on being so precise — that my answers may be limited and give a wrong impression.
Q. So, over lunch, you discussed with the lawyers from Jones Day and Shook, Hardy & Bacon how to answer questions in this deposition?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There was nothing about how to answer them, no.
Q. Well, you just told me about how it was
communicated to you information regarding the preciseness of your answers.
A. As something to keep in mind, yes.
Q. So you were just told to keep in mind what, about the preciseness of your answers?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That — for example, this is the way I am. I try to be as clear as possible, but sometimes because I choose an example — and this is not what they said but this is my understanding — that that example may be very specific and not be representative of what this document is, the reliance list. That's, in essence, what I gathered.
Q. What I'm trying to understand is what was told to you regarding how precise or imprecise your answers are.
What was told to you regarding the preciseness of your answers?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. (No response.)
Q. This was just 20 or 30 minutes ago, correct?
A. Yes. It was not put in terms of you should do this or that, just to keep in mind that this is a line of questioning that may continue, and that I needed to — I should be attentive to the type of question. And, in my answers, I may be too specific, that it is the truth, it's not reflective of the entire reliance list.
And, of course, you know — and this is something that in previous conversations I've had — you know, always say the truth.
Q. You are under oath here today. I mean, obviously, the truth is very important.
A. Of course.
Q. I believe we earlier discussed the historical method. You recall that testimony and our discussion of that earlier this morning?
A. We talked briefly about that, yes.
Q. Briefly. And just for clarity sake, again, what is your understanding of the historical method?
A. The historical method is a — these are the broad pillars of what history as a craft is. One of them — of these pillars of the — it's actually related to the scientific method which is based on a question which then is answered through research. That research is based on both primary sources and secondary materials, in other words, actual documents and publications by authors on those topics.
One of the essential aspects of the historical method is precision. Another one has to do with being able to place whatever document you use in context and analyze it and examine it. For example, if I have, you know, one letter here, it's important for me to be able to
contextualize that letter. Who wrote it; when; why; who was the intended recipient of that letter. So that's something that we do.
We also analyze the information. It depends on how — some historians operate by just doing all the research first and then the analysis and then the writing. But I think in most cases, these three things happen simultaneously. So while you are — while you are conducting research, you begin to form in your mind an idea of your conclusions.
It's also important — I forgot to mention this — it's important to keep your work very organized. Usually work with an outline. Keep good notes because you will go back to them. That's an essential part of historical research. And then present your conclusions in a readable way.
One of the things that characterizes historians is that we have this, unlike other social scientists that don't do that much, we always have to use primary documents, and a lot of what we do requires going to an archive.
Q. I'm sorry, Doctor. I just want to keep us moving, so if you don't mind — I'm not trying to interrupt you, but just in order to keep us moving, I'm going to go ahead and go to another question.
We've covered what the historical method is.
MS. LAWSON: I want to make sure, to the extent that he was answering, your answer fully reflected your understanding of the historical method, which I think was your question. If there was any other portion of historical method that wasn't reflected in your answer, I'd like him to be able to say that.
MR. BIGGER: That's fine.
Q. If that answer did not cover what is the historical method, then you can certainly say more. But I think, hopefully, that is sufficient. Is there more you need to say about what the historical method is?
A. I could always expand —
Q. I'm sure.
A. — but I think that's sufficient.
Q. And the use of historical method is important when you're researching history?
A. Of course.
Q. Talking about the reliance materials — not the list itself, the reliance list, but the materials — who compiled and collected the reliance materials reflected on the reliance list?
A. On the reliance list?
Q. In other words, I believe you said that at your home you have 18 banker's boxes and three filing cabinets of the materials that are the reliance materials contained on
A. That1s true.
Q. Do you recall testifying to that earlier?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Who collected and compiled all those materials?
A. Those materials?
Q. Yes.
A. The bulk of those materials are materials that I have been collecting over time, doing research and various depositories and libraries. Some of those materials I received from colleagues. I asked them about -- and I made sure that -- and this is actually a common practice among historians, you get materials from colleagues and other sources -- but I always make sure that I had a conversation with them as to how they collected that.
Q. It’s important to know?
A. It is, yes.
Q. Who else besides — and you indicated that you did — can we call it primary research, where you actually went to the archival source — if it was physically going there or it was doing an electronic search on the Internet, however it may be — but you physically searching through the universe of information and pulling out certain information, you said that some of those reliance materials were collected by you in that fashion; is that correct?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. Some, yes.
Q. So were you, actually, in reviewing all the universe of information in a source or in sources, you personally chose: I'll take this information and this information and so on?
A. That has always been my decision.
Q. Okay. And you said some was provided to you by colleagues where they provided you information, and I believe you testified that you, you know, questioned them and asked them how they obtained the information?
A. That's correct.
Q. But they actually provided you the information that you reviewed?
A. Well, I'm referring, for example, to say a collection of newspapers from say St. Petersburg.
Q. Sure. Did you have colleagues provide you with information from a collection of newspapers from St. Petersburg?
A. Not information. The actual papers.
Q. The papers.
A. And, oftentimes -- copies of the papers. And, oftentimes, that came with sort of an inventory list.
What I can tell you is that after being convinced
that these were reflective of the stories in general, I also did checking on my own and sometimes I used assistants to go over, actually, some of these collections of materials and to make sure that they were — that things were not missing.
Q. Sure.
A. And the experience was that these were documents that — that were not — I mean, that are reflective of the story that appeared.
Q. Who were those colleagues? For example, I believe you said that colleagues provided you with newspaper articles from St. Petersburg.
A. That's correct.
Q. Who was that, that provided you that information or those documents?
A. That was Lacy Ford. And, actually, what I did was that I went to a depository that he has and I made the selection myself based on what I thought was important.
And in order to be completely sure that things that — for example, going back to the St. Petersburg example — that I was fully convinced that that collection was put together following a sound historical method.
Q. What did you do to determine that that was put together in a sound historical method?
A. First of all, I asked him.
Q. Okay.
A. And, secondly, in several instances, as I mentioned before, not because I didn't trust him but because I thought it would be good if I could verify that myself, I had student assistants looking at collections and finding the articles and verifying, for example, that what they found matched with what had already been gathered, say, in a stack of articles from Fort Lauderdale.
Q. Did you have the student assistants verify that the information or the documents provided to you were accurate and from St. Pete newspapers in St. Petersburg or — and/or, I guess — and/or did you have the student assistants verify that the documents provided were an exhaustive set of the information that was out there?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. BIGGER: And that's a compound question. Let
me ask the first part first.
Q. Did you have the student assistants verify that the information provided to you and the documents provided to you were accurate?
A. Accurate in terms that they're not —
Q. That they actually are newspaper articles from St. Petersburg.
A. Well, to the extent that they look — I mean, this was a sampling that I did. I didn't do that for all newspapers.
Q. Are you talking about having the student assistants verify, or are you talking about the documents that you have on your reliance list?
A. No. For them to, say, spent a — spend a few days at the library in Fort Lauderdale looking at the run of the Fort Lauderdale —
Q. Double checking?
A. Yes, yes.
Q. Did you have the student assistants verify that the research was done in conformity with the historical method? In other words, that a sufficient number of — that the articles that were pulled and provided to you were the articles — all the articles that were out there and available in the public domain in St. Petersburg?
A. No, I did not —
MS. LAWSON: Form.
A. — assign them with the task of making that judgment.
Q. Okay.
A. That was a judgment that I made.
Q. So did you verify that, that the documents you were provided, the newspaper articles that you were provided by Lacy Ford were an exhaustive, comprehensive collection of the information that was in the public domain in St. Petersburg?
A. Yes. The students make the photocopies and then they gave them to me and I had the sense that, you know, these match.
Q. You had the sense?
A. Yes.
Q. Where did you get that sense from?
A. By comparing the two.
Q. What comparing what with what?
A. Well, if I received 1964 Fort Lauderdale news, and this is what I had received from Lacy Ford — and, again,
I'm not sure that was the case, but just coming up with an example — and then I have this stack put together by a student for the same paper in the same years and I could look at them and see that there was this — that they were, in essence, the same.
Q. Okay. And you did that — you said you didn't have the students do that. You didn't have the students verify that they pulled all the information that was out there, all the documents and articles that were out there in St. Petersburg?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You testified earlier that you did not have the students perform that. You had them confirm that it was accurate, that it was actually articles that appeared in Fort Lauderdale or St. Petersburg or whatever.
A. The decision was not theirs. I — student assistants can be of help but I don't — I usually — and certainly not in these cases — allow them to make judgment decisions because I want to be ready to explain that for my self.
Q. So you have independently verified that the information you received from Lacy Ford from St. Petersburg is all — or an exhaustive set of the newspaper articles that were in existence during the time frame that he provided you?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Do you understand my question?
A. My intention was now to look at two lists item by item so that they all matched. And the first step in the process of verification is, of course, Lacy Ford is a historian of renown, who's got a representation for very serious and productive historian, that's where this began. And my understanding that this would have been done in a professional way.
Secondly, having had conversations with him in which, more than once, I asked him about methods and selections that reaffirmed my trust. The discipline of history's, in great measure, based on professional trust and that's why the representation of a historian is so important. And then —
A. — thirdly —
Q. Sorry. Go ahead.
A. And then, thirdly, just to be even more certain or being able to say, if I were asked questions like the ones you're asking me, this is not just based on his work but I went a step further. Which is something, by the way, that I would have not necessarily done in other research, but I wanted to be very, very ready to respond to the fact that this is not just a stack that was handed to me and told that it was put together in this way, but that I, myself, through the help of student assistants, had a sense that, yes, this is reflective.
Q. How did you meet Lacy Ford?
A. I was given his name and phone number by Jones
Day.
Q. You're aware that he — Lacy Ford — has served as an expert witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, as well?
A. I understood that at the time when his name and number were given to me, and then I had the opportunity to talk with him about that. And, most recently, reading his deposition in one of the cases.
Q. So before you became and/or engaged as an expert witness in 2001 by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company, had you heard of Lacy Ford?
A. I had not heard about him, no.
Q. So — okay. Do you know as you sit here today how Lacy Ford obtained those documents?
A. Which documents are you talking about?
Q. The St. Petersburg newspaper articles that you've referenced that are part of your reliance materials.
A. He told me that he gave very precise instructions to student assistants to go through specific — to go through newspapers to find these kinds of stories, and that part of the — part of the equation was to make sure that, you know, dates and periods in which — in which tobacco topics were being discussed in the media, that there was attention to those topics, as well — to those periods, I should say.
Q. Do you know whether any of the documents that were provided to you by Lacy Ford had been provided to him by lawyers from Jones Day or other law firms representing tobacco companies?
A. I'm not sure how he — I can tell you that he told me that — at least in the case with the newspaper — that he himself directed the research process in which students acquired those from, I guess, microfilms or the papers themselves.
Q. Okay. Did any lawyer or other person connected
with the lawyers who represented R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company assist you in preparing your reliance materials?
And not your reliance list or your index, but the actual materials themselves.
A. No.
Q. So you said your — you have done independent research where you have gone to the primary source or the secondary source and pulled that information yourself. You also said that colleagues, such as Lacy Ford, provided you information.
A. (Witness nods head.)
Q. How else did you get the information contained in your reliance materials?
A. I also received some materials from Jones Day.
Q. So you did receive materials from Jones Day?
A. Yes. Because if I understood your question correctly, it was about putting it together.
Q. Well, I'm sorry if my question was unclear. I asked you whether any lawyer or person connected with the lawyers who represented R.J. Reynolds assisted you in preparing your reliance materials and you clarified it.
By preparing your reliance materials, I mean compiling them, collecting the research or providing you any of the reliance materials.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. So who else, other than work that you did yourself, information or documents provided by colleagues and materials provided by Jones Day, did anyone else provide you with the items that are the — that comprise your reliance materials?
A. Some materials have been gathered by students following my directives.
Q. Okay. Anyone else?
A. I —
Q. Or any other entity or organization.
A. Let's see. I received, from another historian, Roger (ph) Sharp, some newspaper materials that don't pertain to Florida.
Q. So are they in your reliance materials?
A. You're not referring to this list?
Q. I am. Are the newspaper articles you received from Roger Sharp, that you said do not pertain to Florida, are they contained within your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not sure they are or they are — I can tell you that I have not read them yet. And, usually, what I do is I wait until I have an opportunity to read a set of materials, then, at that point, I incorporate them.
Q. Okay. So it's safe to conclude that they're not
A. I would have to look at the list, because I don't know whether they are or they are not.
Q. Do you intend to review those materials between now and the time of trial for this case?
A. For the Rodriguez case?
Q. Yes.
A. I may do it for other cases but not for the Rodriguez case, because these are newspapers from New York, which, although I've seen — I've seen, for example, the New York Times very carefully, but some of these other newspapers —
Q. Let me try to step ahead.
So as you sit here today, it's not your intention to review those materials and rely upon them in any way for your opinions in the Rodriguez case, correct?
A. I can't say that, because I may have an opportunity — I don't know that there's a trial date yet, I'm not aware of that or when that would happen — but what I can tell you is that if I do get a chance to look at those materials and they, in some way, shed light on the Rodriguez case, I will use them.
Q. So you're telling me that you, as you sit here today, you may review these documents and you may rely upon them in forming your opinions in the Rodriguez case?
Q. Is that correct?
A. I don't anticipate them shedding much light, but I want to reserve the possibility that when I look at them there may be something. I mean, there may be a story about Rodriguez. Who knows. I don't know what I'm going to be able to find there.
Q. There is a trial date in this case. It's in November. I guess maybe no one's communicated that to you. But this case has been set for trial in November.
Maybe Ms. Lawson didn't know that either.
MS. LAWSON: News to me.
MR. BIGGER: Glad I could share that with you.
Q. The materials you were provided by Jones Day that come price your reliance materials, can you look at the reliance list or are you able to look at a reliance list and identify which of the materials were provided by Jones Day?
A. The first thing I would say is that there's considerable overlap in those because some of them may be materials that I gave them and then they became part of this larger collection. To some — I guess, to some extent, I could.
Q. What about a percentage? Can you put a percentage on the amount of your reliance materials that were provided by Jones Day?
A. I really can't do that. I'm not aware of that.
Q. Can you put a percentage on the amount of your reliance materials that were compiled by you?
A. Well, let me say one thing: The fact that I have those materials in my possession doesn't mean I'm going to use them, or the fact that anybody gave me any materials doesn't mean that I'm going to use them, because it is my own decision.
And sometimes, for example, when I went to the depository that Professor Ford has, you know, he opened the space to me and I made the decisions which ones I take.
Now, what we usually do as historians is we take more than we may need because we don't know whether the research is going to expand in that direction.
Q. You understand that when you provide the reliance list that serves as the basis of your opinions in this case, it is representation to us that these are the materials that are important and that form the basis of your opinions?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You understand that?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. Generally speaking, that's my understanding, yes.
Q. So if you're communicating to me today that, you know, these 5,000 documents that are on your reliance list, that those are broader, more expansive than the documents
you intend to rely on to form your opinions, that puts us in a position of having to go through that list and determine, without knowing, what you're going to use, which ones are important and which ones aren't.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Remember, this is ongoing research, and there are materials that I have identified as a general collection that I would hope eventually to get to them. And just as an example, you know, Harper's Weekly, I do have the sense that there are relevant materials there for the general topic of smoking and health. I may not have read them yet, but, as I think is reflected here, there's — articles are here. So in that regard, these are materials that I may or may not look at.
Q. So it's just up to us to guess as to which ones you intend to rely upon?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, it's not up to you.
Q. How am I supposed to determine from the list of 5,000 documents which ones are important and which ones aren't?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's my determination.
Q. Your determination is that all 5,000 of them are important?
A. That all 5,000 are or may be important.
Q. Are or may be. What sources are contained — or excuse me — what sources of documents are on your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form. I'm sorry. I didn't understand your question.
MR. BIGGER: That's a bad question. That makes no sense.
Q. From what sources did you compile the documents that are contained on your — contained in your reliance materials?
A. From what sources?
Q. Yes, what sources.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Just listing them, what are some of the sources?
A. Well, earlier we spoke about the ones that I went after myself and found. So are you asking for a detailed — Q. All together. What sources are on there?
Newspaper articles?
MS. LAWSON: Are you asking him about types of sources or documents —
MR. BIGGER: Yes. Source.
MS. LAWSON: I want to make sure he understands your question.
MR. BIGGER: Yes.
Q. What type of sources did you compile your reliance materials from?
A. I'm going to try to be as exhaustive as I can —
Q. Great.
A. — but it's a long list so it's possible that I may fail to mention some of them.
Q. Okay.
A. Newspapers, magazines, scientific literature.
Some of the scientific literature is for the lay reader.
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. Well, that there's some publications are meant for the experts in the field, the Journal of the American Medical Association, for example, but then there are other publications of a more popular nature that deal with health.
Q. Can you give me an example? Good Health?
A. Good Health, yes.
Q. And you included materials on there that are designed for the experts, is that what you said?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As part of my research, because so many of the articles, for example, and the news broadcasts refer to scientific studies, say, by the journal — the New England Journal of Medicine, I looked at those because they were mentioned in the media often and that's the way in which that scientific information was disseminated to the public.
So I did look at the run of the American — the Journal of the American Medical Association. I looked at Florida Health Notes. I looked at materials such as the — and I forget whether this is the exact title — the Journal of the Florida Medical Association.
Q. Okay. So newspapers, magazines, scientific literature, including lay reader materials and expert materials. What other sources — types of sources did you pull the information from — or I guess what other types of sources is — I'm having a hard time saying this.
From what types of sources do your reliance materials come from?
A. This is the list that we're putting together?
Q. Right, right. Exactly. So newspapers, magazines.
A. School textbooks.
Q. Okay.
A. Curricular materials such as teacher's guides, educational videos, church publications. I also looked at books relating to the topic. I looked at a variety of professional articles, which are not necessarily produced by scientists but that have a bearing on these discussions.
I looked at public service announcements. I looked at legislation, both at the national level, state level, local level. I looked at the publications of volunteer health organizations such as the American Cancer
Society or the American Heart Association, others, as well.
I looked at various pamphlets and publications put out by the government. Some of these were by the federal government, others were by state governments. Let's see. I looked at posters. I also took into consideration —
Q. One second. What does "posters" mean?
A. Posters, for example, by the Center for Disease Control.
Q. Public health announcement? You're not talking about advertising, like a billboard or a poster in a store? You're talking about an announcement, a poster announcement by a health organization?
A. Which, by the way, sometimes appear in the form of billboards and I have looked at some of those billboards.
Q. What is the answer to my question?
A. Can you repeat it.
Q. That's the type of poster you're talking about?
A. Well, the posters vary. They're a form of advertising to some extent or can be.
Q. Did you include advertising? Is advertising one of the sources that you — one of the types of sources that you looked at, you included?
A. As they appeared in the newspapers and magazines, that was part of what I was looking at, yes.
Q. Did you include the advertisements in your last
A. I don't recall whether specifically by — in terms of, well, on this day, on this page, this ad by X-tobacco company appeared. I don't have that in the list, no, that I can tell.
Q. So did you look at advertisements and specifically decide to exclude them?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I did not exclude them, no.
Q. So did you include them on your reliance materials?
A. As — they're included the same way, for example, there's a statement here various articles from X-newspaper, that would be included as well, although they're not articles.
Q. So what you're saying is if there's an article that appears — an advertisement that appears on a photocopy of a newspaper article that you made from a particular page, that would be the only way the advertisement would be included?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No.
Q. Did you specifically include the advertisements, the millions and millions of advertisements that were publicly disseminated during the decades of time between the
'30s and the '70s, for example, did you include the advertisements that were publicly disseminated in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes, they were included. Again, not to — not necessarily to the degree of specificity, but they were part — if I looked at the Tampa Tribune, which I have a stack here in front of me, and there were ads, I included them. And ads, by "ads," I mean anything from ads by tobacco companies or ads by those that produce pills for smoking cessation.
Q. Nicorette?
A. Yes. Or I'd also add ads by the Reader's Digest, which appear quite often here, and they — it's an ad that says: In our next edition of Reader's Digest, you will see a special section on tobacco and smoking. So that's an ad.
Q. So it's your testimony that you included the advertisements that appeared in the Tampa Tribune and other newspaper sources in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. They're part of the materials. Whether I made notes of them, that's something else, because the focus of — I wanted to include, and I think I did, advertising. And, as I said, ranging from advertising for a new cigarette brand to advertisings about a clinic for smoking cessation,
I did include those. So, yes, they're included. Whether they're on this list, I'm not sure. I would have to sit down and —
Q. If they're included, they are on that list, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I mean, are you telling me that there are documents in your reliance materials that are not contained on that list?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Let me try to explain it by giving you an illustration.
Q. Sure.
A. There is, I believe we read earlier, an item here that says various articles from Harper's Weekly.
Q. Okay.
A. That includes ads.
Q. Because it appeared on the same page as the smoking article, or are you suggesting that it includes ads that independently you selected and put just that advertisement as one of your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As I was looking at some of these materials, I wasn't making a distinction. You know, if it came out, then it didn't matter whether that ad was part of the — next to
a story on tobacco or not. I do have several of those.
Q. So you specifically went through the sources, newspaper, magazines, and looked for tobacco advertisements to include in your reliance materials?
A. What I can tell you is this —
Q. Sorry. It's just a yes or no question, Doctor.
I'm sorry. Not trying to cut you off.
MS. LAWSON: He is allowed to explain his answers.
MR. BIGGER: After he answers. He can explain his answer but he has to answer the question first.
MS. LAWSON: I understand. But not every question that you think is a yes or no question is a yes or no question. He needs to answer as he —
A. It's not a yes or no answer that I can give you.
If you'll allow me to expand, I'll do that.
Q. Specifically, did you go through the sources and pull, add to your reliance materials, the tobacco advertisements that appeared in those sources during the years in which you were searching?
A. In some cases, yes. But this is where I'd like to expand on my answer.
Q. Fine. Some cases, yes. Go ahead. You can explain.
A. And the explanation is this: The main objective of the research is information that is available or has been
available to the public about the risks or potential risks associated with smoking.
As we started talking about, there's a universe of messages that deal with that. School, church, community, boy scouts, comic books, which we may want to add to the list that we were putting together. Those are there.
Now, as a historian, I make a judgment on the importance of the various kinds of materials that will help me answer that historical question, and the ads are not the best source for that. They're part of the landscape, if you will, of messages, but certainly I — and this is something that historians, as I said earlier, we do — we discriminate among documents and we ask questions as who's putting this message out; what is the audience; is this an ad or is this an article or is this an editorial.
And in terms of messages to the public, I understand that there's a difference that people know between an ad and an article, and so I pay more attention, as I do with all my research, to the materials that I feel that provide me with the answers that I'm looking for.
Q. So you excluded materials that you feel people did not pay as much attention to?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that what you're saying?
A. I'm not saying that. It's not a matter of
attention. It's a matter of the message. It's a different nature. I mean, one thing is an ad which is about selling a product, another thing is an article explaining, for example, new research that has come out pointing to the fact that there's a link between smoking and, say, heart disease.
Q. Have you not seen tobacco advertisements that have health claims or information regarding the healthfulness of the product in them?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Have you seen those advertisements?
A. That make the claims that they're healthy for you?
Q. Yes.
A. I don't recall having seen that.
Q. You have not seen a tobacco advertisement that makes a health claim? Is that your testimony?
A. Well, that's a different question.
Q. Well, answer the second question.
A. Health claims? Again, it depends on what we mean by "health claims." And, of course, I do recall having seen some ads in which — and this is just a general impression,
I may be wrong — but there's a possibility that I saw some ads that may have pointed to the fact that, say, filters leave out some of the ingredients that have been linked, through the research, or at least reduce the amount that have been pointed as possible causes for various diseases.
So in that regard, I would put that within the ballpark of general information about health. I mean, they're not specifically.
Q. The information about smoking and health, correct?
A. Smoking and health?
Q. Yes. I mean, it's a cigarette advertisement about the healthfulness of the product.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You'd agree that's information about smoking and health, correct?
A. I'm telling you the general impression that I have. The best way for me to answer that would be to take a look at a specific ad, be able to — although I'm not an expert in advertising, I couldn't tell what the intention of the add is —
Q. I'm asking you a general question. An advertisement — a cigarette company that talks about the healthfulness of the product is information relating to smoking and health, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Because now we're using another word, the healthfulness that you just used.
Q. It's the word I used in the beginning. A health claim. If health claim is easier for you. A cigarette advertisement that makes a health claim is information
that's publicly disseminated about smoking and health. Agreed?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It depends. You know, the word health, we can make it broader or — but I don't recall specifically, but it's possible that I saw an ad that said that this is milder, and, you know, that may have — that may or may not be something related to health.
Q. How about a claim that cigarettes don't irritate your throat?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't recall that.
Q. You don't recall seeing that ad?
A. Specifically with that wording, no.
Q. I'll represent to you that an ad with that wording or substantially similar wording does exist. Based upon that representation, do you think that advertisement is information that was publicly disseminated regarding smoking and health?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would have to look at that document to be able to respond.
Q. Okay. Did you include statements by the tobacco industry, by any of the tobacco companies, in your reliance materials?
Q. Public statements, whether by press releases, editorials, appearances on television shows, any public statement by the tobacco industry or any of the tobacco companies.
A. Yes, I did. And as you can tell by my notes, the ones that you received earlier today, these are — you know, there's a story and I'm taking notes about that story. And there's a claim made by Hammond and Horn in a study, and then there's this — maybe toward the end of that story, there's a small response. I included that. That's part of the — that's part of the story.
Q. You're talking about a newspaper article that has purpose for the story and there is a refutation or a counterpoint by the tobacco industry in the story? Is that what you're talking about, Doctor?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It varies. They're not — they're not always refutations. I would be more comfortable using the term responses. And, by the way, some of the responses were actually in agreement with what the scientists themselves were saying.
Just to give you one example. More study needs to be done. You know, we have found these things and it's strong evidence, but more needs to be done. You could find,
as a commentary by the representative of the tobacco industry saying the same thing. So it is — it is not a contradiction or a refutation, necessarily.
Q. And you think that was the true case in most of those public statements by the tobacco companies?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. The ones that you reviewed, that you saw, most of the time were they contradictory, or were they saying the same thing?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
A. It varies, depending on the story. It — how can I put it? In most instances, I should say, there are no comments from the industry.
In some instances, there are statements made by the journalist in which they appear to be representing the industry. For example, I am the author of this article and the article is a description of a new study that came out demonstrating that a mortality rate was much higher among smokers — among smokers than among non-smokers.
And then in some instances, as is the case in this newspaper, the Tampa Tribune, the author himself, without soliciting, apparently, without soliciting a response from the tobacco industry, would write something along the lines of "by the way, the industry challenges this." So that, I wouldn't count as a response from the industry.
Q. What is your historical understanding of the position of the tobacco industry on a link between smoking cigarettes and disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can only base that on the materials that I have looked at which are materials that become public like newspapers or, say, an interview on television, so —
Q. Right. Well, what is your understanding of it? What was the position of the industry, the tobacco industry, on the link between smoking and disease?
A. It varied over time. In most instances, they agreed that there was a link.
Q. In most instances, they agreed there was a link. That1s your testimony today?
A. Yes, yes. Based on what I've seen.
Now, the type of link is something that is different, because sometimes they talk about, well, there's this statistical link.
Q. So it's your opinion as a historian that there was not a controversy over a link between smoking cigarettes and disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I haven't said that at all.
Q. Well, you said the industry agreed that there was a link.
A. I believe I said in some instances —
Q. You said in most —
A. — and it varied over time.
Q. You said in most instances, you told me.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. We can read it back.
THE WITNESS: Could you do that, please.
MR. BIGGER: We'll read it back.
(The requested testimony starting on page 182, line 25, and ending on page 183, line 3, was read back by the court reporter.)
Q. Doctor, having that just read back to you, was that an incorrect statement by you?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I still think it's true. I mean, I haven't done a quantitative analysis. This is based on having looked at many stories and, you know, the responses vary and sometimes they call for further research.
And, again, there's no disagreement there, because the scientists themselves who were working, say, for the American Cancer Society are making the same statements. So I would say — and by most, I mean more than half — I would venture to say, not having done a statistical analysis of that, that the link, that there's a form of a link, was not denied.
Q. Did you include internal industry documents in your reliance materials?
A. I've come across some of them and they are part of the materials that I've looked at. The reason why I've not gone in that direction — I mean, if a material shows up as I'm doing, say, an Internet search, I'm not going to discard that material. It is part of my collection of documents.
But I didn't go in that direction and that's why it's not part of this general list that we were putting together.
Internal materials, because, by their very nature, they are internal materials and what I'm looking for, from the very beginning, is information that was available to the public through the media, through a variety of other sources, material that was disseminated.
Q. It was just a yes or no question.
Did you include internal industry documents in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection; asked and answered.
MR. BIGGER: It's not answered.
MS. LAWSON: He answered it.
Q. I don't want to be here tomorrow, Doctor. I'd like to just get through all this today. I don't want us to have to come back and keep going.
I would like, when it's a quick and easy answer, and if I follow up, then that's where the explanation comes
up. But if it's just a yes or no answer, let's just try to keep this moving for everyone's sake today, if we can.
So did you include internal industry documents on your reliance list and in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I can't think at this point of one that I included.
Q. Okay.
A. I can't tell you that.
Q. Okay. Thank you.
A. I may have, but I —
Q. Are you aware of the historical understanding of the tobacco industry with regard to the link between smoking and disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Of the tobacco industry?
Q. Yes. Are you aware of the internal understanding of the link between smoking and disease? And when I say "internal," I mean within the tobacco industry.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
A. No. I'm not aware of that. That wasn't part of the questions that I set out to seek answers for, which have to do with information available and disseminated to the public. So, no, I didn't do that.
Q. You didn't research — so you don't know when, for example, the industry was aware that cigarettes are a causative factor in cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
MR. BIGGER: One's good.
MR. WOODS: I had to jump in just in case.
Q. You're not aware —
A. I'm not aware of that, no.
Q. You're not aware of when the tobacco industry was — I don't like using aware because we used it twice.
You don't know when the tobacco industry became aware of the fact that nicotine and cigarettes is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know that information, no.
MR. BIGGER: Let's take a break for a second.
(A brief recess was taken.)
(End of Volume I.)
CERTIFICATE
The State of Florida, )
County of Orange.	)
I, Jennifer B. Sanders, Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, do hereby certify that the aforementioned witness was by me first duly sworn to testify the whole truth; that I was authorized to and did report said deposition in stenotype; and that the foregoing pages, numbered 4 to 188, inclusive, Volume I, are a true and correct transcription of my shorthand notes of said deposition.
I further certify that said deposition was taken at the time and place hereinabove set forth and that the taking of said deposition was commenced and completed as hereinabove set out.
I further certify that I am not an attorney or counsel of any of the parties, nor am I a relative or employee of any attorney or counsel of party connected with the action, nor am I financially interested in the action.
The foregoing certification of this transcript does not apply to any reproduction of the same by any means unless under the direct control and/or direction of the certifying reporter.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this 29th day of April 2009.
Jennifer B. Sanders Notary Public - State of Florida My Commission DD 823358 My Commission Expires 9/16/2012
ERRATA SHEET
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION DEPOSITION OF: LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
CASE NO.:	08-CA-9153
ENTER CHANGES HERE PAGE # LINE #	CORRECTION
Under penalty of perjury, I declare that I have read my deposition and that it is true and correct subject to any changes in form or substance entered here.
SUBSCRIPTION OF DEPONENT State of Florida )
County of Orange )
Under penalties of perjury, I hereby declare that I have read the foregoing deposition by me given, and that the facts contained herein are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief, with the exception of any corrections or notations made on the errata sheet, if one was executed.
Dated this _day of _ 2009.
Luis Martinez-Fernandez, Ph.D.
THE IN CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA IN AND FOR HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY
CIVIL DIVISION
CASE NO.: 08-CA-9153 DIVISION: D
IN RE ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION
Pertains to: Rodiguez, Winell as Personal Representative for the Estate of Gilbert Rodriguez.
_/
DEPOSITION OF LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
(VOLUME II)
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2009 BOIES, SCHILLER & FLEXNER 121 SOUTH ORANGE AVENUE, SUITE 84 0 ORLANDO, FLORIDA 328 01
9:00 a.m - 7:03 p.m.
REPORTED BY:
Jennifer B. Sanders
Notary Public, State of Florida
APPEARANCES:
BRENT R. BIGGER, ESQUIRE ABRAHAMSON, UITERWYK & BARNES 900 West Platt Street Tampa, Florida 33606
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF WINELL RODRIGUEZ
CHRISTINE LAWSON, ATTORNEY AT LAW JONES DAY
1420 Peachtree Street, N.E., Suite 800 Atlanta, Georgia 30309-3053
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO DAVID M. WOODS, ESQUIRE
ANGELA SPLITTGERBER, ATTORNEY AT LAW (via telephone)
SHOOK, HARDY & BACON, LLP
2555 Grand Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64108-2613
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF LORILLARD TOBACCO
MITKA TAMARA LYNN BAKER, ATTORNEY AT LAW (via telephone)
DLA PIPER, LLP
500 Eighth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004
APPEARING ON BEHALF OF PHILIP MORRIS USA
INDEX
TESTIMONY OF LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
Continued Direct Examination by Mr. Bigger	194 Cross-Examination (none)
CERTIFICATE OF REPORTER	355
ERRATA	356
SUBSCRIPTION OF DEPONENT	357
NOTIFICATION LETTER	358
'k'k'k'k'k'k'k'k
EXHIBITS
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 8	240
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 9	266
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 10	293
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 11	299
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 12	308
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 13	333
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 14	341
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBIT NO. 15	345
Deposition taken before Jennifer B. Sanders, Court Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, in the above cause.
Thereupon,
LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D., having been previously sworn or affirmed, was examined and testified as follows:
CONTINUED DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Do you have any way to know, Doctor, how Jones Day collected or compiled the items they provided to you that were include in your reliance materials?
A. I don't.
Q. Okay. And we were talking about the internal industry documents and the positions of the tobacco industry. Let me clarify a point counsel made off the record, which is probably a valid point.
When I talk about the tobacco industry, I'm talking about the industry as a whole, all the companies, including R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Philip Morris,
U.S — or Philip Morris, I guess is easier to do an umbrella
—	Lorillard Tobacco Company, Liggett & Myers Tobacco Company, and as well as the industry associations like the Tobacco Industry Research — Council —
MS. LAWSON: Committee.
Q. — Tobacco Industry Research Committee, and the Center for Tobacco Research, and the Tobacco Institute, those organizations — are you familiar with all of those organizations that I just mentioned?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Okay. If at any time a response to my question requires clarification that it’s not included in the industry or that it should not apply to the tobacco industry, as I’ve just described it, I need you to let me know.
For example, if it’s something that — your expertise is something that's only relevant or applies to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company or Philip Morris, I need you to let me know.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Probably should have clarified that earlier, but, in any event, it’s out there now.
Does that in any way change any of the answers or any of the testimony you’ve given?
A. No, it doesn’t.
Q. Okay. You’ve never asked R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for the research that it has done or for documents — let me back up.
You’ve never asked R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
for internal documents that would reflect when they were aware there was a causative link between cigarette smoking and disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that correct?
A. I don't ask them for documents and the response includes what you just asked.
Q. Okay. You don't ask them for documents?
A. No.
Q. If you asked them for documents, do you think they'd give them to you?
A. Well, I'm the one that finds the documents. And there may have been one occasion — there was one occasion in which the documents were not accessible to me but they were in Atlanta and, at that time, I gave the list of what I already had identified as something I needed, and, at that time, I asked if some researcher could try to get a hold of those documents. But it was my list, and I received many of them and I certainly did not receive anyone that was not on my list.
Q. I'm talking about the internal industry documents. Is that what you're talking about? Or did you ask for — or did you ask — send them a list of internal documents that you wanted?
A. These are not internal documents.
Q. If you wanted the internal documents, you could certainly get them from the company, correct?
A. If I wanted them? I could ask for them. I don't know whether I would get them.
Q. You've never asked for them?
A. I have never asked for them.
Q. You are aware that the tobacco industry, in the course of the 20th Century, conducted extensive research on the link between smoking cigarettes and disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That has come out of the articles and other pieces of information that I have used, that they have in fact conducted their own research.
Q. Have you ever asked them for the conclusions of that research or for the research itself?
A. Have I asked . . .?
Q. The tobacco industry or R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
A. No, I haven't.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Which, my interest, again, is the research that was publicized and disseminated through the media and other sources.
Q. I understand that. But would you agree with me that if a company has information that it could publicly disseminate, it would be important to know that fact.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I guess, in theory, every company has information that is internal that could be publicly disseminated.
Q. If a company has, for example, information or research that they've done that would inform the public about the risk of smoking and disease, do you think the company should disclose that information to the public?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's not for me to judge. That's a decision that, I guess, the corporation makes.
Q. If a company withholds that kind of information, it obviously limits what was available in the public domain. You agree with that, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not ready to make that judgment. What I can say is that my research was based on what was available. There may be other materials that were not available to the public, and, therefore, they were not in the purview of my research.
Q. But you feel that your research and reliance materials include all the materials that were available to the public?
Q. Let me ask you this: Are your reliance materials intended to be a comprehensive set of what was publicly available, or are they merely a representative sample of what was available?
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
A. If we’re talking about categories, every category that I could think of and come up with is included.
Q. Except for advertisements, right?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Tobacco industry advertisements —
A. No. Advertising is part of it.
Q. So you did include — it’s your testimony as you sit here today that you did include tobacco industry advertisements in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. They are part of my research, yes. And you can look in this particular stack and there are several ads for tobacco products, the same way there are several ads for smoking cessation products. So they’re part of the landscape, and, as such, I did pay attention to them, yes.
MR. BIGGER: Off the record for a second.
(A discussion was had off the record.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. What is your understanding of the term
authoritative, in reference to a source or a publication?
A. Authoritative? It means that it's produced by an authority, someone or an institution that has the knowledge as well as the credibility to make a statement.
I could be — I could produce an authoritative report on, say, Cuba-U.S. relations. I couldn't do that on Medieval France, for example, so I wouldn't be an authority on that.
Q. Are the polls and the polling data — are the polls of the Gallup organization an authoritative source of information?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes, I believe so. And in the list of what we were putting together, I didn't get to finish and that would certainly be part of that.
Q. You included many polls from the Gallup organization in your reliance materials?
A. I did include polls from that organization and Roper, as well.
Q. You included polling data from the Roper Organization in your reliance materials?
A. Those are part of my reliance materials, yes.
Q. That's your testimony, as you sit here today, that the polls for the Roper Organization are included in your reliance materials?
Q. Yes. All those documents that we've been provided, your reliance materials.
A. I don't know whether they're there or not.
Q. So you don't know if they're there.
Do you consider the polls of the Roper Organization to be authoritative?
A. I do.
Q. Okay. Now, I asked you this but I actually want to rephrase it just to make sure I asked it properly. You do consider the polls of the Gallup organization to be authoritative?
A. Yes. But I must say something that, like with any other source, a historian that looks at polling data needs to exercise the role of being critical of that information, contextualize it, analyze it. We don't give that up just because an authority said something.
It is our responsibility to analyze that and to see, you know, if it fits within everything else and particularly what the context of that document is.
Q. It's also the historian's responsibility not to use that poll in a misleading fashion. Agreed?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That the historian uses that information in a way that it's misleading?
A. Of course. We — we're not supposed to do that. We're not supposed do that. It is part of our code of ethics.
Q. Do you consider the official reports prepared by congressional investigation to be authoritative?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Official reports produced by . . .?
Q. Official reports produced by a congressional committee or subcommittee following an investigation, do you consider those sources to be authoritative?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. Not necessarily, because they can reflect the view of people that are not authorities or are not qualified to be authorities.
Q. How about the 9/11 Commission Report, is that authoritative?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Do you consider it to be authoritative?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I'm not familiar with that report. I know that it happened. I'm not familiar with the testimony, who was speaking. There are people who — I don't know — may have been interviewed for that that are not authorities on terrorism but they may be knowledgable about some other
aspect. So I can't — I can't make that assessment.
Q. Are you aware of the investigations into the tobacco industry by the commerce committee?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Are you referring specifically to a particular period in time?
Q. During the 1990's.
A. During the 1990's. Yes. That received media attention and I was aware of that.
Q. Are you aware of the investigations into the tobacco industry by Representative Henry Waxman?
A. Yes. I remember the name.
Q. Do you believe that the reports and the conclusions of those investigations are authoritative?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I believe that the reports are meant to reflect the diversity of views of the different people that were called in to give testimony. So they are — in a sense, they are authoritative and official about what happened.
Now, the voices that may have been called to speak there may have or may have not been authoritative, and, of course, some may be more authoritative than others.
Q. We talked earlier about the report you prepared in connection with this case.
A. Yes, I do.
Q. I believe it was Exhibit 5.
A. Yes. I have it here.
Q. Does this report contain all your opinions with regard to your expected testimony in the Rodriguez case?
A. This is a, I believe, a summary of the major opinions, not all of the opinions.
Q. What opinions are not contained within this report?
A. Well, most of the things that support that are not there. As I said, this is a summary. So it's just a — just a four-page document that can't possibly include my opinions which I have gathered over eight years of research. So this is just a summary.
Q. So this document does not contain all your opinions with regard to the Rodriguez case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It's a summary of the major opinions but it does not include many other opinions that — that I have gathered. I mean, it's just — they're mentioned. There's no expansion on them here.
Q. Okay. So they're not expanded upon, but all your opinions are listed in this document?
to do with public awareness of smoking and how it relates to illness and the possibility of it being hard to quit, that's reflected here. But, over the years, I've come up with a number of opinions based on the thousands of documents that I've looked at. So this is just the main two, the two main ones .
Q. But there was common knowledge regarding the connection between smoking and health — let me rephrase that.
There was common knowledge regarding the health hazard of smoking and there was common knowledge regarding the addictiveness or difficulty to quit smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't believe I used the word or the phrase common knowledge. I don't believe it's here. I would have to read it again.
Q. Why would you — do you not agree with the use of the phrase common knowledge?
A. You asked me if that was part of this report.
Q. Sure.
A. And I said I don't believe it's part of this report.
Q. So those two words may not be used. Public awareness?
Q. Do you believe the common knowledge and public awareness are synonymous?
A. Common knowledge --no, I don’t think they are.
Q. What is the difference between common knowledge and public awareness, in your understanding?
A. It’s a matter of degree more than -- it’s just a word that I feel more comfortable with, public awareness. And part of the reason is because the documents that I have found speak to the issue of public awareness.
Q. Awareness doesn't require knowledge, is that one of the distinctions?
A. No.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not saying that, no.
Q. Does awareness require belief?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. These are two different things. One can be aware of something but not believe that.
Q. So you believe that — do you believe that common knowledge requires both knowledge and belief?
A. It certainly doesn't require belief.
Q. Common knowledge?
A. Common knowledge.
Q. And public awareness, in your opinion, does not require belief either?
A. Yes. As I said, these are two different things.
Q. So there could be public awareness of something that isn't true?
A. There could be a public awareness of something that isn't true. I would agree with that.
Q. Okay. Likewise, there could be a lack of public awareness about something that is true?
A. Yes. That could be the case.
Q. What is the threshold for public awareness?
A. That's an interesting question, and I can say this: I have looked at some literature on the subject, and, in one instance — and they don't — they don't use, necessarily, the term public awareness — I believe the term used in that particular article had to deal with saturation of information, and that that level is achieved, if I recall correctly — and this is just an estimate — between 60 and 66 percent. Now, that's their opinion.
Q. 60 to 66 percent of what?
A. Of the population.
Q. Once 66 percent of the population is saturated with the information, then you have public awareness? Is that your — is that what you're saying?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I'm not saying that.
A. Okay. This is what I can say: Let me go to the Tampa Tribune.
Q. Hold on a second. What is — and I'm trying to determine what your understanding of public awareness is. What does public awareness mean to you?
What is the amount of awareness — you said it doesn't require knowledge, it's different from knowledge — what is the amount of awareness required in the population to have public awareness?
A. I don't believe I said that it doesn't require knowledge. I think I said it doesn't require belief.
Q. So it doesn't require belief. But you also said that knowledge and awareness were two different things.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You said public knowledge — or sorry — public awareness and common knowledge are not synonymous.
A. Not necessarily. But there's one term that is, in my mind, gives the impression of a precision that it's not really there, and I'm referring to common knowledge.
What I was starting to say earlier was that this particular article mentioned that. Now, I don't necessarily agree with that, but let me tell you something that I found from, perhaps, the most authoritative source of awareness in general and that's the Gallup Poll. And they mention in one
of the articles that you have with you, they mentioned that there was a particular study in 1957 — I think that's the date — in which 82 percent of the smokers had heard about or read about a specific study linking smoking with illness. And I'm not ready to make that judgment, but the Gallup people themselves said: This is unprecedented.
And I take them as the authority making that claim. And, actually, they produced evidence to that effect. And they say, compared to so many other studies, the Kinsey report, a few — two or three years earlier, only 42 percent of them — of the population — had read or heard about it. So they're making this statement specifically.
Q. Are you aware of what else the Gallup organization has publicly stated about that poll?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Have you heard anything else about what the Gallup organization has publicly stated regarding that poll or its use?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I don't remember specifically about that poll. I know they did that for several — the kind of story that I described, they did that for several studies in different years and the result is very, very high levels.
Q. Are you aware that the Gallup organization publicly criticized Dr. Ford for misleading use of that 1957
Gallup Poll?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form. I'm not sure that's quite an accurate representation of what happened.
A. I believe I read somewhere — I don't know — but I know that there was a controversy, whether it was an accusation against Lacy Ford or — I'm not sure. And I'm not even sure who raised this, whether this was the Gallup Poll organization itself or an individual that may or may have not been associated with that organization. So I can't say that it's the Gallup Poll making the statement.
Q. So you're not aware that in 1998, the Gallup Poll publicly criticized the use of that 1957 poll by Dr. Ford as misleading?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form. And, again, same objection. I'm not sure it's an accurate representation of that.
A. In order for me to comment on that particular item, I would like to have the opportunity to read it.
Q. I'm just asking if you're aware. Have you heard that before?
A. Not in — not necessarily in the terms in which you characterized it.
Q. Okay. You don't recall that coming up in your deposition in the Cohen case?
Q. Are you aware that the Gallup organization has stated that that poll was reflective of an awareness of the controversy surrounding a link between smoking and disease —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. — rather than an awareness that smoking causes disease?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I'd have to read the document. And, by the way, I don't think we're talking about the same poll.
Q. I think we are.
A. Because the poll I was referring to, it's very clearly stated, judging from the questions, that it's not about a controversy. It's about knowledge.
Q. Is this the July 1957 poll that's contained in your reliance materials?
And the question was: Did you happen to hear or read about the recent report of the American Cancer Society reporting the results of a study on the effects of cigarette smoking. And 77 percent of the respondents said yes.
82 percent of the cigarette smokers said yes.
A. Yes.
Q. That's the poll?
Q. Then we're talking about the same thing.
A. But you mentioned something on controversy and the questions don't allude to controversy. They allude to awareness of that story — or that study.
Q. If the Gallup organization has publicly stated that they believe those results suggest an awareness of the controversy surrounding smoking and disease, do you have any reason to disagree with that assessment?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. First of all, I would need to look at that document to verify that these — this is a statement by the poll organization.
Q. You would need to look at the public statement by the Gallup organization? Is that — when you say "the document," you're talking about the public statement?
A. Yes, yes.
Q. Not the poll, but the public statement?
A. Yes. And I would also like to be informed about the circumstances surrounding that, the publication of that document.
Q. Okay. The publication of that statement —
A. Yes.
Q. — by the Gallup organization?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You're talking about the public statement in '98
—	1998 by the Gallup organization?
A. Again, I'm not 100 percent sure that it's by the organization itself or by one individual, perhaps, linked to the organization or not. I don't know if it's something that the organization authorized or whether somebody from that organization was quoted. I would have to look at the document.
Q. Okay. One of your opinions in this case, based upon your report, is that — well, hold on a second before we go there.
Part of the subject matter of your expert testimony that's described in your report, Exhibit 5, is the history of the use of tobacco and cigarettes in Florida and the United States?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. Would you agree that this necessarily includes the history, both internal and external, of the tobacco industry?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Internal and external —
Q. When I say "internal," the internal history as far as the internal knowledge of the tobacco company — excuse me — the tobacco industry. And by "external," I mean the public statements, the public positions of the tobacco industry.
A. Can you lead me to the particular section that you're reading from?
Q. Yes.
MS. LAWSON: I'm sorry. We were searching for it
so he could look at it specifically.
MR. BIGGER: No problem.
Q. Under subject matter of expert testimony, first sentence: Dr. Fernandez is expected to testify about the history of the use of tobacco and cigarettes in Florida and the United States.
A. Yes. That's precisely what the intention of that
is
Q. Okay.
A. — is the history of the use of tobacco and cigarettes. This is part of the background.
Q. Right.
A. Because it's important for me to know — it's one way — one of the ways of measuring whether that information that was made public had an impact in smoking habits, for example. And that's something that I see after many of the reports are made public. So this has to do with the use, the consumption of tobacco and cigarettes.
And, for example, the agriculture department puts out reports on the sale of cigarettes. They used to do
that. I don't know whether they still do that. So that, to me, was part of the background and context of my investigation.
Q. And part of the history, the use of the tobacco and cigarettes in Florida and the United States, necessarily includes the history of the tobacco industry, both internal knowledge of the industry and public statements, the external statements of the tobacco industry?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Not the internal part. I think it's important for me to have a sense of the chronology. For example, the formation of the American Tobacco Company, the use of cigarette-making machines, these things have a bearing on my study.
Q. But the knowledge of the industry, tobacco industry, regarding its awareness of a link between smoking cigarettes and disease is irrelevant?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Unless that is part of the information that is disseminated to the public through the media and other channels, it's not, not for my research.
Q. And the — are the efforts by the tobacco industry to affect the information that was publicly available, is that relevant?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Only to the extent that that information is available to the public. What happened inside the corporation and didn’t make it to these sources that I had enumerated earlier, that has no relevance, in my professional estimation, in the area of public awareness.
Q. So efforts to stifle reports, newspaper articles, other information from being publicly disseminated has no bearing on public awareness of the health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I wouldn’t use that language, no.
Q. And the withholding of knowledge, of information, research, conclusions, has no bearing on the public knowledge or the public awareness, as you used, of the health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The way I can measure public awareness is by looking at the information that was made public and that people had access to, whether it was through television or through a sermon on Sunday or whether it had to do with school curriculum, that type of thing that made it to the public, that’s what allows me to gauge the extent of the awareness.
Q. So what was the earliest date and time, in your opinion, that the public was aware of the health hazard of smoking cigarettes?
A. From materials that I have looked at, this information was being disseminated through publications, health magazines, articles in Harper’s Weekly from the 19th Century, that this information was out there in the public, at the very least -- and I could say, well, actually, maybe the 1870’s, but perhaps even earlier than that.
Q. So it’s your opinion as an expert in this case that the public was aware that smoking was a health hazard in the 1870's?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As —
Q. If that’s not correct, I want to cure the objection here. Tell me what your opinion is.
A. Okay. The awareness comes from a variety of sources. If you have a neighbor who’s smoking and you see that that neighbor gets sick after the act of smoking, that is a form of awareness.
Q. Would you say that person is publicly — is aware of the health hazard of smoking?
A. That person can see that there’s a connection between the act of smoking and coughing, for example, so --
Q. But — sorry.
A. But the question I was answering before, and I thought we were talking about media materials --
A. — that began to circulate in larger numbers in the latter part of the 19th Century.
Q. Okay. Just because there's information out there, though, that doesn't amount to public awareness. Do you agree with that? Or are you saying that the existence of information is public awareness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. They're not the same.
Q. Right. You can have information out there that's available and still not have a public awareness. Agreed?
A. That's out there? Well, if it's out there within the reach and reaching the population, they are, of course, related, yes.
Q. So you're saying that upon dissemination, you have public awareness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I'm just trying to understand. I want to cure Ms. Lawson's objection, so help me understand here.
A. I think people can be aware of things without ever having read about them. I mean, people are aware of basic things that — such as, you know, there are four seasons and there are changes throughout the year in items of temperature. That's an awareness that people have. Even primitive people have that sort of awareness, which doesn't
have to be disseminated through the media.
Q. So you feel that an awareness that smoking is a health hazard is the kind of information that is basically understood by everyone just like they understand there are four seasons?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I never said that. I never meant to imply
that.
Q. Okay.
A. Again, I have problems with those absolutes like all and everyone. As a historian, I never — I don't use them and I tell my students not to use them.
Q. I don't want to put an absolute on you. I'm just trying to determine, simply, the dissemination of information.
So the fact that there is some information available in the entire public domain — okay — the universe of all knowledge, of all information, there is some information disseminated about the health hazard of smoking. Upon dissemination, that equals public awareness of the health hazard of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Not necessarily. Because there are different kinds of sources. You know, you walk by the aisle in the supermarket and it's the Star magazines and all of that,
that information is out there. Most people, I believe, don't take it seriously or as seriously as they would take information from a credible source. So it's not a matter of the information being out there.
Q. Obviously, like you're saying, another important component is the exposure to the information, correct?
A. Exposure, whether director or indirect?
Q. Sure. If I shout from the roof of this building whatever I shout, certainly, people who don't hear it are not going to be aware of what I shouted. There would be no awareness of the fact that I shouted that. Would you agree with that?
A. Unless you told them that you did that.
Q. Sure. Unless they were exposed to the information in some way, whether I told them, whether they heard me, whether you went and told someone and said "You won't believe what this crazy lawyer did in a deposition today," unless they are exposed to the information, they will not have an awareness of it?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I disagree. Because there's lots of information that you get through oral sources, communications, conversation.
Q. That's an exposure to the information.
Q. Okay. It's indirect. But they're exposed to the information, correct?
A. That's a form of exposure to information, yes.
Q. And the only way to have awareness of something is to be exposed to it, whether it's by oral communication, written communication or some other form of communication, television?
A. I think the question is too broad and so many things could be fit in there.
Q. Well, let me make it very narrow then.
Are you of the opinion that someone can be aware of information to which they have never been exposed?
A. Well, that exposure could be a personal encounter with that reality, or that exposure could be reading about it, or it could be seeing it on television, or it could be somebody else telling them. So I would agree with that, yes. There has to be some —
Q. Right. So you — just hold — follow up. But you would agree that someone who's never exposed to something could not be aware of it?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I wouldn't — I wouldn't go that far. I mean, there are things that are in the realm of the spiritual and they have to do with faith. And, actually, faith doesn't have to do with being exposed or believing in things that
you're exposed to.
Q. I think that most people of faith would tell you that if they had a spiritual conversation or connection that exposed them to information, that's an exposure.
But regardless of that, what I'm trying to determine is if someone could be aware of something without having any exposure to the information at all.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Just a basic premise of awareness.
A. I can't come up with an example other than the one that I expressed later. I mean, there's intuition, for example, and that's a form of acquiring knowledge on which you act. That's not necessarily being exposed to something. There's this feeling that you get about something.
So I'm thinking — I'm avoiding giving you a blanket answer that will say, no, that's not possible, because there are these realms of possibility.
Q. Generally speaking, awareness derives from exposure to information?
A. I would feel comfortable agreeing with that.
Q. Okay. We'll get there eventually.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q. I guess we won't get there eventually. Mr. Wood says no.
MR. WOODS: I'm just making an objection to form.
Q. I believe I asked you earlier if you had read the Engle Florida Supreme Court decision and you said you had not.
A. I have not.
Q. Have you had anyone communicate an understanding of the Florida Supreme Court's opinion in Engle? communicate to you.
A. That subject has come up in conversations with Christine Lawson.
Q. At the — presumably, at the same time or a similar meeting to where you developed your understanding of what the Engle Progeny cases are, such as this Rodriguez case?
A. I'm sorry. I didn't get the question.
Q. You said that an understanding of the Engle Florida Supreme Court decision was communicated to you in a meeting with some lawyers.
A. As well as my own searching on the Internet.
Q. Okay.
A. Just for the basic aspects of that.
Q. You understand there is a series of what are known as findings that were made by the Engle jury in the underlying class action? Do you understand that?
A. I do understand that.
following statement is or was, at any time, a matter of common knowledge or public awareness: The tobacco industry concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking from both?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If I agree with that?
Q. Are you going to offer an opinion that that statement regarding the concealment of the health effects and addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was common knowledge or that the public was aware?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. This is a different question from the one you just asked, right?
Q. I just tried to summarize it a little bit. You want me to read it again?
A. It sounds very different.
Q. I'll read again.
Do you —
MR. BIGGER: I'm sorry, by the way.
Q. Do you intend to offer the opinion that the following statement is or was, at any time, a matter of common knowledge or public awareness: The tobacco industry — which as what we talked earlier includes all the
defendants in this case and the Tobacco Institute — Center for Tobacco Research and the Tobacco Industry Research Committee — the tobacco industry concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not able to provide a reaction to that, a response to that because that falls outside of the purview of my research. And this, as previous questions that you have posed, have to do with internal dynamics within a corporation or an industry and that has never been part of my research project.
Q. That statement is, in summary, a finding by a jury that the tobacco industry concealed from the public the health effects of smoking.
Do you intend to offer an opinion that the public was aware that the tobacco industry was concealing the health effects of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. Because that was not part of my study.
Q. Okay.
A. Those are their statements. They're not part of my study.
A. You just mentioned that a jury came to that conclusion. So the jury.
Q. You understand that is a finding of law that applies in any case with Engle class members?
A. That's my understanding. Although, I would have to read the — make sure that it came out of that document for the Engle decision.
Q. Based on that assumption that it did, your understanding is that it applies as a matter of law in a case with Engle class members?
A. It sounds familiar with what I understand.
Q. Similar question but a little bit different. Do you intend to offer the opinion that the following statement is or was at any time a matter of public awareness or common knowledge: The tobacco industry agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers and the public would rely to their detriment?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I would give you the same answer as to the previous question.
Q. You do not intend to offer the opinion that the public was aware of an agreement amongst the tobacco industry to conceal information regarding the health effects
or addictive nature of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. Because — no. Because that's not — that's not part and parcel of the research agenda that I had.
Q. Okay. Your report also says you'll testify about the — the information disseminated to the public concerning the health risks associated with smoking cigarettes and the public's knowledge of those risks.
A. This is from mine?
Q. From your report.
A. "In addition"?
Q. That next sentence.
A. Yes. That's a statement that I made and I stand by it.
Q. And the next sentence is that you will testify about the information disseminated to the public concerning the fact that some people, once they start smoking, find it very difficult to quit?
A. Yes. That's — that's my statement.
Q. Okay. As to the first part about the health risks of smoking, your conclusion is that from the information disseminated to the public, the public had knowledge of those risks?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
is not the same wording but it is, in essence, the point I made here.
Q. I'm just trying to streamline it a little bit.
A. Yes.
Q. And so, there, you use knowledge instead of awareness. Is there a particular reason you did that?
A. No particular reason, no.
Q. Earlier you said you don't like the phrase knowledge. You prefer awareness.
A. No. I didn't say that.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Okay. What did you say?
A. What I said was I'd rather use the word public awareness than common knowledge.
Q. So it's "common" is the word you really have the distaste for?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Or that you prefer to avoid?
A. Not distaste. But as a historian trying to be as clear as possible and as thorough as possible, we always make decisions about what — the wording, what wording best reflects what we intend to say.
Q. Your opinion is that based upon the dissemination of that information, Gilbert Rodriguez, the decedent in this case, was aware of the health risks of smoking cigarettes,
A. That is information that can actually be derived from some of these testimonies, that — the depositions. I can't tell you that Mr. Rodriguez read this particular story in the newspaper —
Q. Sure.
A. — unless there's some testimony to that effect.
Q. Otherwise, you have no way of knowing what he read or what he didn't read?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm referring to a particular story.
Q. Sure.
A. But what I can tell you, with a great degree of professional certainty as a historian, is that the information that was available around him, from a very early age, as a member of the Tampa community, coming from schools, coming from the media, coming from family, coming from church, and, actually, there's some statements to the effect that there were sermons that dealt — or maybe not a sermon — but that their pastor, at one point, talked about the negative aspects of smoking.
So I can tell you I can't pinpoint a particular story necessarily, but I can tell you that this man, during his lifetime, was surrounded by a great deal of information
that established or that provided information on smoking being related to illnesses, possibly being related to illnesses, and that smoking was something that could be difficult for people to quit.
And this, again, comes from organizations like the American Cancer Society that had its Florida headquarters precisely in Tampa and was very active there.
Q. Are you aware whether Gilbert Rodriguez ever interacted with the American Cancer Society or any of its representatives?
A. I cannot tell you that, but this is something that I can infer. Cancer patients are, based on my knowledge — and this is something that I'm just inferring and it's part of what historians are able to do — that people who are afflicted with cancer receive or can receive information and various forms of support from the American Cancer Society. This is something that we find in their reports, for example. These are some of the services that they provide.
Q. Are you aware of when Gilbert Rodriguez was diagnosed with cancer?
A. I would have to look at my notes again. My recollection was that it was maybe a year before his death. I'm not 100 percent sure.
Q. Are you aware of when he died?
A. I think he died in 2006, if I recall correctly.
Q. And your position is that upon being diagnosed with cancer, the American Cancer Society — you could infer the American Cancer Society may have made available certain information to him?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Or are you suggesting that at some time previous to that, the American Cancer Society made information available to him?
A. I can't tell you with 100 percent certitude that that information was made available to him either in 2005 or before that.
What I can tell you is that there were massive efforts by the American Cancer Society, specifically in Hillsborough County and in Tampa, to get that message out. Volunteers, for example. There were surveys that were conducted, things of that nature.
Again, I can't — I can't tell you on such and such date a representative of the American Cancer Society visited him in the hospital. I can't say that. But based on how active they are in sending that information through the media, through posters, through health clinics, through a variety of events that happen, this is something that reached the public and Mr. Rodriguez was part of that public.
exposed to or actually aware of anything from the American Cancer Society?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Specifically?
Q. Yes.
A. No, no.
Q. Specifically what time — or what period of time do you, in your professional opinion, believe that Gilbert Rodriguez was or should have been aware of the health risks of smoking cigarettes?
A. At what time he was? Well, we have, of course, not his own testimony, but testimony by surviving family members and friends --
Q. You’re being called to testify as to the public awareness of information regarding smoking and health hazards and the difficulty to quit or the addictiveness.
I would like to know, based upon your expertise and your review of the public dissemination of information
—	not the deposition testimonies that are specific to this case — but on the public information, in your professional opinion, when should Gilbert Rodriguez — or when was or when should have —
MS. LAWSON: Why don’t you strike it and start
over.
MR. BIGGER: Let’s just come back to it.
Q. In your professional opinion, based upon the public dissemination of information — not upon the deposition transcripts — when was Gilbert Rodriguez aware of the health hazard of smoking cigarettes, or when should he have been aware of the health hazard of smoking cigarettes?
A. I can't pinpoint a date. Again, you're asking me specifically about public information. But, as a historian, I am also looking at the depositions, but you're suggesting that I set those aside --
Q. For this question.
A. — for the sake of this question.
Q. Yes.
A. I can tell you that the information was out there, that it was overwhelming, that it was coming from a variety of different places, that this is information that was available in Florida textbooks, used in schools as early as 1919, at least.
I can tell you that somebody in that committee, and somebody who read the paper, and somebody who watched TV would have received this information.
Q. At what time?
A. Well, I can tell you this: If he was a student and that was covered in school — based on the textbooks that I have examined, these topics were touched upon in
school textbooks — I cannot tell him that he did — I don't know whether he was absent on the day in which those things were covered.
Q. Let's back up a step. Have you made a determination that the textbooks you included in your reliance materials are the textbooks that were used during the years that Gilbert Rodriguez was a student in the Hillsborough County School system?
A. I can tell you this: Those are state-wide determinations, what books are to be used in schools. It is my understanding that within that small list of possibilities, maybe two or three, that the district itself has the authority to select which book in particular.
Q. So the answer is . . .?
A. So I can look at, for example, these three textbooks where the ones that were authorized by the State, those were the three — one of those three, at least, was used in that — in a particular school.
Q. And you made that determination?
A. Which one he was exposed to, that would take, perhaps, some further research.
Q. Did you make that determination that you were certain that the materials in your reliance materials, the school textbooks, are the only possible school textbooks that Gilbert Rodriguez could have used during his time in
the Hillsborough County School system?
A. Probably others were added. But what I can tell you is this: I look at the legislation. The legislation mandates the uniformity for the state, and that's law. The Florida education department determines which are the texts that are available. And, in many instances, it's two, perhaps, in some cases, three that can be selected. They're approved.
And I can tell you that in every particular school
—	again, following the law which dictated that these topics were to be addressed in school — I can tell you that either they did it or they were not following the law.
I mean, I can't walk into a classroom 20 years ago and say, you know, this is a textbook that they were using. As a historian, this is how we function. We don't have to have that specific smoking gun, so to speak, to make a determination. No. We look at the information. And I would use this for my own research.
Q. I understand. In the law, we need to have certainty. At least, certainty more likely than not, in these cases, for proving issues.
But what I'm just trying to determine is: On your reliance list and in your reliance materials, is it your testimony today that you included all the possible school textbooks that were available to be used in the Hillsborough
County School system that were legally sanctioned by the State of Florida?
A. If I have used those?
Q. Are they included in your reliance materials?
A. In my reliance materials, or specifically in this list that we've been talking about?
Q. That is your reliance materials, that list. Your reliance materials that formed the basis of your opinions in this case.
Are these school textbooks the ones that were — the only ones that were legally sanctioned by the State, are they included in your reliance materials that you've disclosed in this case?
A. I would have to look at the list.
Q. So you don't know?
A. I don't know.
Q. Have you ever heard of a textbook or have you ever reviewed a textbook called the Textbook on Healthy (sic) Living by Howard S. Diehl?
A. Diehl? D-E —
Q. D-I-E-H-L.
A. Probably. I don't recall the name.
Q. It was widely used throughout schools in the 1940's and the 1950's. Do you recall seeing that name, Howard S. Diehl, or the title Textbook of Healthful Living
in the scope of your research regarding public awareness of the health hazard of smoking in Florida and the United States?
A. It does sound familiar. I can tell you more. If it was in the list of the sanctioned books, I looked at all those books.
Q. Okay. Are you aware that that book concludes — and I quote — in spite of all the careful studies and observations of the effects of tobacco upon man and animals, we are still unable to give a final answer to the ultimate effects of moderate smoking upon health?
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. You're telling me that this is a direct quote from that textbook?
Q. Yes.
A. The way I would be able to respond to you is by looking at the book, looking at the context, is that the only mention about tobacco throughout the book, or is that part of a larger discussion. And not having that in front of me, I can say that there are a lot of qualifiers in that statement.
I	mean, if I could read it, I could point to
those.
Q. Are you aware if that book is in your reliance
A. My — are you asking me, again, about the reliance
list?
Q. The reliance list is simply an index of the reliance materials that we have been provided in this case.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Those reliance materials form the basis of all your opinions in this case, at least that's what's been represented to us.
A. Yes.
Q. Are you aware whether that work by Howard S.
Diehl, Textbook on Healthful Living, is contained within your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can't tell you. I would have to look at the point list. And, here, I'm taking your word that it was one of the books that was sanctioned. I would have to look at my own notes.
Q. I'm not making representations as to whether it was sanctioned. I'm simply asking you whether you're aware that was in your reliance materials.
A. That specific title, no. It's a long list, so I don't have fresh in my mind —
Q. 5,000 documents is a long list.
Just because many people may have been exposed to
a fact, is there any way for you to determine whether Gilbert Rodriguez was exposed to that fact?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I could, based on the depositions.
Q. Other than what was provided in the depositions, aside from that, looking simply at the public dissemination information —
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. And the whole question is . . .?
Q. — is there any way to determine whether Gilbert Rodriguez was exposed to a fact that was disseminated in the public domain?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can infer.
Q. Other than an inference.
A. Other than an inference? Well, you know, you're asking a very broad question. Information is out there that you must stop when there's a stop sign. This is something that I — it's out there. And I'm sure, given his line of work, driving of trucks, that he knew that because —
Q. What if I — what if I threw a blanket over the stop sign? You think the person still has a responsibility to stop at that stop sign?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I'm not asking about the law. I'm just asking about, you know, should they still be aware that they should stop at that stop sign.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. Again, it's — to me, it sounds like a legal matter and I'm not ready to talk about that. I'm not aware of it.
Q. I believe I asked you before that — what is the saturation point. What's the tipping point where something becomes publicly aware or a fact becomes publicly aware.
A. I haven't made that determination. What I can tell you is that, in my research, I came across this article in which I believe that what it said — and I would have to go back to it — was that in the vicinity of 60 to —
60 percent of the population, but that's one article, that's one opinion, and basically is the only type of source in which I have seen any type of discussion. So the fact that that's what they say doesn't mean that I necessarily abide by that.
MR. BIGGER: Let's have this market as No. 8.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 8 was marked for
identification.)
Q. Doctor, this is a document that was in your reliance materials that was numbered — identified as
AIW-000214. And this is a Gallup Poll from — two Gallup polls, I guess, actually. One from June 30, 1954, and one from July 2, 1954.
A. I see that. These are summaries of polls.
Q. When was Gilbert Rodriguez born?
A. 1929.
Q. So how hold would he have been in 1954?
A. 23.
Q. Yes. That sounds about right. 23, I was going to say 25. Is that right? 39 — 49 — 54 — 25. 24 or 25 years old. When did Gilbert Rodriguez start smoking cigarettes? Do you know what the testimony is?
A. In some of the testimony, I recall reading that perhaps it was in 1945.
Q. Mid 1940's?
A. That's what the widow stated, I believe.
Q. Right. So at this point, it's — assuming that testimony is correct, at this point, he's been smoking for about ten years?
A. (Witness nods head.)
Q. June 30, the question is: Do you happen to smoke cigarettes now?
The answer was: Yes. 45 percent.
So almost half the people in the country, extrapolating this out as a national Gallup Poll, half the
people in the country were smoking cigarettes in June of 1954. Do you agree with that?
A. I can't come to that conclusion without knowing whether this refers to adults or everybody. What the cutoff date would be for adults and non-adults.
Q. This is in your reliance materials. You tell me.
A. I tell you what I just told you, that based on this poll summary — it is a summary — I can't tell whether it's about, as you said, the entire population of the United States.
Q. Do you see down there below that, they have it broken down by age 21 and up?
A. Yes, I see this.
Q. So is it safe to conclude that this poll was a poll of people aged 21 years and older?
A. Polls usually have explanations. And, again, this is a summary. I don't know if part of the poll included people from 16, say, to 20. I don't know. So I would have to look at the document.
Q. Do you have the document? Because this is from your reliance materials.
A. I do have this document. But I'm referring to the actual study, the actual poll.
Q. If you're telling me that these materials are inadequate to trust the reliability of them, because there's
information that's missing, are you aware whether the missing information is in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I'm not saying that. Documents are relevant, but that doesn't mean that, as a historian, I'm going to give up my responsibility which is to analyze the information. And this is helpful because it gives me a sense, yes, but not to answer the very specific question that you asked, as to whether this was the top numbers had to do with the total population. You know, I'm not ready to answer that.
Q. So this could be a poll of only people in Florida, is that what you're saying —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. — rather than a national poll?
A. No, I'm not saying that. This publication is about national polls.
Q. Gallup Poll is a national polling organization?
A. Yes. But they also take regional polls.
Q. I believe that this comes from a volume of historical polls. If you have look at the first page, it says: The Gallup Poll, Public Opinion, 1935 to 1971,
Dr. George H. Gallup, Founder and Chairman of the American Institute of Public Opinion.
an authoritative source of information.
A. It is. But if I may explain. I — just because something appears in print doesn't mean that I give up my responsibility as a historian to verify that, to put it in a broader context, to try to figure out what they mean by the categories. That's still my responsibility.
Q. I don't disagree with that, Doctor. I'm just trying to determine that this question says: Do you happen to smoke cigarettes now? It's a national Gallup Poll of people age 21 and over, and 45 percent of the people answered yes.
A. I see that, yes.
Q. Do you have reason to believe that 45 percent of the country, in 1954, was not smoking cigarettes? I mean, obviously, it's a poll. It's a sample. It's statistics.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. So if you actually counted up every single person in the United States, there's going to be some sampling in there, plus or minus a few percentage points. Aside from that sampling error, do you have any reason to believe that this Gallup Poll on the number of people ages 21 and older, who were smoking cigarettes in 1954, is inaccurate?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I go back to the same point: I can't make a connection. Because, further down, there's a breakdown, 29
to 50. That the top one, which you have read twice already, refers to people 29 to 50. I cannot do that just by looking at this summary. This is a summary.
Q. This is in your reliance materials. So this forms the basis of your opinions, correct?
A. No. It doesn't form them. It's part of —
Q. It's part of, right.
A. It's part of the materials.
Q. It's not only — it's not the only thing that forms the basis of your opinion, but this is part of the materials you believe you rely upon to form your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. But the point I've been trying to make is that historians get the documents in a raw form, so to speak. And it's our responsibility to read them carefully and to be able to come up with conclusions that stand.
Now, you're asking me a very specific question and that is, there's an assumption in your question that the top one, 45 percent said, yes, they smoke, that that refers to the population 21 years and older. I can't answer that very specific question with what I have here.
Now, that doesn't mean that that piece of information is not useful. It is useful, but not to answer the very specific question that you're posing.
Gallup Poll, you'd agree that in 1954, 45 percent of the country was smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. 45 percent of the respondents — and I don't know what — not having looked at this — and that's why the polls have detailed explanations of what definitions — they begin with that — you know, adult means, in this poll, 18 and over, or adult means 21 and over —
Q. Aside — okay. Aside from the breakdown of the age, your concern is that perhaps it may also include people from 18 to 21?
A. Or 15, for that matter. I can't say what's missing and what's not. I could, if I had the entire poll with the explanations and the methods described and I read those, I could perhaps answer your question.
Q. Before you used these materials again as your reliance materials in another case, are you going to go out and look at the materials you say you need to be sure that you understand what this question is asking, who it applies to?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's not my intention. Because based on what I'm doing, the research and awareness, this is not necessarily an essential component of that.
Q. You don't think a national poll is reflective of
the public awareness and the public knowledge that existed at that time? You think this Gallup Poll is not reflective of public awareness whether you happened to be smoking cigarettes in 1954?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This question is about the smoking habit. I don't see anything here, in that first item, that says anything about awareness or knowledge.
Q. Right. We're getting down there. That's poll July 2. But I want to clarify on June 30 that whether you think this poll, this national Gallup Poll of 1954, is reflective of the number of people who were smoking in 1954, the number of adults age 21 and up.
A. Again, you're trying to limit this to 21 and above.
Q. I'm not trying to limit. I'm going off what is in your reliance materials and this breakdown shows an age broke down of 21 and up.
A. Let me put it in as clear terms as possible.
Q. Let me withdraw the question. We'll go to a different question. Maybe that will help.
Gilbert Rodriguez was 25 years old, right?
A. When?
Q. In 1954. 24 to 25 years old. We have established
that?
53 percent of people who responded were smoking in 1954. So over half of the country, age 21 to 2 9, was smoking.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You agree?
A. That's what I get out of this information.
Q. That's what we can extrapolate from this?
A. That's true.
Q. Looking down at the next one, July 2, regarding cigarette smoking. The question asks: What is your own opinion. Do you think cigarettes smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer or not?
And you'd agree with me that lung cancer is one of the health hazards of smoking cigarettes?
A. Based on my research and what's out there.
Q. It's not the only health hazard, but it's one of
them?
A. It's one of them, yes.
Q. There are other health hazards from smoking cigarettes?
A. I could speak to that, not as somebody who has knowledge in the field of medicine —
Q. Sure.
Q. Emphysema?
A. Yes.
Q. Heart disease?
A. That's correct.
Q. Are you aware that part of the findings that we talked about earlier in this case that come from the Engle jury, the findings describe a list — a list — a series of diseases that that jury concluded were caused by smoking cigarettes?
A. I'm not 100 percent sure. I recall something to that effect.
Q. You said you have the complaint from this case there?
A. Yes.
Q. Why don't you open the complaint.
MR. BIGGER: While he's doing this, we can talk
off the record.
(A discussion was had off the record.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Doctor, now you've seen the complaint, your paragraph 22, subpart A. You see that paragraph says smoking cigarettes causes the following enumerated diseases?
A. That's correct. I can see that.
Q. And it lists a series of diseases there?
Q. Is that the first time you have become aware of that finding or that statement, smoking cigarettes causes the following enumerated diseases and then a list of diseases? Have you seen that before at any time?
A. You're referring to the Engle —
Q. Not the complaint but that information. Have you seen that information before at any time, in another form or in any form?
A. Probably in a previous document of this sort. I can't pin it down.
Q. Another complaint or something?
A. Yes. That's where —
Q. In any event, obviously, smoking cigarettes causes more diseases than just lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Agreed? Or can cause —
A. Not as a medical —
Q. Not as a medical —
A. — expert, I can say that based on what's out there, that that's the case. I couldn't speak to each one of these diseases, of course.
Q. Based on a finding that applies as a matter of law for every Engle class member, smoking cigarettes causes those enumerated diseases.
Q. Would you agree with that?
A. As a matter of law — I'm not sure I can — I understand that completely. I know it's a legal document.
Q. Do you see that kidney cancer is one of the items listed there in that paragraph?
A. I see it here, yes.
Q. Coming back to this poll from July 1954, what is your own opinion: Do you think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer or not? Yes, 41 percent; no,
2	9 percent; undecided, 30 percent.
So 59 percent of the country either thought smoking cigarettes was not a cause of lung cancer or they were unsure. They were not aware of whether cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer. Do you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That's one way of putting it. We can also put it in terms of 71 percent agreed or was undecided.
Q. So you think someone who 1s undecided about whether cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer is someone who's aware that cigarette smoking is a health hazard?
A. In this case, this is a question about "think" which I associate more with "do you believe" than "are you aware" of that information. So it's — I need to qualify
Q. And you think belief is not necessary for public awareness, which we stated earlier, correct?
A. You can be aware of something and not believe it.
Q. Belief is not necessary at all?
A. It's not necessary at all for what?
Q. Public awareness.
A. We are talking about two different things.
Q. How so?
A. For example, awareness, you can be aware, having seen these new stories about the link between lung cancer and smoking. That's awareness.
Q. That's awareness of a possibility. That's not awareness of the health hazard.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. But if the story speaks to an actual link, then it would be different. It would be an awareness of the link.
Now, belief, in my estimation, is something that once you get that information, you internalize it and you accept it. So that, to me, is a substantial difference.
Q. Would you agree that people presented with inconsistent information would be likely to disregard that information?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
that information is coming from and the degree of the conflict of information. So I can't make a blanket statement.
Q. Generally speaking, you can't make a statement one way or the other?
A. About information in general, no, I can't. I mean, it would — I could answer a more specific question.
Q. So if someone was presented with inconsistent information regarding the — regarding whether or not smoking cigarettes is a health hazard, your opinion is that they would not disregard the information?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I'm not saying that either.
Q. So they may disregard the information. You're just not — you're saying that they would not conclusively disregard it —
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. — categorically?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. They may or may not.
Q. You have no way to know?
A. Well, I can tell you this: And that is that people pay different degrees of attention and credibility to different sources. I can tell you that.
A. Most important source for what?
Q. For credit credible information.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. About . . .?
Q. Generally speaking, what is the most important source of credible information for the public?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. About everything?
Q. Yes. Just let’s speak generally. If you’ve — you’re a historian and you study this. Generally speaking, what does the public consider the most credible source of information?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. It depends on the question. It depends on the subject. For some people -- it really varies from question to question.
Now, if you want a general one, which I don’t think really adds much to what I’m trying to say here, you know, there’s some sources like Encyclopedia Britannica that, for many people, are -- is the, you know, the general source of information.
Q. Encyclopedia. What about role models?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Role models? Again, it depends. Because you
can — you can pay attention to Billy Graham on spiritual matters but not pay attention to him on matters pertaining to sports. That's why I'm so hesitant to give you this blanket answer. It depends on the field. That's why we have authorities in different fields.
Q. So, generally speaking, do people — maybe "people" is too broad.
Generally speaking, who do children consider the most credible source of information?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. If you're aware. And if you've never studied this, if you have no idea at all, let me know. And I don't want you to be guessing. I want you to base this on your professional experience and expertise as a historian, as somebody who has studied public awareness, who has studied public knowledge.
Who do children consider the most credible source of information?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I couldn't give you a specific answer to that as to who's the most. It probably depends on the case.
I can tell you what are the traditional figures of authority for children. That would include teachers, for example. But I can't tell you that teachers are more credible than parents or a better source because I'm not
aware of that. I don't know that literature and I haven't looked at it.
Q. Teachers are a great example.
I think we had said earlier that, you know, based on this June 30, 1954 poll, we could agree that 53 percent of people 21 to 2 9 years old are smoking cigarettes?
A. That's what it reflects, yes.
Q. Same for people ages 30 to 39?
A. 53 percent, as well.
Q. And 45 percent of those age 40 to 4 9?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is there any reason to believe that people who were in a teaching profession, who were between the ages of 20 and — 21 and 49, smoked cigarettes on any different basis than the percentages we just talked about?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't have any basis to come to that conclusion.
Q. Okay. So it's safe to assume —
A. From this document.
Q. — from a national poll of smoking nationally, it's fair to assume that teachers smoked the same rates as this poll?
A. No, I can't say that either.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. For the same reason that I answered the previous one. This is not broken down by professions.
Now, what I can tell you is that, based on what I had read, at some points certain subgroups smoked more than others.
Q. I don't care who smoked more. I'm just trying to see if we can agree — even if it's off by a few percentage points — it's only 50 percent instead of 53, whatever — the number doesn't matter — but approximately, you know, is it safe to extrapolate approximately half the teachers in America were smoking at that time?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Between the ages of 21 and 49.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I cannot come up with that conclusion based on what I have here. No, I can't.
Q. Okay. So is there some reason you think that the teachers could potentially have been smoking at a drastically different rate than the rest of the country?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. I'm aware of the fact that this varies. Well, let me put it this way: You know, one answer that I can give you is there's a larger percentage of women who are teachers, and that is a fact. And women smoke at a lower
rate than men, as reflected in these polls and other information for that period.
So that, in and of itself, given that it's a female-dominated area and women smoke, at that time, to a lesser extent, I can begin to tell you that that's one of the reasons why I think, if we're looking at the subgroup of teachers, that I can't apply this, which includes men and females, to just that particular group.
Q. Let's use the number for women, then. 32 percent. Roughly one in every three women were smoking cigarettes at that time. Agreed?
A. Women? Yes.
Q. So approximately one in every three female teachers were smoking cigarettes at that time?
A. I cannot come to that conclusion, because it varies. It varies according to social class. It varies according to income.
Q. You say it varies. What are you basing that upon. Do you have other data? Have you done or seen polls on teachers that suggest that they smoke at a different rate than the rest of the country?
A. For teachers?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. No. I haven't seen that, no.
concerns?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This is informed, as somebody who has been looking at this for a long time. I could tell you that the environment of the school is a different environment in which there are limitations on smoking.
And I can tell you, based on what I've read, that there's an expectation that teachers are role models to the students. I can tell you that, based on what I've seen, it's to some extent a matter of common sense. It is an environment that is not as conducive to smoking because of certain limitations.
I can also tell you that I have, over the years, found information that has changed. And, for example, my sense, from what I've seen, is that doctors smoked at a larger rate than people in other professions. I've seen that. And, by the same token, it's different — I mean, I would say the same thing about, you know, having not done a study of it, that pastors smoke at a lesser rate than non-pastors.
These are ways in which historians infer things, and I'm pretty comfortable saying this to you, that I don't think that this general information that appears here for the entire population is reflective of teachers unless I see
a poll or some other piece of information that makes me come to that conclusion.
Q. So you think it's unreasonable to extrapolate that because 33 percent — 32 percent of women, 45 percent of the country as a whole, ages 21 and up, was smoking, we cannot extrapolate that across other groups like teachers, doctors, et cetera, because there's going to be significance — statistically significant variance in that extrapolation?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would say that this is a very specific question about the general population broken down by gender.
Q. Okay.
A. And I don't see how you can go from this to a breakdown by — this does not provide a breakdown by profession.
Q. If one in two people are smoking cigarettes in the country and people are young people, people under the age of 21, under the age of 18, children are hearing publicly disseminated information that smoking cigarettes is a health hazard, don't you think the fact that half the people they encounter in their daily life are smoking would have an impact on whether or not they believe that information, whether or not they accept that information?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
Q. So you don't think it matters at all, someone's ability to accept or become aware of information that they hear based upon their daily perception of other people, perhaps parents, teachers, other people that they may have as role models, smoking cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As to awareness?
Q. You don't think that affects their awareness of whether or not smoking is a health hazard? Seeing other people who they may look up to or respect, smoking cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. It's your opinion that has no effect?
A. I'm sorry. This is a very complex question. I want to make sure I understand it fully. Could you please repeat it.
Q. Sure. It is your opinion that encountering other people smoking cigarettes — at the time, one out of every two people were smoking cigarettes — it's your opinion that that prevalence of cigarette smoking would not have any affect on a person's awareness of whether smoking cigarettes was a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have no way, based on what I've looked at, as far as studies and the rest of the materials I've examined,
to make that connection that because they see people doing it or they see half of the population doing it, that that means that somehow they draw a conclusion from just seeing people do that.
Q. They see movie stars doing it.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You don't think that has an impact?
A. An impact on —
Q. On their —
A. — conclusions about health?
Q. Yes. An impact on their awareness of whether smoking cigarettes is a health hazard.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. When they see movie stars smoking cigarettes, glamorous movie stars smoking cigarettes.
A. This is —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This is a realm in which I'm not an authority. I couldn't speak to that, really.
Q. What about when they see athletes like —
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
Q. — Joe Dimaggio and Mickey Mantle smoking cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
don't have the knowledge to measure what — this falls more in the area of psychology, perhaps, where they're seeing other people doing something, whether that has an impact on your knowledge of whether that's harmful or not. I'm not prepared to answer that because I don't know.
Q. So I'm not asking you whether it has an impact.
I'm asking you whether it affects — it has an affect on someone's awareness or their, you know, perception where smoking is a health hazard.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Again, I'm not ready to say that.
Q. And all the counter information that was contained in the public domain, the millions and millions of advertising dollars that were expended promoting cigarette smoking, including some claims that cigarette smoking was in fact not a health hazard, that doesn't have an impact on people's perception of whether smoking cigarettes is a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. As I said earlier, as I was looking at the universe of materials, I did not ignore ads. I think they are part of the messages, but that doesn't mean that I can, because I'm not an expert in the field of advertisement, to say, you know, this is the intention of this ad and this is how it's going to work. I have no training in that area.
Q. And the July 1954 poll indicating that 59 percent of people in the country either did not think smoking cigarettes was one of the causes of lung cancer or they were unsure, it is your opinion that does not reflect that 59 percent of the country was unaware of the fact that cigarette smoking is a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There are several headings here. There are two under July 2. So can you tell me which one you're referring to .
Q. The first one, July 2, cigarette smoking.
A. On page —
Q. That's the only one under July 2.
MS. LAWSON: In fairness, there are more on the following page.
MR. BIGGER: It's all under July 2. It's the same question.
Q. What's your opinion?
MS. LAWSON: Sorry.
MR. BIGGER: It's just the date extrapolated out amongst —
MS. LAWSON: I think he's asking about specific numbers and there were other numbers on the next page.
I wanted to make sure he was pointed to the right direction.
A. You're referring to the bottom of page 1,247?
Q. Yes. Referring to this poll from utilized materials, Gallup national poll, July 2, 1954, what is your own opinion: Do you think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer or not? 59 percent of the country either said, no, it is not, or they were unsure.
But it is your opinion, despite that 59 percent of the country was the opinion that cigarette smoking — let me rephrase that.
It is your opinion that, despite that 59 percent of the country was seemingly unaware of a health hazard, that in fact it was public awareness at that time that smoking cigarettes was a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That is not derived from what I have in front of me. You're talking about awareness and the question has to do with "do you think" whether you've internalized that.
Q. And you have taken the position — it's your understanding that the word think there means belief, correct?
A. I think it means an acceptance of that information.
Q. And acceptance is not part of awareness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. You can be aware of something and not accept it. And, actually, to take it a step further, you can say that, well, it affects but it may affect other people, not me.
I'm a strong man. It won't happen to me.
So I can't really — I don't see the connection between the information that appears here and any conclusion that could be drawn about actual awareness.
MR. WOODS: Can we go off the record for a second
here?
MR. BIGGER: Sure.
(A discussion was had off the record.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. I'm going to hand you another document we're going to mark as Exhibit 9.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 9 was marked for
identification.)
Q. Doctor, have you seen this document before?
A. I have seen this document.
Q. Are you aware this document is generally referred to as the Frank Statement?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. And the title of the document is A Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers?
A. That's the title, yes.
left-hand column. Sorry. Actually, start with the first paragraph.
A. "Recent reports on experiments with mice have given wide publicity to a theory that cigarette smoking is in some way linked with lung cancer in human beings."
The next paragraph: "Although conducted by doctors of professional standing, these experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the field of cancer research. However, we do not believe that any serious medical research, even though its results are inconclusive, should be disregarded or lightly dismissed."
Q. Would you read down a little further, the first paragraph below number four.
A. "We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business."
Q. And the next sentence?
A. "We believe the products we make are not injurious to health."
Q. Are you aware of how many publications this full-page ad appeared in?
A. I can't give you that number. I could only give you an estimate and I'd rather not.
Q. Does 408 sound familiar?
Q. So as a full-page ad in newspapers and in magazines, 408 publications across the country.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. BIGGER: It was just newspaper, wasn't it?
MS. LAWSON: Just newspapers.
Q. 408 newspapers across the country, full-page ad.
A. Well —
Q. Is that your understanding?
A. I have seen it, not as a full-page ad.
Q. Sure. You know what a full-page ad in the newspaper looks like. You got a Wall Street Journal out there. I can bring it in here. It's a big document, full-page ad in the paper.
A. My understanding of what full page means is that it's the entire page.
Q. Right. Have you seen a full-page advertisement before?
A. Of some other sort?
Q. You, personally, yes. Of any kind.
A. Yes, I have.
Q. When you're reading the paper?
A. Yes.
Q. Does it catch your eye?
A. Not necessarily more than any other page.
A. Not necessarily, no.
Q. Tell those companies they're wasting their ad dollars.
Do you know the circulation, the estimated circulation of this advertisement?
A. I don't know that information.
Q. Does 43 million, approximately, ring a bell?
A. I couldn't even approximate that — that information because I have no — I don't have that information with me. It's something that could be researched if I had a list of papers, and it would take some time to find out circulation numbers for the various newspapers.
Q. Do you know the year this document was publicized.
A. If I recall correctly, it was early in 1954.
Q. All right. The same year as that Gallup Poll we were talking about earlier, Exhibit No. 8?
A. Yes.
Q. And this was publicized before that Gallup Poll, which was July 1954, do you agree?
A. If —
Q. Or do you have any reason to disagree with that?
A. Well, my understanding is that this came out in January, Frank Statement. And let me go back to this where
it says dates. There's one, the poll took place in June, but the date of the poll — the polling took place in June but the poll apparently was made public in July.
Q. After this statement was disclosed to 43 million people?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The same 43 million people that would have had access to other information on smoking and health.
Q. Is there any other item — this Frank Statement is not in your reliance materials; is that correct? You did not include this as part of your reliance materials?
A. I have this document.
Q. I understand. But is it included in your reliance materials for this case?
A. I haven't gone over that list to see that.
Q. Do you have any reason to believe that it wouldn't be included? I mean, a full-page ad in 408 newspapers is the kind of thing you'd want to include in reliance materials on whether or not the public was aware of something.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Would you agree with that?
A. I used the same standards as I would use to include a story about a report establishing a connection between smoking and cancer. It is part of the information,
Whether it's — whether the public will be influenced more by one or the other, that's another question. But I when I see things like these, I include them. And, actually, they're here, as well.
Q. Are you aware of any other document that is included in your reliance materials that had an estimated circulation of 43 million in 1954 or earlier?
A. Whatever document appeared in that newspaper, for example, or in that year. I mean, if 43 million people were reached by this, 43 million people were also reached by the stories about the links.
Q. So you're saying that every story in your reliance materials was published in all 408 newspapers that that Frank Statement was published in?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I don't think you're saying that but I want to make sure that you — you understand that's what you're saying right now.
A. No. I am not saying that, no.
Q. Because that Frank Statement was published in 408 newspapers and reached 43 million people.
Do you know if any other item, any other document in your reliance materials, was either published in 408 newspapers, any other story that was — you're certain was
published in 408 newspaper, or any other story or item in your reliance materials that you know reached 43 million people?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. This is what I can tell you: As you mentioned earlier, this appeared in 409 newspapers — and I'm taking that number for this discussion and accepting it. There are many other newspapers. I don't know if — I don't know, because I haven't done the research, whether the story about the 1954 report appeared in more papers. I'd have to know how many papers there are and, of course, circulation is important. But I can't —
Q. The short answer is you don't know?
A. I don't know.
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
Q. And —
MR. WOODS: Off the record, again.
(A discussion was had off the record.)
(Angela Splittgerber, Attorney at Law, with Shook, Hardy & Bacon, LLP, appears via telephone.)
MS. LAWSON: Just by the way, Angie — because you weren't here earlier — we've agreed that if an objection is made by one of the attorneys, it applies to everyone.
MS. SPLITTGERBER: Great.
MR. WOODS: Angie, I'll be on until 4 o'clock your time and then I'm going to jump off.
MS. SPLITTGERBER: Okay.
MR. BIGGER: Most of my questions are very objectionable, so that's an important stipulation.
MR. WOODS: It's a good thing we got that on the record.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. We talked earlier about Gilbert Rodriguez's smoking history, briefly, and your understanding that he began smoking in the mid 1940's.
A. Yes. I read that in one of the depositions.
Q. You also presumably read in one of the depositions that — or in the verified worksheet — that Gilbert Rodriguez was a reader of the Tampa Tribune?
A. That did come out in the materials.
Q. Reads regularly, as he understands that word to mean. And there is not testimony about him reading other materials. You understand that?
A. Testimony? I can't recall.
Q. Right.
A. As far as testimony.
Q. Should be the other way. Testimony that he does not read other materials besides the Tampa tribune. He wasn't a reader of magazines or a subscriber to any
magazines, things of that nature?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
A. Generally speaking, that's my recollection. There may have been an instance — a mention of magazines, but I'm not sure. I'd have to go back to those.
Q. Now, did you testify earlier — and forgive me,
I'm not remembering correctly or remembering wrong — the documents contained on your reliance materials are intended to be an exhaustive collection from the sources that you deemed were important sources of the material that was publicly disseminated during those time periods.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Is that correct? Is my understanding correct?
A. They're materials of other sorts —
Q. Right?
A. — as well.
Q. I guess the main focus of what I'm trying to understand is: Is it an exhaustive collection? In other words, did you try to find each article that appeared in Newsweek from 1950 to 1960, or did you only pick a selection of the articles that appeared in Newsweek?
A. My methodology was if I was working on a particular publication such as Newsweek, that I would look at all the articles.
I guess, in one case, just for time-saving
purposes, I selected a few years. I think I may have done that for Life. I can't recall. But if I took a year, I looked at everything within that year.
Q. Okay.
A. However, for most of the publications, I looked at the run of years.
Q. Right. Like with newspaper articles, did you, in doing your research, make an effort to find — I don't want to use the word all, I know you don't like that word — did you use efforts to conduct an exhaustive search of the newspaper articles that were publicly disseminated during the time periods contained in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form. Some of the
reliance materials actually go back to 1402 and —
MR. BIGGER: Right.
Q. I guess, from the 20th Century onward — 1900 onward.
A. That has been my preference. However, there's so many documents that, in some instances, I have been — for example, the Tampa Tribune, I read beginning in 1950.
Q. So you started in 1950?
A. Yes.
Q. Did anyone else conduct any research regarding the Tampa Tribune that you included in your reliance materials?
Q. Did anyone — a colleague provide you with information from the Tampa Tribune or did Jones Day provide you with research from the Tampa Tribune? do you know?
A. No. Jones Day did not.
Q. So all the research in your reliance materials is information that you personally collected and compiled?
A. No. As I said earlier, some of the newspaper collections I received from Lacy Ford.
Q. We're talking about St. Petersburg. And maybe it's my bias from living in Tampa, I presume that meant — St. Petersburg Times articles, St. Pete Times. There's two papers, prominent papers in Tampa and there have been for decades, the Tampa Tribune and the St. Pete Times. Do you understand that?
A. If you look at the area as a metro area, yes.
Q. Right. So my impression was when you said you received materials from Lacy Ford regarding St. Petersburg,
I presumed you meant St. Pete Times.
Is it your testimony that in fact Lacy Ford provided you with the newspaper articles contained in your reliance materials from the Tampa Tribune?
A. From the Tampa —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. From the Tampa Tribune, yes.
Q. So all the Tampa Tribune articles in your reliance
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay.
A. Now, I need to go back to the piles of documents and see whether I have something pre-1950 pertaining to the Tampa Tribune.
Q. Okay. The ones that Lacy Ford provided you, dated back to 1950?
A. As far as I can tell, yes. But he may have given me earlier ones that I haven't looked at yet.
Q. Did you go out and look for articles earlier than 1950?
A. The Tampa Tribune?
Q. Yes.
A. No.
Q. Okay. So only if Lacy Ford provided the articles that in fact go back pre-1950, you're just not sure there might be some in there?
A. At the moment?
Q. No. In your reliance materials.
A. This is what I have on the Tampa Tribune.
Q. That stack right there?
A. Again, I may have some others. There's a slight possibility that I may have others.
Q. But your understanding is, that is the bulk, the
A. Yes. And it's probably the entire thing.
Q. And that's — the materials that you're referring to, you're pointing to, are these materials that you provided me today; is that correct?
A. Does that begin with 1950?
Q. I may have disordered it. I don't know.
MS. LAWSON: I just want to clarify for the record, the portion we provided you today was where he stopped taking handwritten notes. I just want your record to be clear. I don't think they go back to 1950. At least, the first one on top there has 1962.
Q. Aside from any notes that you made on these documents — some have notes and some don't —
A. Yes.
Q. — aside from that, these would be the same as the documents that are contained in your reliance materials?
A. These would be the same, yes.
Q. Okay. So these are just duplicate copies that may or may not have additional markings on them?
A. Duplicate —
Q. In other words, this same document right here, Tampa Tribune, March 5, 1962, may very well and likely is contained in the reliance materials we were already provided. This is just another copy of it because there was
a belief that you had done some — made some handwritten notes on this document?
A. Yes.
Q. Sometimes these questions, I think, are honestly better posed for the lawyers, but —
MS. LAWSON: I just wanted to make sure your
record was clear and that he understood your question.
MR. BIGGER: I don’t want him to not understand
the question.
Q. Are you willing to agree that the period of time from 1950 to 1964 is during Gilbert Rodriguez's smoking history?
A. Based on what I've read, yes.
Q. Are you also willing to agree that the period of time from 1950 to 1964 was the time when there was considerable developments in the question of whether there was a link between smoking and disease.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. In terms of the science?
Q. Science and public disseminated information — publicly disseminated information?
A. You used the word questions?
Q. The question of. I'm saying the question of whether there was a link.
A. Increased coverage and dissemination?
A. Yes.
Q. During that 14-year period.
A. Yes.
Q. Have you ever heard that period referred to as the deluge — deluge?
MS. LAWSON: Deluge.
Q. Have you heard that term before?
A. I'm not sure I've heard it before. Probably. And I'm not sure whether it pertains to the entire '50 through '64 period.
Q. Okay. But during that span — somewhere in that timespan, you've heard that term before?
A. Probably. I'm not sure.
Q. And it wasn't all 14 years but some portion of that 14 years?
A. But, again, I'm not 100 percent sure that I've read or heard about that term, the deluge.
Q. Okay. Are you also aware that testimony in these cases have indicated that Gilbert Rodriguez's reading of the Tampa Tribune was primarily limited to the sports section?
A. I read that in the testimony, yes.
Q. Are you aware how many documents in your reliance materials are newspaper articles that appeared in the Tampa Tribune from the period of time 1950 to 1964?
Q. If I said or represented to you that the number was 160, would you have any reason to disagree with me?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would have to check the list against what I actually have. And — yes. I would have to check.
Q. Okay. Obviously, you have no idea whether Gilbert Rodriguez read any of those articles?
A. I couldn't make that — I couldn't reach that conclusion, no.
Q. No basis for such conclusion?
A. Any particular article, no.
Q. Or any of the articles at all?
A. I have no basis to putting him next to a particular article or articles in general.
Q. Do you have any basis to conclude that he was exposed to the articles that appeared in the Tampa Tribune during that period?
A. That he was exposed? I know the paper arrived at his house. That came out of the testimonies. I know that he read the paper, also.
I don't know whether he had access to papers elsewhere, at work or something like that, but the short answer is — the specific question was about exposure?
was exposed to any of those articles that appeared, other than what you stated that the paper was delivered to his home?
A. Other than that, no.
Q. Okay. Do you know how many cumulative, total — do you know how many articles appeared in the Tampa Tribune from 1950 to 1964, not limited to smoking and health, but just articles, total, Tampa Tribune 1950 to 1964?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I haven't done that research. It would require extensive amounts of time for somebody to read through them and count them.
Q. But you could — based upon an average number of articles that appeared in the daily paper, you could extrapolate, at least, an average number and get something that was a reasonable probability, could you not?
A. It depends because I would have to look into questions such as did the paper increase in size over time.
Q. Sure. Taking all the variables into account, could you determine that?
A. I could determine what?
Q. The number of articles on — total articles that appeared in the Tampa Tribune from 1950 to 1964.
A. Extrapolation would not provide or averaging would not provide an exact number. There could be variations, and
I think it would be important to know whether, in the '50s, it was a tiny newspaper —
Q. Sure.
A. — and grew twice its size.
Q. Taking all those variables into account, you could figure out a reasonable probability of how many articles appeared during that 14-year period.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If I — if I was aware of those variables and I applied them to the analysis, yes.
Q. Would you be interested to know that figure?
A. Not for any particular reason, no.
Q. So in your professional opinion, a comparison between the number of articles related to one issue and the total number of articles is not important in determining whether there was awareness regarding the facts contained in the smaller set of articles?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. BIGGER: That's a bad question.
Q. Let me give you an example or a hypothetical.
Let's say there were 200,000 articles that appeared in the Tampa Tribune from 1950 to 1964. Do you think that it's significant that there were that many other articles and only 160 of those 200,000 were related to the issues of smoking and health?
Q. Do you think that's a significance — of any significance?
A. Generally speaking, I would say the more articles that appear, the more information there is and the more likely somebody like Mr. Rodriguez is likely to come across them.
Q. Sure. Greater opportunity for exposure, correct?
A. In general terms, I would agree that the more there are, the more likely the reader is to encounter them. Now, there's some stories that appear one time and have an enormous impact, so —
Q. The Frank Statement, would that be one of those stories?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. A story that appeared as a full-page ad and reached an estimated circulation of 43 million people and if — is that the kind of story you're talking about?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. The Frank Statement is not a story. I see it as an ad.
Q. You see it as an advertisement?
A. I see it as an ad in terms of it being a component of the newspaper that somebody paid for. It's not a story. So it's an — there are different kinds of ads. It's not a
cigarette ad, but I — I would never place it in the field of stories.
And, also, one more thing: As far as I know, in the Tampa Tribune, it was not a full-page ad.
Q. What's the basis for that?
A. Because I saw it.
Q. It's in your reliance materials?
A. It is either here — no. That would have been earlier. It's in the other ones that I have.
Q. So —
A. I saw it. It's not a full-page ad.
Q. So it's your opinion that the Frank Statement is not a full-page ad?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. In the Tampa Tribune.
A. Based on what I saw, which is a photocopy, it was not there was — there were other things next to it. So, by definition, if there are other things next to it, it does not cover the full page.
Q. And it's your testimony today that that's contained in the reliance materials?
A. Contained in the reliance materials. What?
Q. Doctor, the Frank Statement in the Tampa Tribune you just referred to, you said it is in your reliance materials; is that correct?
A. Again, as I've said with other documents that you've asked me specifically about, I would have to look at, in detail, at that list to see whether that particular thing is there or not.
Q. You just told me that you, in reviewing and researching, came across the Tampa — the Frank Statement as it appeared in the Tampa Tribune, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. So either it's in your reliance materials or you specifically excluded it from those reliance materials even though it appeared in the Tampa Tribune during that time period.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. You know when I came across that, within the past four or five days. And —
Q. Within your reliance materials?
A. — in the new set of materials, there's a list in here, and probably in the notes that I took, there's something to that effect. I don't know. But this is something that I just recently came across.
Q. When was television created?
A. Television created?
Q. If you know.
A. My understanding is that it became available as a — for marketing in the late '40s. I want to say maybe
'48. It really bounced in the '50s.
Q. You've — it's your understanding that television gained, what we call, mainstream popularity in the late '40s, early 1950s?
A. I'm not ready to say that it was in the late '40s that it gained mainstream — no. I don't know.
Q. In 1957, the A.C. Nielson Company projected that 81 percent of homes had television penetration.
A. In '57?
Q. 1957.
A. If that's what the poll says, I have no reason to challenge that.
Q. In 1962, 90 percent — the number rose to 90 percent, A.C. Nielsen Company. Do you have any reason to challenge that?
A. You are talking about penetration, right?
Q. Right. Just television penetration.
A. I'm not sure what that means. Does it mean there's a TV in the house?
Q. Yes. One or more TVs in the house.
A. If that's what they say, I have no reason to challenge that.
Q. Have you, in the course of your research, made any determinations about the importance of television as a medium of public dissemination?
Q. Have you made the determination regarding the periods of time in the 1950s and 1 60s?
A. That it's an important component of the universe of sources that I've looked at, yes, it is. It is an important component.
Q. Very important?
A. Well, it varies. The numbers that you've given me are for beginning the late '50s, '57, and I wouldn't make — I wouldn't feel comfortable saying that that applied in 1948. And, again, I'm not an expert on the history of the media, but I recall that that was about the time in which it became a popular means of communication.
Q. I'm asking you: During the '50s and '60s, television was a very important medium for public dissemination. Would you agree with that?
A. Well, it depends on what you mean by "very important," because there were so many others: Newspapers, magazines, oral communication. So I would say that it was important, yes.
Q. Would you say it was effective?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
Q. Based on your professional opinion as a historian, was television in the '50s and '60s an effective method of public dissemination of information?
Q. You include several television clips in your reliance materials, do you not?
A. Yes. I remember that.
Q. In your reliance materials, did you include any advertisement from any cigarette company that appeared on television at any time during Gilbert Rodriguez1s smoking history?
A. I don't know for sure that that is included there. I know I have seen some of that.
Q. Did you include any advertisements from any cigarette company that appeared on television during the period from 1950 to 1964?
A. Is that included in the —
Q. Right.
A. — list?
Q. Is that something you included in your reliance materials which formed the basis of your opinions in this case?
A. Again, I can tell you that I did look at these ads. They're part of the bulk of the universe of materials. I cannot tell you whether this specific ad appears as an item on that list.
Q. I'm not asking whether a specific appears. I'm asking: Is it your understanding that you included — do
you think you included any advertisements that appeared on television in your reliance materials? Or did you?
I mean, do you know? You should know. Do you know if you included any advertisements that appeared on television from 1950 to 1964, in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes, I did.
Q. You did?
A. But I'm not sure that it's there. For example, if you look at the other document that lists the materials that
I	have either looked at or planning to look at, that appears there.
Q. What appears there?
A. Information about TV ads.
Q. Television ads?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you aware that these television advertisements you claim you included in your list of materials do not appear anywhere on the reliance index?
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the form of that. I think — I think that he may have a misunderstanding of what you're asking about. So I don't want to testify for him, but I think he may have a misapprehension about what you're asking him, what you mean by ads.
Doctor? What advertisements do you think are included on your — in your reliance materials?
A. Well, there are — if there's a list, for example, and that list includes Life magazine, those ads would be part of that grouping.
Q. Is it your understanding that Life magazine was a television program?
A. No. But I think the last question you asked me had nothing to do with TV. It was advertising, in general.
Q. No. I was asking about television advertising.
A. Okay. But not the last question, as I heard it.
Q. Let's not argue about it.
What is your understanding of television advertisements, when I ask you whether television advertisements are contained in your reliance materials?
A. I would have to look at the list to see they are there.
Q. Specifically, I believe the question I asked is: Did you include any advertisements from any cigarette company that appeared on television during the period from 1950 to 1964?
Do you have a clear understanding now of whether or not you included advertisements from a cigarette company that appeared on television during the period from 1950 to
Q. You don't believe they're in there, or you just don't know?
A. And I think there's a major difference in which historians usually operate with their materials and what is a reliance list which falls within the realm of law. And I can have a material there, which I'm aware of, but I have not yet studied it and taken notes on it, so it is in a status in which it's not yet part of my conclusions.
Q. I understand that it's difficult for you, as a historian, understanding what's necessary in the legal realm, but do you understand that the materials that you put down on your reliance list, materials that you purport to rely on to form the basis of your opinions are necessary to be disclosed to us so we can understand how you're reaching the conclusions — how you're reaching the opinions and how you're drawing the conclusion that you're drawing?
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
A. And I've given that information to the lawyers.
Q. So the information you've provided, it's important for us to have accurate information.
A. It's supposed to be accurate.
cigarette companies sponsored approximately 45 percent of all programs or broadcasts — excuse me — not all programs.
Are you aware that by the early 1960s, the cigarette companies sponsored approximately 45 percent of all evening programs that appeared on U.S. television —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. — or that were broadcast on U.S. television?
A. I'm aware that they did support some of these shows but I couldn't begin to make a measurement about that, and certainly not agree to 45 percent because I'm not aware of that.
Q. Let me show you a document which we can mark as Exhibit No. 10.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 10 was marked for
identification.)
Q. Doctor, you see there's some numbers on the bottom right-hand corner of the document?
A. Yes, I see that.
Q. If you will turn to page 04413163. This document is an internal network television review of the P. Lorillard Company, 1962. You see in the far right-hand column there? The title of this page is "Number of Evening Programs Sponsored by Cigarette Companies, November to December Each Year, 1955 to 1961."
The far right-hand column in 1961, it says
45 percent of programs were sponsored by cigarette companies. Well, we already established that television was a very effective medium in disseminating public information and almost half the shows on evening television were sponsored by cigarette companies.
Are you of the opinion that those sponsorships, those advertisements, did not influence the public awareness about cigarettes and whether they caused disease?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. First, I have a question —
Q. Sure.
A. — and that is when you — when it's stated here "sponsored," I can't really tell whether that means that they were the sole sponsors or whether one of their ads appeared at some point in the show.
Q. Well, are you familiar with the I Love Lucy show?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Are you familiar with its popularity during the time it was on evening television?
A. Yes. I am —
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. — aware that it was very popular.
Q. Have you ever seen the I Love Lucy show as it appeared on television during that time?
A. I wasn't born then.
Q. You've never seen old historical reruns of it?
A. Oh, yes. Those, I have seen.
Q. Not reruns that appear today that have the old sponsorship information deleted, but the actual broadcast that appeared during that time?
A. I don't think I've seen those. I've seen what I believe to be reruns.
Q. So you've not seen the old broadcasts where, at the end of the show, Desi and Lucy — Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball will talk about Desi's choice of cigarettes and why he likes to smoke those cigarettes and he will sit there and enjoy a cigarette and talk about why it's so enjoyable?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. You've never seen that?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. No, I have not.
Q. You should check it out sometime. It's interesting.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. Would you agree at a minimum, a company that has sponsored more, advertised heavily on half of the programs on evening television, has a significant opportunity to affect the public awareness regarding its product?
A. Not having studied the field of advertising, I'm not ready to say what type of effect that they may have had.
Q. I'm not asking about the type of effect. I'm asking doesn't it — do you agree it creates an opportunity to affect public perception of your product?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I'm just asking whether advertising or sponsoring half of the evening television programs in 1961 creates an opportunity to affect the public perception of your product.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If the ads are there and people watching the shows watch them, they will see them and they'll get an impression, I gather, you know.
Q. Did you look at any — I know you said you didn't review any internal industry documents; is that correct?
A. In some instances, perhaps one or two came out while I was doing Internet research and those would be the case.
Q. You haven't gone to the tobacco companies publicly available web sites and researched the documents that are available on those web sites, have you?
A. Do you mean web sites that are put together by the tobacco companies?
companies involved in this case maintains a publicly available website of documents that have been — there are internal documents and they make those documents publicly available on web sites, that are accessible from their home pages. You may have to link to another site but they're accessible.
You've never gone to those web sites, though, and research or looked for any internal documents?
A. No, I have not.
Q. You haven't asked the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for any of its internal documents?
A. I have not. And, again, as I said earlier, the purview of my research has to do with information that is out there, that is public information. By the very nature of being internal documents, that keeps them out of the universe of materials that I looked at.
Q. Well, I believe we talked earlier that polls are an important source of information.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. BIGGER: What's the objection?
MS. LAWSON: I don't know that he said they were
an important source of information. He said they were
a source of information.
Q. I believe you said earlier that polls were one of the sources of information that you'd consider in performing
A. That's correct.
Q. And polls are contained on your reliance materials?
A. Yes.
Q. There are Gallup Polls on there. I believe you said you're of the belief there Roper Organization polls are on there, as well?
A. They may be there.
Q. Have you ever or are you currently aware — let's back it up.
Have you ever become aware of the industry-sanctioned polling that was done by the various tobacco companies?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm aware of the fact that Gallup did work for particular companies, and I believe that that may have been the case for tobacco companies. I can't pin it down at this moment.
Q. Are you aware that the Roper Organization did several — several polls for the various tobacco companies or the tobacco institute?
A. I'm inclined to say yes. I don't remember whether it was several.
A. That rings a bell, that I may have looked at something like that.
Q. Do you know if you've included those polls in your reliance materials?
A. They are part of my materials. Whether they're included specifically in this document, the reliance list for this case, I'm not sure that that's the case.
Q. So you don't know whether they're included in your reliance materials or not?
A. In that list, I would have to check.
Q. I'll recommend to you that there are not any of these industry polls included on your reliance list.
MS. LAWSON: Is there a question, or just a statement?
MR. BIGGER: It's coming. I'm just trying to save him some work.
Q. I'm going to show you a document that is going to be marked 11.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 11 was marked for identification.)
Q. This is a poll that was done by the Elmo Roper & Associates organization. Are you familiar with that organization?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. It's called A Study of Attitudes Towards Cigarette
Smoking and Different Types of Cigarettes. It was done in January of 1959; is that correct?
A. That's what I read here, yes.
Q. This is just an excerpt. It's a larger poll but I tried to limit the information so our deposition exhibits were not too voluminous.
You'll see that the questions at the top reads:
In a sense, everyone is a gambler. Every time we cross the street, there's a chance that we will get hit by a car. Assuming a person does all the following things, which one of these activities do you think is most dangerous to life?
So they're asking the respondents which of these activities is most dangerous to life. Smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day was — 11 percent said that was most dangerous to life.
MS. LAWSON: I just want to state for the record, it's very hard to read this. That may be 11 percent and I don't have reason to doubt you, but I honestly can't tell.
MR. BIGGER: I understand. I apologize for the legibility of the copy. It's the best I can do.
Q. I will represent to you that that's 11 percent, and if it's different you can preserve your right to say well, you told me it was 11.
Q. You see at the very bottom, it says "don't know, no answer"?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. The one above that is "climbing in and out of a bathtub." And the one above that is "smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day."
A. I see that.
Q. So 11 percent of the respondents felt that smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day was the most dangerous to life.
10	percent of the respondents felt that climbing in and out of the bathtub was most dangerous to life.
Would you agree that smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day, among these respondents, was marginally more dangerous to life than climbing in and out of the bathtub?
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
A. I'd really have to look at this with a lot of care. Because looking at the question to begin with, "everyone is a gambler," I don't agree with that. I don't agree with that metaphor of somebody who crosses the street is gambling, really. So I have problems with that assumption.
Q. So your concern is that the polling data was skewed because of the question that was asked?
A. I'm not reaching that conclusion. I'm saying that based on the wording, it may — it's hard for me to understand it, really.
Q. You're not an expert on polling. You said that earlier, correct?
A. I'm not an expert on polling.
Q. Do you believe that the Roper Organization is an expert on polling?
A. I believe they are.
Q. And you stated earlier, I believe, that you felt — you considered them to be an authoritative source of information?
A. Yes. But as I said, in other instances before, that doesn't mean that I give up my responsibility as a historian to see if there's something that, you know, may be confusing. And this — it is not the standard type of question that I've seen in any polling. You know, some assumption like everybody being a gambler. This is actually a statement that's made there.
So that, to me, even though I'm a polling expert, as a historian, strikes me as a unclear question. And certainly based on what, in my estimation, is incorrect. I don't think everybody's a gambler.
Q. So aside from your concern about the first clause of the question "everyone is a gambler," do you have any
other reason to disagree with the fact that the 11 percent of the respondents felt that smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day was most dangerous to life?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I have to say this: If that's the beginning of the question, I don't see how we can isolate that, because it is part of the question. So any person reading the second sentence has already read the first sentence.
Q. If it was public knowledge that smoking cigarettes posed a health hazard in 1959, wouldn't you think that more people would respond that smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day is the most dangerous thing to life?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Reading this critically, as I would read any document, I can't come to that assumption, because there is a — there's a list there of possibilities and the fact that people don't say that it's the top doesn't mean that they're not aware. So I would never be able to come to that conclusion based on this document.
Q. So the fact that 11 percent of the people — only
11	percent of the people thought that smoking was the most dangerous to life is of no significance, in your mind, in 1959?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
being an expert on looking at materials critically, I don't know — it's an interesting set of possibilities. What do you mean by "most dangerous to life"?
Well, I don't know the people responding to this are thinking that, well, you know, if I smoke a cigarette, I won't die necessarily. I won't die necessarily, either, if I fall on the bathtub. But there's a message here, you know, this is a — this is a scenario that the respondents are presented with of an actual fall where you can bust your head and die on the spot.
So I'm not — I don't agree with the notion that not placing it at the very top of the list can be read as not recognizing it as dangerous.
Q. Can you point me to the first time in the public domain there was a link between smoking cigarettes and kidney cancer?
A. I don't have that information.
Q. Your understand that Mr. Rodriguez — Gilbert Rodriguez died of kidney cancer, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you can't point me to anywhere, though, in the public domain, the first incidence of public dissemination of the fact that smoking cigarettes causes kidney cancer?
A. That's very difficult to do, and historians avoid the absolutes. I would have to have complete certainty that
this is the first time and that would be very hard to do.
Q. Can you point me to any time in your research into the smoking and health areas, into the health hazard of smoking cigarettes, any time that information was publicly disseminated that smoking cigarettes was a cause or caused kidney cancer?
A. I'm pretty sure I've read that at some point, but I cannot — I cannot do that for you.
Q. You have no idea when?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No.
Q. But you think you remember reading it at some point?
A. That's very possible.
Q. What in your opinion that Gilbert Rodriguez should have been aware that smoking cigarettes is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Should have been aware?
Q. Do you have an opinion that at some time, Gilbert Rodriguez was or should have been aware that smoking cigarettes is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can't make that judgment for him. What I can tell you is that people don't even have to read that smoking is addictive or see it on a TV show, but just from everyday
living, they know of people that smoke and can't quit or have — find difficulty quitting. Whether they call it addiction or not, I'm not sure.
Q. So just from everyday living, they should be aware that cigarette smoking is difficult to quit or addictive?
A. I'm not using the word should. I think that that's one of the ways in which people learn about that, just by watching others. People in the family, for example.
Q. If the manufacturer of the product told them expressly, in no uncertain terms, that the product is not addictive, do you think that would have an impact on their awareness?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not sure what you mean if by the manufacturer — manufacturers telling somebody.
Q. The tobacco companies, if they publicly disseminated information that the product is not addictive, would that have an impact on the public's awareness of whether cigarettes are addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
A. I think that needs to be put in a context. I can't recall something to the effect of what you're describing. But if it appeared, how many times did it appear? Did it appear as an ad, or was it a story? Is there much more information which is the case stating the
I would not discard it as a piece of information if it made it to the public. I would certainly not discard it. But historians need to put that particular piece of information in a context in which the public is being overwhelmingly showered with information about the addictive nature of tobacco, or, at the very least, that it's hard to quit.
Q. What if the CEOs of the companies stood before congress and swore under oath that the product was not addictive, do you think that would have an impact?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Are you referring to a particular episode?
Q. Are you not aware that the CEOs of the major domestic tobacco companies in 1994 swore under oath before congress, congressional testimony, that nicotine in cigarettes is not addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Or something substantially similar to that.
A. I'm aware of those hearings. I remember seeing them on TV, being asked questions by congress. I don't know that specific item about addiction. I don't recall that.
Q. Let me hand you a document that is 12.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 12 was marked for
identification.)
Q. This is a document entitled Smokers and Non-Smokers, Facts You Should Know. This was information that was publicly disseminated by Philip Morris, USA.
At the top, it says: Both smokers and non-smokers deserve to know facts, not innuendo, about cigarettes. Yesterday Philip Morris and other U.S. tobacco manufacturers helped to set the record straight by speaking before a congressional committee. For your consideration here are the highlights of the information presented by Philip Morris in that session.
If you look down to the fourth fact down there, fact: Philip Morris does not believe cigarette smoking is addictive.
If information like this was being publicly disseminated, you don't think this has any impact or affect on the public's awareness of whether smoking cigarettes is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Before I can comment on that, I would like to know the date of this document. You stated that it was disseminated. I don't know whether this is a leaflet or this is part of a poster or a newspaper.
In order for me to comment on that, I would have to have that information.
Q. Yes. 1994. And it was disseminated through various methods, not just one method.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form on that.
A. And the question is . . .?
Q. Do you think statements like this, statements from the industry, from the tobacco companies themselves, regarding the fact that they claim their product is not addictive or smoking their product is not addictive, do you feel this has any impact on public awareness or public knowledge regarding whether cigarette smoking is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I would not ignore this as part of the universe of messages that consumers would be receiving. I would —
Q. You say that, but —
A. Yes. But if I can —
Q. — this is not in your reliance —
MS. LAWSON: If would you let —
Q. — materials.
MS. LAWSON: — him respond to your question.
A. I'd like to say what I have said for other documents before, and that is this has to be seen in a context of what else is out there. And this may be the only voice making the statement at the time compared to the voices of literally dozen of organizations that are saying
Q. Well, when it's the voice of the manufacturer of the product, the company that should know the product best, that produces the product and supplies it to the American marketplace, that's a pretty important voice, wouldn't you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know for sure that they're the ones that know the product best.
Q. You don't think the tobacco companies knows their product best?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I cannot reach that conclusion.
Q. Who do you think knows their product better than they do?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know who knows it better.
Q. But you think that someone else might?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. There are other organizations that know cigarettes very well and they test them regularly. I don't know whether one knows more than the other, honestly.
Q. The tobacco industry — the tobacco companies employ scientists that work for them?
A. I can't tell you for sure but, you know, companies that produce products for human consumption, usually do that.
Q. They've been manufacturing the product for decades. You think — you're of the opinion that they may not know their product better than another organization or person?
A. No, I'm not saying that.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. What are you saying, Doctor?
A. I'm saying that I can't tell that with certainty because I don't know. I would have to compare the level of study that went into this. I know that many other organizations, including government agencies, have studied cigarettes very carefully, so I can't — I honestly cannot reach that conclusion.
Q. Would you agree that if you have reviewed or if you had reviewed the internal industry documents, you may have a better understanding of what the tobacco companies knew and when they knew it.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Wouldn't you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. You stated earlier that you've not reviewed any industry documents, internal industry documents, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Don't you think that if you had reviewed those internal industry documents or if you do review those internal industry documents, that will give you the ability to understand exactly how well the tobacco companies know their product?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I don't know that for sure, because I don't know what materials are available.
Q. Right. But you don't know — having not reviewed any materials about the industry, you have no way to form an opinion one way or the other.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. And I think that's what my answer meant, that I don't know whether it's — it's a case of greater knowledge about the product by this particular company or by some other entity.
Q. And you haven't — you haven't tried to find that
out?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. That is not part of my research. That is — that is not relevant to what I was trying to do. And, actually, this is a — I don't see how something from the 1990's can
affect the Rodriguez case that much. It's my understanding he had quit, already, smoking.
Q. He quit in 1996.
A. Yes.
Q. The fact that the tobacco industry and the tobacco companies were still maintaining the position, publicly, that smoking cigarettes is not addictive, into the 1990's, you don't feel that could have any affect on Gilbert Rodriguez's awareness of whether smoking cigarettes is addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, in your question you mentioned the tobacco companies, and I only see one document from Philip Morris.
Q. In the document it says, as we read, Philip Morris and other U.S. tobacco manufacturers. And I'll represent to you that it was each of the defendants in this case that stood before congress and made these representations.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can understand that, yes.
Q. So you're holding —
A. But —
Q. You're holding the public and Gilbert Rodriguez to a higher standard of knowledge and awareness than the tobacco companies?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If I can clarify something, because this document states here that other tobacco companies participated in that process. But the facts, as they're enumerated here, they're presented by Philip Morris. So I don't agree with the fact that this is an industry statement. This is a —
Q. Doctor, this is a statement by Philip Morris and it was publicly disseminated. And I would encourage you to review the 1994 congressional testimony.
As a historian and as somebody who's studying this issue of public awareness and smoking and health, public awareness of the addictiveness of cigarettes, it's an instrumental historical fact that should be considered amongst your research.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes. But if I can answer the question.
Q. My question that I wanted an answer to —
MS. LAWSON: I would object to statements then.
If you're going to ask a question —
MR. BIGGER: I had a question pending. I'm trying to come back to it.
Q. My question was: You are — with your opinion that Gilbert Rodriguez should have been aware that cigarette smoking is addictive, you are holding Gilbert Rodriguez to a higher standard of awareness than that's claimed by the tobacco companies themselves?
A. I believe I never used the word should.
Q. You said there was sufficient information out there that people, the public, was aware. Gilbert Rodriguez is part of the public. Unless you're willing to take the position that Gilbert Rodriguez was not aware or should not have been aware, but I don't think that's the opinion you're going to offer in this case —
A. No, that's not.
Q. As your report states, you're going to offer the opinion that Gilbert Rodriguez should have been aware because of the information that was out there?
A. Yes. But you're asking about this particular document that you gave me from Philip Morris.
Q. I'm not asking you about that document anymore. That document reflects a position by Philip Morris and it also reflects the same position that is held by the industry at that time, in 1994.
What I'm asking you is: Aren't you holding Gilbert Rodriguez and the public to a higher standard of awareness than that standard of awareness that is publicly stated by the tobacco companies?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not doing that, no. What I'm telling you is that Mr. Rodriguez and others in the public, if they got to
see this — you know, I have no idea about the extent of how widely this was disseminated.
Q. You have no idea about the extent of whether someone saw or read these other articles, as well.
A. But that's very different because those are articles that appear in newspapers and you can get the circulation. This is just a —
Q. That article was — I believe — I may be wrong — but I'm very certain that article appeared in newspapers, as well. It was published in newspapers. I don't know that it was in magazines or other periodicals. I know that it was widely disseminated.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It's not an article.
Q. That's fine. And you're making a determination that — are you making the determination that a consumer can make that distinction from that, that the facts you should know from Philip Morris, an average person is going to distinguish that from another article that they would see in the newspaper?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I think it's very clear that this is not an article by a journalist. This is a statement or a series of statements from one company.
And I should add something that perhaps will shed
light on what I'm trying to explain. And that is that a historian needs to look at things within their context.
This is a time, the '90s, when the overwhelming — I would say close — the overwhelming number of stories that are coming out have to do with the negative effects of smoking. This is one —
Q. Doctor —
A. — document that you showed me.
Q. Doctor —
MS. LAWSON: If you'd allow him to finish his answer.
A. Let me add something else.
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his answer.
Q. I'm not putting that in to suggest that it was something pertinent in the '90s. That statement was made in the '90s, but it's reflective of the position that the industry had held during that entire time.
I'm not purporting to suggest that in the 1990's that Gilbert Rodriguez should have known or what he should have known. The date at that time is only relevant to show that's when the dissemination was made.
The position had not changed. The industry in the 1980's did not say it wasn't — or was addictive and now they're saying it wasn't. It's the same position they've held all along.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Because it’s one thing to say that at a time of scientific debate where the research is still ongoing, and it’s another thing to say it at a juncture when it becomes sort of a lone message. I don’t know. And I should also add the fact that my research hasn’t gone into the ’90s.
Q. You have reliance materials — many reliance materials on your — excuse me.
There are many documents in your reliance materials that are from the 1990’s. Are you now stating that those reliance materials are not something that you researched or compiled?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. There’s no connection between one thing and the other. The fact that I get them --
Q. Doctor, you just stated that you have not done research on the 1990’s.
A. Specific research. But that doesn’t mean that I don’t have materials for that period.
Q. So where did those materials come from, if they didn’t come from your research?
A. The focus of the research has changed. Early on in the Puerto Rico cases, for example, I did research up to the 1990’s.
A. For these cases, I was — I received the information that there was a cut-off date for the materials in newspaper, for example.
Q. Are you aware, or are you not, that there are materials on your — documents on your reliance materials that are from the 1990's?
A. There may very well be.
Q. Are you stating now that you're not relying on any of those materials from the 1990's?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No, I'm not saying that.
Q. What are you saying when you tell me that you did not conduct any research into the 1990's, and there are materials from the 1990's in your reliance materials?
A. Okay.
Q. I know you said that Jones Day and colleagues, other folks provided you materials, and if those are materials that came from other people than yourself, who has not done any research on that time, that's fine. I just need to understand where they came from.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Okay. First thing, for this case, the research deals with a shorter period. There's a cut-off date of 1969 as far as media materials, for example.
A. (No response.)
Q. I didn't follow that.
A. For this case, the research is more — and, actually, for each case, the chronology is different based on date of birth and so on. For these Florida cases, the cut-off date is 1969, as far as the newspaper and other media materials that I'm looking at.
Q. Why's that?
A. Why is that? Because that came out of some of the conversations that I had with the Jones Day —
Q. So the lawyers instructed you to limit your research to materials before 1969?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. That's not —
MR. BIGGER: I don't think — Christine, I don't
know what the objection is there.
MS. LAWSON: I don't want you to mischaracterize
anything he said.
MR. BIGGER: I don't want to mischaracterize it.
I want to try to understand it.
Q. You said, from communications you had with the lawyers, your understanding is that your research in the newspapers, which is the example you gave, is up and until 1969; is that correct?
A. As far as these newspapers, using them as primary documents, yes.
Now, that doesn't mean that that's not a directive not to do anything else. That's a directive of, you know, this is where the focus will be for this court.
Q. Who made that determination?
A. What determination?
Q. That that's where the focus would be for this research.
A. That's information that I believe I received. And if I can characterize the exchange, it had to do with the fact that some materials beyond a certain period were not applicable for this — some of these cases.
Q. So earlier today when I asked you what expectations were there for your work, what was the focus and goal of your work, you didn't share with me that there were certain parameters placed on your research.
Are there, from what you're telling me now, were you provided with focus or a time frame for your research?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, you call it limitation. I don't believe that's the case. Each case is different and individuals lived in different time periods.
Q. So what you're telling me is, for the Rodriguez case, the limitation that was instructed to you was 1969?
A. No, I'm not saying that at all.
Q. That's what I'm trying to figure out. Are you talking about generally for these cases, the Engle Progeny cases? When you use "these cases," I'm just trying to understand what that word means.
A. The Florida cases.
Q. Okay. Which — the Florida cases you were working
on —
A. That's correct.
Q. — you were instructed that for purposes of your work on those cases, the newspaper articles should be considered up until 1969?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. No. I was — that's not the way it was presented to me. If I recall correctly, it had something to do with admissibility of evidence, and, therefore, logically, my focus became that period.
Now, I can also tell you that as a historian, if I find a book that was published in 1990 that deals with the history of tobacco, that pertains to the period I'm studying. If I get — if I find an article in 1980, say, in the New Yorker, the history of — and this is an example I'm coming up with — the history of tobacco in the U.S., that is beyond 1969 as far as publication, but it's pertinent.
In no time was I told to limit my research to a particular period. What I was told was that the focus — and I believe that the way it was presented to me is that there was some decision about admissibility of evidence. I heard that, but that doesn't mean that if I find other materials that I think are relevant, I'm not going to include them.
Q. What other focus was provided to your research by the lawyers from Jones Day?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Focus. Earlier today, I spoke about the first meeting and what transpired.
Q. I'm talking about with regard to these Florida cases, not the Puerto Rico cases, not your first meeting in 2001 with the lawyers from Jones Day.
I want to just focus on the cases that we're here on today, specifically on this Rodriguez case which is part of those cases. What other focuses were you told or what if any other instructions were you given about the focus of these cases?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The focus of this case is something that I developed. Coming up with ideas of, first of all, thinking about the universe of sources of information that individuals can be exposed to. I determined that.
MR. BIGGER: I’m not trying to stop him. I’m
trying to get us through this faster.
Q. I don’t think you’re understanding my question.
What other instructions if any — and if there weren’t any, tell me that — what other instructions were you given from the lawyers regarding your research on these cases, aside from what you’ve told me previously that the focus was to be on documents prior to 1969?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Instructions? I don’t consider that an instruction to tell me that there are these limitations and this is admissible. That is not an instruction.
Q. What would you call it?
A. Sharing some information that may be important that may -- may guide the priorities within my research.
Q. Can we call it guidance? You just said guide.
Can we use guidance?
A. I don’t know what word you would like to use. I’m trying to explain it in clear terms.
Q. I want to use the word you want to use.
I know. I’m just trying to use the word — you said you don’t like the word instructions. I’m trying to figure out what word we can use to help you understand the question that I’m asking. Let’s try guidance.
What other guidance if any — if there's none, just tell me none — what other guidance were you given by the lawyers from Jones Day regarding the focus of your research other than the fact that it was to focus on documents prior to 1969, as you've already testified to?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. At one point, I was told to hold further research.
Q. When was that?
A. That was, I believe, in — at some point in 2007.
Q. Do you know why?
A. I understood that there were some pending decisions in court and — and that is a guideline, of course.
Q. You testified earlier that you were retained or engaged for these Florida cases in 2007. How long after your engagement for these Florida cases were you told to hold your research?
A. I can't remember the exact time, no.
Q. Had you conducted a lot of research or had you began conducting research at the time you were told to hold your research?
A. I was working on it, yes.
Q. So you had began work?
A. That's correct.
Q. Any other guidance, besides focus on documents
prior to 1969 and the guidance to hold your research in 2007 for a period of time?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. The guidance, if you want to call it that, was not to limit my research to materials before 1969. That was not the case, because I make the determinations as far as what is important.
It was an exchange of information in which I was told — and I believe it had to do with admissibility of information — and I made the decision, well, you know, since this is the case, I should focus on other things that I have in my research agenda.
Q. What else were you told?
A. What I just mentioned about holding further research at one point.
Q. What else?
A. That' s all.
Q. That's all the guidance you were given?
A. Guidance? I was told that there were these experts that had materials that —
Q. Lacy Ford?
A. Lacy Ford, for example.
Q. Okay. Jones Day has put you in touch with Lacy Ford?
Q. Okay. And I don't want to go back through all that again. We already got a lot of ground there. I'm trying — I had the impression from your earlier testimony there wasn't guidance that was provided, so that's why I'm going back through this. I'm not trying to replow ground.
I wanted to be sure that we had all the correct information, that we both had the correct understanding.
A. I think we were using different definitions of guidance. "Guidance," to me — I mean, the fact that I receive information from Jones Day about a limited admissibility, I don't know whether to call that guidance or not, because it does not impact in the way in which I conducted my research.
And, by the way, it has never impacted the way I conducted my research. I have made all the decisions my self.
Q. Except for the documents which were provided to you by Jones Day?
A. They were provided to me. That doesn't mean that I'm going to use them.
Q. Well, you included them on your reliance materials.
A. Some of them are there, I believe.
the tobacco companies, for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, were you aware that they had done research on the public knowledge of the health hazards of smoking?
A. Who's "they"?
Q. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
A. I was not aware of that.
Q. Have you become aware of that since you began working for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. From my readings being part of the — these industry groups, some of them having to do with research, I've become aware of that.
Q. Did you also become aware of it when you gave a deposition on the Cohen case?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Well, I became aware of that prior to that.
Q. So you were aware of it prior to that?
A. That tobacco companies were conducting research on smoking and health?
Q. On the public knowledge of the health hazard of smoking.
A. Not that I can say I read that. I could just infer, but I couldn't — I have no solid basis.
Q. But you're aware of that now, as you sit here today?
public — I'm sorry.
Q. That the tobacco companies were doing research on public knowledge of the health hazards of smoking.
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
MR. BIGGER: Just because we haven't had an objection yet.
MS. LAWSON: No. It's vague. You don't specify a time period. It could be any time. It could be a time that's not relevant to this time period. I just don't know what your time period is.
A. I mean, we just looked at a document by Roper and that has to did with that topic. It's — you know, we could argue whether it's the research by Roper or by the tobacco companies.
Q. If it's done at the direction of the tobacco companies, that would be research that was done by the tobacco companies on public knowledge of the health hazard of smoking?
A. No. It was not done by the tobacco companies. I mean, this was obviously done by — the name Roper is in there.
Q. I — that was an internal — that was a poll that was done at the direction of one of the tobacco companies.
It was not done unilaterally or voluntarily by the Roper Organization.
MR. BIGGER: I'm just telling him. This is rehashing ground.
A. Again, the organization that is putting its name in there is the Roper Organization, that it was commissioned — that's the way I would characterize it — that it was probably commissioned by a tobacco company or several tobacco companies, that seems to be evident.
Q. All right. So this is — you're obviously now aware that the tobacco companies were doing research of public knowledge of the health hazard of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. At least they were commissioning research for
that.
Q. Okay. When you began working for the tobacco companies or R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, were you aware that they had done research on public knowledge of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not comfortable with the statement that I — I'm working for the tobacco companies. It's for a law firm that is representing a tobacco company.
MR. BIGGER: For the record, this kind of stuff is not me.
Q. Doctor, we’ve clarified this earlier. Jones Day is here on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and they’ve retained you as an expert. So can we skip a step and you understand — I thought you understood this earlier — you’re here on behalf of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company as an expert witness in this case.
A. That’s true. But it’s different and I want to be very carefully with my wording.
Q. So —
MS. LAWSON: I don’t want to tell him to be imprecise. As you can tell, he’s a very precise-type person.
MR. BIGGER: I’m fine with precise.
Q. I just want you to understand that’s who you’re working for.
MS. LAWSON: And I think he’s testified to that. Again, he’s being precise with his language.
Q. So when you began working for the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, through their agent, their law firm Jones Day, were you aware that they had done research on public knowledge of the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. When I started working for them? No, I wasn’t.
Q. Have you become aware since that time?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
Q. That they have done, conducted, research on the public knowledge of the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
A. The first piece of information to that effect is the Roper poll that we were talking about earlier.
Q. So today was the first time you've heard about that? Is that what your testimony is?
A. Heard about it? I believe so.
Q. Today is the first time you learned that the tobacco company was conducting research on public knowledge of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. I'm just trying to understand your answer.
A. I don't think I have — perhaps. But I don't think so. This is, as far as I can tell, the first document that I see pointing in that direction.
As I said earlier, I could infer that the company's interested in knowing about its consumers. That is normal for any type of company.
MR. BIGGER: Take five.
(A discussion was had off the record.)
(Angela Splittgerber, Attorney at Law, no longer
appears via telephone.)
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 13 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Doctor, I've handed you a document that we've had marked as Exhibit No. 13. And this is a document entitled the study — A Study of Public Attitudes Towards Cigarette Smoking and the Tobacco Industry in 1982, prepared for the tobacco institute, July 1982, by the Roper Organization.
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON: I just want to state for the record,
I don't think this is a full copy of that.
MR. BIGGER: It's not. And I'll clarify that.
Q. You're aware of who the tobacco institute is or
was?
A. Yes.
Q. I guess was. You understand that they were essentially an industry organization, an industry-controlled organization?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. It was an organization made up of the various cigarette producers.
Q. Right. That works. So this was a study of public attitudes towards cigarette smoking commissioned by the tobacco institute on behalf of the industry done by the Roper Organization. Agreed?
Q. Okay. And as counsel represented, this is not the entire study. This is simply an excerpt of what I thought was the relevant portions — portions I may go into today.
You'll see that on page 21 there, the first page, under the heading Smoking as a Health Problem, question of which hazards make a great deal of difference in longevity. And the choices are listed there in the left.
One of the choices is: If a person smokes a pack of cigarettes a day — similar to the question that appeared on the — or the choice that appeared on the July 1959 poll we looked at earlier.
A. I understand the question posed.
Q. You see that in 1970, 42 percent of the respondents stated that a person smoking a pack of cigarettes a day made a great deal of difference in longevity. You see that?
A. I see that.
Q. You see that in 1982, that 53 percent of respondents agreed that if a person smokes a pack of cigarettes a day, that made a great deal of difference in longevity. You see that?
A. I see that.
Q. If you flip over to 32.
MS. LAWSON: If he wants to explain his answer,
then let him explain it.
A. You said it was similar to the one we saw earlier and I can’t tell whether these are options to choose -whether this is a list of options or whether it’s the top one, because I think the other one asked the respondents to mention the top one. So, in that regard, this one’s different.
MR. BIGGER: Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q. On page 32, under the heading — which you’ll see at the top of the page — I’11 give you a moment to get there. It’s in the upper right-hand corner. It says 32. Are you there?
A. Yes.
Q. There’s a question on whether the respondents believed — do they consider smoking to be only a habit or is it an addiction. And you see in 1978, in the far right-hand column —
A. We’re on page 32?
Q. Yes. 19 — there should be columns at the top.
A. Yes.
Q. A chart or graphic. 1978 is the far right-hand side. And amongst the respondents who were smokers,
57 percent said they thought it was a habit. Only
22 percent said they thought it was an addiction. Do you see that?
A. I see — I see the numbers but I don't find the question that was posed to them. And just by reading "habit or addiction," I don't know the question has to do with knowledge or belief or awareness. It's not a question, so it's hard for me to be able to comment on the numbers, not knowing what the actual question was, which I assume would be included in the full document, either at the beginning or at the end, which I don't have those parts here with me.
Q. You see under 1982, under "smokers," 52 percent of the respondents considered smoking to be a habit.
25 percent of the respondents considered smoking to be an addiction.
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to the form. I think it actually says smokers. That's not the total number of respondents.
MR. BIGGER: Did I say —
MS. LAWSON: You said respondents.
MR. BIGGER: Sorry.
Q. Under 1982, on the left-hand column, 52 percent of the respondents who were smokers considered smoking to be a habit. 25 percent of the respondents were who were smokers considered smoking to be an addiction. Do you see that?
Q. Are you aware whether, in 1982, Gilbert Rodriguez was a smoker or a non-smoker?
A. 1982?
Q. 1982.
A. I believe — I recall that he was a smoker.
Now, if I could say something so that we have a clear picture of the options here, there's also a 19 percent that say that they're apparently both a habit and an addiction, if I'm reading that correctly. And that needs to be taken into consideration.
Q. Are you aware that other industry-sanctioned or company-sanctioned polling was done similar to this 1982 Roper poll and the 1959 Roper poll that we discussed?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I know I have seen, maybe, a couple of examples of commission work like this. I'm not 100 percent sure whether this was one of them. It looks familiar, so I'm not aware of any more of this sort.
Q. Are you aware that no industry polling is included in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Meaning —
MR. BIGGER: What's the objection, Christine?
MS. LAWSON: Well, industry polling. I think he's
told you several times he considers some of these to be
commissioned by the industry but he doesn't consider
them to be done by the industry.
Q. Are you aware that no polling that was either done or commissioned by the industry appears within your reliance materials?
A. I would have to check the list of reliance materials.
Q. Will you do that?
A. I can do that.
Q. Okay. I'll ask that you just inform counsel if I'm mistaken. And there are polls that were done or commissioned by the industry in your reliance materials.
I believe you're also — you're just making a note to yourself — you testified earlier that you would provide a copy of your CV — not create one — but provide one that listed your experience as an expert witness on it, if you should have one in your possession.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now that you're aware that the industry has either done or commissioned polling to evaluate or determine public knowledge of the issues on which you're being asked to present your expert opinion, are you going to either, yourself, seek out or ask R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for the other industry-commissioned or industry-done polling?
Q. You don't plan to do that?
A. No.
Q. So you don't plan to include these polls in your reliance materials in the future?
A. I think you were asking about requesting different ones from the company.
Q. Not different ones, Doctor. Requesting the polls that they've done so that you could evaluate them as part of the historical method in determining what the public awareness of the health hazard of cigarette smoking was during the period of time which you're being asked to research.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. If I have plans to do that?
Q. Yes.
A. Request them?
Q. Yes.
A. No. I don't have plans to do that.
Q. So even though you're aware of these polls now, you don't have any desire to consider them in reaching your expert opinions in this case or any other case?
A. I think we're talking about two different things, as I can tell from your questions.
A. On the one hand, I do have, as I stated earlier, a couple of materials that are — if not these, in particular — are similar. So I do have them, and they are part of what informs me.
Now, asking for further materials is something else, and I don't plan to do that. And the reason being is that I strongly believe that I already have so many materials that give information about public awareness, numerous polls, articles, sources sort of similar to those, that I don't foresee a need to request any further materials of this kind.
Q. So you believe that your analysis of a sample of newspaper articles and other documents from the time periods in which you've researched is a better indicator of public awareness regarding the health hazard of smoking than scientific polling that was done on the same or similar — the same or similar question?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not saying that. What I'm trying to convey is that historians make decisions about which avenues to pursue because there's always a time constraint. So I, in my practice, I decide whether pursuing this avenue of further documentation will significantly add or even change the conclusions.
But I must say that I have come across many — you
used the word scientific to refer to these — I have looked at numerous polls that are scientific, some of them conducted by the government, some of them conducted by private organizations, health organizations, and some of them conducted by Gallup and Roper, and given all that I have, I feel that I have enough to come to the conclusions that I've come up with.
Q. You testified earlier that you have included some advertisements — you believe you've included some advertisements in your reliance materials, correct?
A. I have relied on advertising, yes.
Q. Advertising by the tobacco companies?
A. Advertising, in general. I have looked at ads for cigarettes. I have looked at ads for smoking cessation. I have looked at ads for Reader's Digest pointing readers and newspapers about an upcoming article. I have looked at other types of advertising just to get a sense of, you know, the themes that were being used in selling other products, such as Coca-Cola, for example.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 14 was marked for
identification.)
Q. I handed you a document, Doctor, marked as Exhibit 14. This is an advertisement that appeared in 1937 for Old Gold cigarettes. It's a picture of Ginger Rogers, the radio star. And the advertisement contains a small caption that
says: The throat-ease cigarette. With a picture of a pack of Old Gold's. Do you see that?
A. I see that. But you mentioned the date in the
'30s?
Q. Yes.
A. And there's a stamp here — which I don't know what it means — from January 19, and the rest is illegible.
Q. The source that I recovered this from is 1937. I think this says 1935. And maybe it was '35. I believe it was 1937.
A. Okay. And then the other thing is that this appears to be — not to be a complete document. There's a cut on the right, at least, that shows part of the ad missing.
Q. The caption — the ad reads: Old Gold's respect my throat and charm my taste, too, says Ginger Rogers. Do you read that?
A. Yes. I can read that.
Q. Okay. In 1935, Gilbert Rodriguez was six years old. In 1937, I think when this advertisement was actually published, he was eight.
Do you think that an advertisement like this would have more impact on an eight-year-old than articles that appeared in newspaper, Reader's Digest, Time, Life magazine?
A. Not being an expert on advertising or on children's perceptions of advertising, I would not feel comfortable coming to a conclusion like that.
Q. So you think that a child can be equally influenced by an article that appeared in Time magazine or the Tampa Tribune as an advertisement, such as this one, that was publicly disseminated?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
A. I can't make that assumption or come to that conclusion because I'm not an expert on advertising or on the reception of advertising by the population.
Q. Which is an eight-year-old more likely to expose — be exposed to: An advertisement like this one, or an article in the Tampa Tribune?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. See, I can't even tell what publication this is.
Is this —
Q. I'm not asking you —
A. — the Saturday Evening Post —
Q. I'm not asking you if he was exposed to this particular article. This article is representative of many other advertisements that appeared at that time. So I'm not asking you specifically was he exposed to this article or was it likely that he was exposed to this article, which
does appear to have been in the Saturday Evening Post.
MR. WOODS: Object to the form.
MS. LAWSON: Object to the form.
MR. BIGGER: Wasn't even a question.
MR. WOODS: You get stereo on that one.
MR. BIGGER: You have got to wait until I finish it and then you can object to the form.
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. What I'm asking you is: Which was a child or an individual who was under the age of 18 — if you want to call it a child, a minor, whatever — which would they more likely be exposed to, an advertisement such as this one, or an article that appeared in the Tampa Tribune, newspaper article?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can't come to a judgment on that. I can say that you're asking about two specific types of information and I could add and say they're very likely to be exposed to information about cigarettes and health in school, at church, from community organizations such as boy scouts, through, even, comic books.
In order for me to clarify my answer, which I don't have an answer for, I would say that there are a variety of other sources that would reach a minor.
Q. I'm glad you brought up comic books, Doctor.
MR. BIGGER: Let's have this marked.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 15 was marked for
identification.)
Q. I'm handing you a document which we have marked as Exhibit 15, which is an ad for Camel cigarettes. It's representative of other similar ads that appeared at the time. And it's a cartoon with Hans Thorner, Nationally Known Skiing Expert. And there's a brief cartoon, and, I apologize, it's hard to read what the dialogue in the cartoon is with this copy, although I don't think any of it is necessarily "kids, come smoke cigarettes." That's not the suggestion, but it's a cartoon, nonetheless, with Hans Thorner, Nationally Known Swiss Skiing Expert. And at the bottom, it says: Let up — light up a Camel.
This was from 1939 when Gilbert Rodriguez was ten years old. Do you think he's more likely to be exposed to information that's publicly disseminated in this form, or an article in the Tampa Tribune?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Based on your professional opinion as an historian.
A. I would like to know where this appeared so that I can make that judgment. I don't know if this is from popular mechanics. So I don't know where it came out. Because you're asking specifically to compare with the Tampa
Q. Well, you don't know that Gilbert Rodriguez was ever exposed to the Tampa Tribune in 1939, do you?
A. I can't say that for sure.
Q. You don't know. You can't say he was. So we're on an equal footing here. You can't say he was exposed either.
I'm asking you, if he were exposed to both, which would be more likely for him to have read as a ten-year-old, this, or an article in the Tampa Tribune?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I can't compare that because I don't know where this came out. I don't know if this is a — came out in a publication that was very specialized for a particular readership, whether it circulated in Tampa. I know that the Tampa Tribune circulated in Tampa, but I can't say the same thing about this, not knowing its provenance.
Q. Let me ask you hypothetical, then, Doctor. Hypothetically, let's assume this did appear in Tampa.
MS. LAWSON: Is that a question?
MR. BIGGER: Yes.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
Q. Hypothetically, let's assume this did appear in Tampa. How would that change your opinion?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, I really can't make that judgment about him, nor can I make it about children in general, not having studied that. I really can't make that assessment. You're asking about, you know, an 18-year-old.
Q. Ten-year-old.
A. A ten-year-old.
Q. Ten years old. Based on your experience, your life experience, your common sense, everything, you can bring all into this equation, because you always can as a witness, based on all that, do you think it's more likely for a ten-year-old to read a comic strip, or an article in the Tampa Tribune?
A. Well, this is an ad.
Q. Right. But it's a comic strip in the ad.
A. Okay.
Q. Is it more likely on, based — again, based on all your experience, for a ten-year-old to read a comic strip, whether an advertisement or not, or an article in the Tampa Tribune?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I couldn't give you an expert answer to that question.
Q. I'm not asking for an expert answer. I'm just
asking for your — based on your experiences.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I believe I'm here as an expert to speak about what I know, and I refrain from speaking about other subjects that I don't know about.
Q. But you believe you could give an expert opinion about whether Gilbert Rodriguez was exposed to articles in the Tampa Tribune in the same time period?
A. I believe I said that I couldn't. If you go back to the record, I believe that's what I said. I can say that that was the newspaper of the largest circulation where he lived, but I can't tell you that he, himself, was exposed to it. No, I can't do that.
Q. Doctor, do you have any relatives who work for tobacco companies or work in the tobacco industry?
A. That work for the tobacco industry or companies?
Q. Do you have any relatives that work for a tobacco company or work in the tobacco industry?
A. Not that I'm aware of. I don't think so.
Q. Do you have any relatives who are lawyers who have represented tobacco companies?
A. Relatives that are lawyers?
Q. Who have represented tobacco companies.
A. No.
Q. Have you ever smoked?
A. I tried it maybe a couple of times in high school and never smoked since then. It was just a trial.
Q. What years were you in high school?
A. This would have been 1977 — it was probably 1978.
Q. Were you aware at the time you smoked that smoking was a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. At the time that I tried —
Q. Yes.
A. I had knowledge of that information, yes.
Q. You had that knowledge of information. So you were aware at the time you smoked that smoking was a health hazard?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes. But I also knew that smoking four or five cigarettes would not lead to any health hazard. I was aware that becoming a habitual smoker could expose you to disease and illness. But my understanding was that just smoking four or five cigarettes was — wouldn't harm me, necessarily.
Q. Has anyone in your family ever died of a smoking-related disease?
Q. You've done extensive research on the Colonial Carribean?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. As part of that research, you have, as you said, you've research and studied the tobacco trade, tobacco production in colonial times, both in the Carribean and in Key West?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Yes.
Q. As a historian, based on your research, was the slave trade important to the early success and growth of the tobacco trade?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Are you referring to what context in particular?
Q. Based on your historical research as a historian, based on many of your published works listed on your CV, was the slave trade important to the development of — let me rephrase — was slavery important to the development of the tobacco trade?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. Of the tobacco trade?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, this is what I know: I know that in the British Islands — Barbados, that's where the English started colonization in the Carribean, although they had
started earlier in St. Kitts, but really Barbados became the focus — tobacco production was the primary product. And it was produced, for the most part, in — by White indentured servants from Europe. So in that face, there was no link.
Q. You said some of your research looked at the tobacco trade. You also looked at the tobacco trade and its production in the United States. Is that correct?
A. Tobacco trade and production in the United States. Cigars, yes.
Q. It was limited to cigars?
A. For my own research on the Carribean and Latin America, there may have been some cigarette production that I'm not aware of, but the materials were overwhelmingly dealing with cigar makers and cigar factories.
And to further expand on your question, there is an interesting series of developments in the Carribean, and, actually, there's a very fine book entitled the Cuban Counterpoint by a famous Cuban anthropologist who very firmly makes the case that sugar is associated with slavery but tobacco production, because of its nature, is associated with free labor.
Q. In the Carribean?
A. In Cuba, I would argue, yes, throughout the Carribean. They are different types of crops that have different types of demands.
Q. Do you know whether that's the case in the Domestic United States or whether that was the case in the Domestic United States?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I'm not — I can say this: I can say that in the U.S. south, tobacco tended to be produced in larger plantations, and there's a link with slavery there that we don't find in the smaller plots in the Carribean where tobacco was produced.
MR. BIGGER: Just give me a few minutes.
(A brief recess was taken.)
BY MR. BIGGER:
Q. Doctor, do you know when the tobacco companies first publicly acknowledged that smoking cigarettes causes diseases such as lung cancer?
MR. WOODS: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Form.
A. I'm not sure about that, no.
Q. You don't know when?
A. I believe — and this is — dates further from the research that I have been doing — that there came a point where the language changed and — and, again, this is something that I'm not completely sure of — but my impression is that there was some acceptance at some point of these possibilities.
Q. Would you be surprised to learn that it was in
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
A. I associate that date with what I have just said, but I couldn't tell you that that was the first time that it happened.
Q. But you believe that the public was or should have been aware that smoking was a health hazard long before 1999?
A. The documentation reflects that fact, that the public was indeed aware.
Q. They were aware?
A. Yes.
MR. BIGGER: Okay. I have nothing further.
MS. LAWSON: I don't have any.
MR. WOODS: No questions.
THE COURT REPORTER: Do you want him to read, or waive?
MS. LAWSON: We'll read and sign.
THE COURT REPORTER: Do you want to order the transcript?
MR. BIGGER: Yes.
THE COURT REPORTER: Do you need a copy?
MS. LAWSON: Yes.
THE COURT REPORTER: Do you need a copy?
MR. WOODS: No.
THE COURT REPORTER: Ms. Baker, do you need a
copy?
MS. BAKER: Whatever our standing order is.
MS. LAWSON: I’m getting a copy, so I don’t think you need a copy.
MS. BAKER: Okay, then.
(The deposition concluded at 7:03 p.m.)
CERTIFICATE
The State of Florida, )
County of Orange.	)
I, Jennifer B. Sanders, Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, do hereby certify that the aforementioned witness was by me first duly sworn to testify the whole truth; that I was authorized to and did report said deposition in stenotype; and that the foregoing pages, numbered 194 to 355, inclusive, Volume II, are a true and correct transcription of my shorthand notes of said deposition.
I further certify that said deposition was taken at the time and place hereinabove set forth and that the taking of said deposition was commenced and completed as hereinabove set out.
I further certify that I am not an attorney or counsel of any of the parties, nor am I a relative or employee of any attorney or counsel of party connected with the action, nor am I financially interested in the action.
The foregoing certification of this transcript does not apply to any reproduction of the same by any means unless under the direct control and/or direction of the certifying reporter.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this 29th day of April 2009.
Jennifer B. Sanders Notary Public - State of Florida My Commission DD 823358 My Commission Expires 9/16/2012
ERRATA SHEET
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION DEPOSITION OF: LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, Ph.D.
CASE NO.:	08-CA-9153
ENTER CHANGES HERE PAGE # LINE #	CORRECTION
Under penalty of perjury, I declare that I have read my deposition and that it is true and correct subject to any changes in form or substance entered here.
DATE:_ SIGNATURE OF DEPONENT:_
SUBSCRIPTION OF DEPONENT State of Florida )
County of Orange )
Under penalties of perjury, I hereby declare that I have read the foregoing deposition by me given, and that the facts contained herein are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief, with the exception of any corrections or notations made on the errata sheet, if one was executed.
Dated this _day of _ 2009.
Luis Martinez-Fernandez, Ph.D.
DATE: April 29, 2009
CHRISTINE LAWSON, ATTORNEY AT LAW
JONES DAY
1420 PEACHTREE STREET, N.E., SUITE 800 ATLANTA, GEORGIA 30309-3053
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION Dear Ms. Lawson:
I've enclosed the original errata and subscription of deponent pages with your copy of the transcript, Volumes I and II, so your client may read and sign. Please have him make whatever changes are necessary on the errata sheets, have him signed before a Notary Public, and then make copies of all pages for your copy of the transcript.
Please then forward the original errata pages to U.S. Legal Support.
If the reading and signing of the deposition has not been completed within 30 days, we shall conclude that the right to do so has been waived.
Your prompt attention to this matter is appreciated.
Sincerely,
Jennifer B. Sanders
Court Reporter and Notary Public
cc: Brent R. Bigger, Esquire
A	acquired 162:23	307:11 , 17	176:3, 18	108:9 179:9
a 240.19	acquiring 222:12 308:13, 17	178:6 , 10	198:1 , 16
[tv 139-3	act 217:17 ,22	309:9 , 9 , 11	199:9 , 11 , 15	205:17 207:5
•2 312-6	222:13	313:7,10	289:11 290:1	208:23 213:16
4'4.4 77'.9	action 6:22 7:3	314:23 317:23 290:4, 17	218:6 220:11
2	0*107*18	7:11 8:13'16	330:18 331:21 291:1,2,15,16 221:16,19
,.5 151;22	8:18,19,22	332:3,13	291:20,24	224:8 242:2
;25 15o.6	9:1,10,13,15	addictiveness	294:7 341:9	246:1 248:6
' 166.'1	188:13, 13	68:8 205:12	341:10 343:23 248:14 251:2
'•16 179-13 223:23 355:13 232:16 314:11	advertising	251:15 252:21
|;21 225!q	355:13	adding 6 4:7	92:24 95:1 , 9	256:5 257:8
i-14 237-17	active 84:22	addition 129:17	95:13 147:12	269:21 270:22
>•16 303-18 230:7 231:20	227:11	172:10,19,20	279:10,14
■	"	activities	additional 15:8	172:20 174:23 284:9 288:16
lamson 2 • 3	300:11 , 13	16:2,5,23	174:24 179:14 293:10 295:22
8	192-3*	activity 9 0:9	17:17 33:3, 9	199:12 263:14 296:5 301:13
it 20-14	actual 12:12	33:25 35:5,5	291:10,11	301:20,21
.2 '	30:14 32:19	39:1,13 54:17 296:2,8	304:11 310:6
L* te 71-3 4 32:20 40:17	95:20 ,24	341:11 , 12, 13	311:19 ,24
,U13 ' '	50:11 84:19	96:25 97:5	341:17 343:1	314:4
' x	121:19 151:19 116:17,21	343:2,11,12	agreedl80:2
{U24 *5	155:21 163:3	117:7 118:9	advertisings	183:12,13,24
L tes 219-10 242:23,23	118:24 120:19 174:25	201:22 218:11
U25	'	252:16 266:7	122:24 124:3	advisory 74:16	226:16 250:17
»mic 18-13	295:6 304:9	124:5,22	affeet 33 : 4 , 10	251:18 258:11
"6 1A.{c	336:8	126:13, 16	34:11 ,20	272:22 333:25
23	8q.7	ad 17 3:3 174:14	278:20	215:23 261:21 334:20
12	'	174:16 175:25	additions 17:14 263:7 266:3	agreeing 222:20
t 252*20	177:14,18	addressed 235:11 295:25 296:6	agreement 4 8 :15
j.23 261*2	178:2 179:13	adds254:19	296:10 308:15 48:18,19,19
*1 267*14	180:6,13,15	admissibility	313:1,8	48:24 49:3,6
stance '	263:24 267:21 322:17 323:4	affidavit 55:8	181:21 226:24
,•22 24	268:2,7,10,11 326:9 327:12	59:19	agriculture
, 12 4 ^	268:14 269:3	admissible	affidavits 42:18 214:24
ated 14*14	270:17 284:16 324:13	42:22 59:13	ahead45:16
'21 '	284:21,23	ads 174:8 , 9 , 9 , 9	59:22,25	46:12 49:12
atina 272*7	285:1 ,4, 11 , 13 174:10 , 13	affiliations	59:1 123:8
's 5 6*20 24 289:22 306:24 175:17 , 19	17:7 , 13	133:19 ,21
*8 14'7.9'	342:13, 15	177:9 178:20	affirmed 4:6	147:15 152:23
.18 270*8	345:5 347:15	178:22 199:18 194:6	161:3 165:13
';22 '	347:16	199:19 263:21	afflicted 230:15 176:22
-ibie	Adams 145:4	284:25 289:21	aforementioned	aisle 219:24
*•14 297*4	147:2	290:14,15,25	188:5 355:5	AIW-000214241:1
I-	'	add 19:19 42:25	291:5 294:14	age 229:17	allocated 78:6
nnanies	82:10 174:13	296:12 341:13 242:12 244:10 80:9,11,13
,f231	176:17 177:5	341:14,15	246:10 247:13	allowl37:9
nolishment	179:15 316:25 345:6	247:17 248:2	160:3 176:15
,P24	317:12 318:7	adult246:7,8	248:4 256:10	317:10
nnlishments 340:23 344:18	adults 242:4,5	260:17 , 18	allowed 33:11
20	added 17:1 , 10	247:13	344:10	176:8
t 282*19	62:13 67:10	advertised	aged 242:15	allows 216:21
,.5 '	120:19 122:25 295:23	agencies 311:16	allude 212:3,3
rate 53*11	235:2	advertisement	agenda 227: 4	allusions 117 :10
5	137*15	addiction 92:21 173:17 , 19	326:12	alter 34:9,11
,.5 157.10	306:3 307:22	175:21 178:14	agent 331:19	altered90:23
:;19 20'	335:18 336:1	179:6 , 17 ,25	ages 244:21	amendment 115:19
1	* 24? 210 * 3	336:5, 14,24	180:17 263:23 256:8 , 13	115:19
i*16 292*23 337:9	268:17 269:6	257:14 260:5	America 16:11,12
,;24 '	addictive 91:23	284:22 289:6	ago 54:6 57:18	19:1 ,20 ,23,24
ratelv 26*5 93:19 96:7	341:23,25	64:24 99:20	20:3 86:25
-.25 Y '	97:13 187:13	342:20,22	107:16 108:21 87:14 88:4,7
'"ation 210*7 224:6 , 11	343:6 , 14	108:23,24	257:12 351:12
’ d 2 0 7*15 225:7 226:17	344:12 347:20 109:11 119:4	American 15:10
■jwledcred	227:1 305:16	advertisements	150:19 235:13 86:4,5 170:12
,.14 9	305:21,25	172:25 173:6	agree 62:14,22	171:1,2,25
Lre 71*17	306:5, 11 , 17	173:23,24	72:21 80:12	172:1 184:21
L	'	306:19 307:6	174:2,18	92:11,12	211:19 215:12
i:6,9,16	314:16 317:11 343:23 344:13	216:5 258:4	278:16 302:24
.:2,3,7,13	317:13 332:15 345:6,22	263:2,25	324:8
.:18 232:1	335:2 344:22	347:1	276:15,15	asked20:ll
1:23 310:4	344:23 347:23	APPEARING 2: 6,12	areas 35:4 36:19	23:16 33:20
it 71:8 , 15	347:25	2:19 ,25 192:6	67:5 305:3	35:10 36:3
16	, 17 72:9	answered 101:19	192:12, 19 ,25	argue 31:5	46:23 49:24
17	77:15 133:15,16	appears27:4	291:13 329:13	75:13 99:8,16
7,20	80:18 151:17 185:18 28:4,5 29:2,3	351:23	101:19,22
24	81:18	185:19,20	29:20 173:17	Arnaz295:ll	110:24 112:19
i: 24 167:2	244:11 257:2	173:17 244:3	arrive 35 :11,22	112:23 124:17
1:24 208:7	answering 153:2	259:24 266:6	116:11	131:2 133:15
1:9 218:5	217:24	272:20 289:22	arrived 281:19	143:22 148:22
its 282:11	answers 111:4,4	289:24 290:11	articlel4:23	154:11 155:12
sgy 45:5	114:20 119:15 290:13 332:25	15:1 17:5	156:24 160:21
fsis 37:10	131:21 149:18 338:4 342:12	29:18 45:7	161:5 163:19
12	39:23	150:2,5,14,16	applicable	173:16,18	185:18 195:22
15	41:8	150:24 176:8	321:13	175:19 177:15	195:25 196:7
):25 152:6	176:9 177:20	application	177:18 178:3	196:10 , 17
::16 ,23	186:23 195:19 107:9 , 11	181:13 182:16	19 7:7 , 8 , 16 , 18
1:10 340:12	Anthony 115:2 2	applications	182:17 207:14	201:9 , 10
fze 151:23	anthropologist	80:7	208:22 240:13	205:19 223:1
::4 201:16	351:18	applied37:ll	240:16 274:19	224:15 240:9
.: 18 243:6	anticipate 34:7	43:23 57:23	281:12, 15	243:9 286:2
fzed143:3	35:6 166:3	283:10 288:10	316:8,9,14,19	291:9,19
ar 157:11,11	anybody61:14	applies 51:20	316:23 322:22	297:10 301:25
.:24 188:16 167:6 275:25	80:10 195:13	341:16 343:5	307:21 321:14
): 16	anymore 315:15	226:5,10	343:15,22,22	335:7 338:21
La 2:15	Anyway 55:5	246:19 250:23	343:24,25	339:12
!:15 272:19	anyways 53:20	272:23	344:13,14	asking20:ll
!:24	apologize 10:19	applyl7:23	345:18 346:10	21:5, 19 28:11
5272:21	124:19 300:20 103:16 107:5	347:13,20	32:15 44:6
1:1	345:9	140:19,19	articles9:18	53:18,19 72:1
als 237:9	apparently	188:15 195:9	26:19 29:3,21	81:3, 9 108:16
jncement	182:22 270:3	258:7 355:15	30:9 38:22,23	124:16 125:15
:: 9 ,11,11	337:8	applying 9 9 :1 , 2	39:1 126:18	125:16 161:6
jncements	appear 28:17	103:8	126:19156:11	169:17,20
):23 126:4	123:12 126:17	appreciate 23:24	157:5, 7 ,21	179:16 210:20
i: 6 147:13	126:19 128:1	appreciated	158:12,13,13	233:7 238:2
.: 22	172:13 174:14 358:17	158:22 159:19	238:20 239:17
al 7 0:19 ,22	182:15 284:5	approached 73:2	159:24 160:8	240:2,2
sr 8:24 46:9 284:11 290:19	appropriate	162:6 164:17	245:17 246:19
9	51:13,13 295:5 306:24	146:5	168:12 169:19	263:6,7
19	54:3, 16 306:24 316:6	approved 235:8	170:21 171:20	264:22 288:14
18	57:1 344:1 346:19	approximate	173:13,15	289:24,25
24	65:18 346:23 269:9	175:15 197:13	290:22,24
. :2 119:5	appearances 2:1	approximately	209:1 216:6	291:11 296:4
1:8 128:5	181:3 192:1	257:10,11	217:4 274:21	296:5,8
!: 23 137:6	appeared 156:8	258:13 269:8	274:24 275:7	300:12 315:13
':21 141:14 159:24 172:23 293:1,4	275:11 276:11	315:15,19
i:20 149:21 173:4 174:18	approximation	276:20,25	324:25 339:6
•:24 153:2	175:18 176:18 45:20 47:24	277:11 , 16	340:5 343:19
1:5,8	267:21 271:9	130:7,8	280:24 281:8	343:21,24
:: 15 176:10 272:6 , 10	Aprill:17	281:13, 15, 17	344:9 , 17
1:10,13,14	274:19,21	122:15,21	282:1,6,8,14	345:25 346:8
i:21 177:9	280:24 281:17 123:1,19	282:22,22	347:6,25
1:17 179:12 282:1,6,14,23 124:23 125:11	283:6,14,15	348:1
): 24 186:1	283:7 ,21	125:18 126:4	283:17 ,21 ,23	asksl3:15 36:6
:: 16 226:21 284:16 286:7	126:9 , 11	284:4 316:4, 6	47:17 60:19
::14 237:10 286:11 289:6	188:18 191:17	322:12 340:9	248:11
.:23 243:8	289:12 290:1	355:18 358:1	340:13 342:23	aspect57:25
1:11 245:20 290:4 291:21	archival 20:5, 7	348:7	203:1
): 23 246:15 291:25 293:5	154:20	asidel8:16 59:8	aspects89:16
1:7 255:4	294:15,24	archive 125:22	63:13 89:6	151:21 223:20
):20 257:23 295:7 306:23	135:13 152:20	144:22 145:2	229:22
1:5 272:13	316:9 334:10	archives 68:23	233:10 239:6	assembled 141:10
.: 24 301:2	334:11 341:23	areal4:12 15:6	244:19 246:9	assessment 203:1
:: 16 314:15 342:24 343:5	17:16 90:22	246:9 278:13	212:8 318:1
': 5	audio 104:24	186:17 ,22	211:7 212:4, 6 277:8 , 17
jn 15 8:17 127:22	187:2, 8 , 9 , 10	215:16 216:5	278:11 298:11
st 32:4	Augusta 17:25	187:11 , 13	216:8 , 13, 16	314:20 327:2
1:2 87:13,23	196:2 197:9	216:22 217:15 327:6 348:9
stant76:2	author 182:16 ,21	203:2,9,10	217:18 218:5	background 9:7
stants156:2	authoritative	206:18 209:13	218:7,11,16	83:9 105:15
':4, 8 , 12, 17 200:1 ,2,5, 10	209:24 210:12	218:24,25	107:18 112:21
1:2,9 160:2 201:7,12	210:20 211:2	219:2,20	146:6 214:16
.:12 162:9 202:6 , 11 , 17	216:24 217:9	220:11 , 19	215:2
sted 163:20 202:19 203:14	217:19 218:20	221:4 222:9	Bacon2:16 148:6
:iate 251:24 203:19 ,21 ,22	218:21 220:10	222:18 224:2	149:21 192:16
1:4 208:24 244:1	221:11,20	224:24 226:15 272:20
:iated 44:17 302:11	222:6 224:12	228:6 , 9 , 14	badl69:7 283:19
16	, 16 65:4	authorities	225:19 226:24	232:15 237:1	Baker 2:22
10	177:2 202:14,15,24	228:25 230:8	246:23 247:1	192:22 354:2 i:10 227:7 255:5	230:19,24	247:3,8 252:3 354:4,7
.: 19,20	authority 200 :3	232:1 , 9 233:3	252:7 , 10 , 12	Ball 295:12
:iates 200:7 201:17	233:5 237:7	252:13,14,17	ballpark73:5
•:22 209:7 234:13	237:25 238:11	255:15 261:7	179:2
Nation 255:23 262:18	238:20 239:25	261:8 ,21	banker's38:10
11	170:13	authorized 188:6	240:3, 7 , 11 , 11	262:11 263:8	39:2 49:15
.:2,5 172:1 213:5 234:16	243:1 249:6	265:13, 17 ,24	60:13 128:23
:iations 355:6	250:2 251:14	266:7 283:16	129:18 130:4
:: 23	authors 151:19	251:21 ,25	294:7 295:25	130:10 , 16
tie 51:14	available 22:11	252:4, 10	306:12, 18	153:24
1: 18,21 23:3,4,5, 7	255:11 256:1	308:16 309:10	Barbados 350:24
i:8 346:19 43:17 47:3	257:22 261:2	313:9,23	351:1
;: 2 3 48:8 65:6	266:1 , 19	314:10 , 11 ,24	Barnes 2:3 4:18
tied 112:11 70:15 104:3	267:20 270:19	315:21,21	192:3
Bing 241:17 139:10 147:7	271:6 280:19	336:6 339:11	base24:2,16
i:10 158:14 176:25	280:23 281:1	340:8,15	137:16 183:5
tiption 72:3 177:1 185:12	283:9 290:17	A.C 287:7 , 14	255:13
15,22	186:24 198:15	292:8,25	a.ml:20 191:20	basedl3:9 31:16
i:9 245:18 198:19,20,24	293:3,8,10	_ 41:1,9,19
.: 23 302:18 199:4,5	294:22 298:10	B	43:14,15 44:7
1:15 343:10 215:23 216:2	298:12,16,20	Bl-23 3*12 4-1	62:18 71:24
tiptions 218:11 219:17	303:18 305:16	188-4,22 '	71:24 72:8
20	224:4 225:4	305:18,20	191-23 193-13 108:2 111:5
stes262:20 229:16 231:3	306:4 307:14	194-1 355-4	123:17 133:8
ita 2:10 231:8 , 10	307:20 314:22	355-22 358-21 141:7 ,20
:: 10 196:15 233:17 235:6	315:4, 6 , 7 , 11	back 13-20 17*8 147:13 151:16
::4 235:25 286:24	319:5 328:2, 6	19 • 13* 22 • 4,*7	151:17 156:17
itic 8 6:7 296:21 ,22	328:7 , 11 , 12	23-20 27-23	160:23 161:6
=hedll:19 297:2,4	328:15,16,23	28-23 30-11	180:16 183:15
5,23	99:9 312:11	330:10,16	30:13,19*	184:16 198:19
!: 3,5	avenue 1:18	331:20,24	31-1632-17	204:25205:4
2hment 11:13 191:18 340:22	333:13 337:1	32:19 33:7 , 10 213:8 226:9
ition7:18	avenues 340:20	337:11,17,19	35-9 41-21	228:23 230:12
16	162:14	average 71:1	338:3, 19	43-19 45-15	231:19 232:17
': 18,22 282:13, 15	339:20 348:19	46!3 52-2	233:1,24
1:1 199:21 316:18	349:7,14,18	57-12 60-2	239:4 242:7
1:9 253:23	averaging 282:24 351:13 353:8	16'.q 77-10	245:25 246:22
): 1, 2	avoid 149:16	353:11 , 12	7 9 ! 2 4 81:17	248:16 ,25
1:17 228:18 304:24	awareness 65:2	82:10 83:8	250:20,23
itivel50:23	avoiding 222:15	93:14,19 94:3	98:12 100:1	253:25 256:4
:udes 29 9:25	awards 98:7	96:3,7,15,19	103:4 109:3	257:4,16
1:6,23	aware 4:21 ,23	97:10,13,20	132:17,19	259:8,10
cney2:9,15 6:18,21,25	98:2 112:21	134:20 145:22 261:3,24
!2 66:8 8:14 9:20	145:22 205:1	147^19,21 '	279:13 282:13
1:12, 13 16:21 27:14	205:24 206:2	152:14' 156:19 285:16 288:23
1:9,15,22 50:8 62:1	206:5,7,9,10	184*6,8,10,12 302:2,22
:: 19 332:24 100:19 101:17	206:15,24	185-23 195-24 303:19 320:5
):12, 13 106:9 108:4, 6	207:2,4, 7 , 9	218*1 232-25	345:20 347:9
::2 109:4 141:21	207:13,21	234-4 240-15	347:12,18,18
rneys148:5 143:19 145:5	208:5,6,7,9	244-24 251-8	348:1 350:10
1:6 272:23 161:17 165:19	208:10,14,17	269:25 274:5	350:15,16
snce 177:14 167:1 186:12	208:24 211:3	275:14 277:4	basic 44:19
:: 25 218:21	73:11 81:8	best 11:10 , 12, 17 329:5 330:2	130:4, 16
1:9 223:20	93:10 190:8	53:14,19 71:5 330:23 331:13 153:24
': 15	206:15,20 ,21	137:6 177:10	332:22 333:3	boyl77:5 344:20
=allyl48:14	206:25 208:12	179:12 190:7	333:12 335:10	branch65:22
1:3 240:17	208:13 252:2	228:21 300:21 336:18 ,20	brandl74:25
ig 24:22	252:5,18	310:3,9,11	337:23 344:4	break 38:2 51:8
1:18	265:20 279:1	357:7	344:6,8 345:1 57:11 77:6
3	60:8 74:14	298:7 311:1 better 139:9 , 17	346:21 352:10 83:5 119:8
::8 106:11	336:6 357:8	255:25 279:5	352:12 353:14 138:11 147:15
1:8 120:2	believe 14:12, 17	310:14, 17	353:22 358:24 187:16
:: 13 140:11	16:21 22:12	311:8,21	billboard 172 :10	breakdown 244 : 25
i:16 142:16	23:13 28:15	340:14	billboards	246:9 247:17
::21 143:1	32:3 39:25	Bettyll5:23	172:14, 14	248:2 260:14
1:14 167:16	42:2,3,10,14 beyond321:12	billing47:10	260:14
': 18 236:8	44:16 47:2	322:25	76:18	Brent 2:3 4:17
1:7 245:5	48:12 50:17 bias 276:10	Billy 255:1	192:3 358:24
): 10 256:15	57:6 ,22 61:12 big 104:12	binder-clipped	brief 83:6
1:17,25	66:12,15	124:10 268:13 134:8	135:19 187:17
.: 11 , 14 , 16	79:11 82:6	Bigger 2 : 3 3:3	biologist 84:23 345:8 352:11
.: 25 285:5	95:20 96:24	4:9 , 17 8:1 , 6	birth 320:6	briefly 13:12
•: 18 292:15	98:13,22	8:8 10:11	bit 19:17 52:2	14:7 83:9
1:22	99:18,21	12:17 20:24	224:16 226:13 151:10,11
:ub 301:5, 12	109:20 110:12	21:3, 14 22:6	228:3	273:10
.: 16 304:7	111:1 114:7	22:23 23:12	blanket 222:16	bringl2:4 13:3
4:18	119:23 126:11	23:18,23	239:21 253:2	13:6,16 46:4
Lng 171:21	131:7 , 17	25:11 , 14, 17	255:4	46:17 ,20
):13 216:8	142:13 144:10	26:9 , 12, 15	board 16 :10 ,23	48:11 , 14
i:12	151:7 153:23	27:17,22 29:7 74:10,12 75:6 50:10 105:18
tiing 134:23	155:11 156:9	29:9 37:19	boardsl6:5	268:13 347:11
•: 19	175:14 184:1	38:1,4,9,18	body 106:2 107:8	Britannica
i	6:6 , 8	200:13 203:13	38:23 39:1 , 8	108:14	254:20
22	70:5, 7	203:16 204:3	39:10 , 13,21	B0IES1:17	British 350:24
17	160:17	204:7 205:14	39:22 42:17 191:17	broadl07:17 1:2 273:11	205:15,21,25	42:20 43:2,4	bookl7:4 45:8 128:1 151:13 ):20 ,23	206:1 , 18 , 19	43:9 , 12 50:25 69:9 , 14 90:11 221:8 239:17 ':25 328:7	206:19 207:13	53:16 ,20 ,21 90:20 93:11 255:7
i:15 331:18	208:11 210:5	77:8 , 11 , 14	117:1 140:4	broadcast 293:7
ining 41:13	212:6 220:1	79:19 ,21 ,25	234:13 237:7	295:6
7,10	220:17 223:1	80:4,8,16,22	237:18,19,25	broadcasts
': 11 179:23	232:8 240:9	81:3 83:5, 7	322:20 351:17 170:21 293:2
): 12 275:20	240:14 241:16	119:8 , 19	books 19:15	295:10
1:9 303:5	243:20,25	120:9,12,13	108:12 132:18	broader20:19
i:9	244:13,20	121:9 122:1	171:19 177:5	70:21 77:25
Lf 2:6 , 12, 19	245:11 251:24	123:7 132:6	234:10 237:5	80:6 167:25
!5 53:6	252:4 256:12	133:16,20	237:6 238:17	180:5 244:5
2, 7 , 15,24	260:22 267:9	134:7 138:10	344:21 ,25	broadest 68:13
3	57:2	267:18 270:16	147:15, 18	Bordo 132:5	broke 247:18
9	59:22	291:19 292:3	153:7 157:15	born 241:5 295:2	broken 81:14
2, 10 , 11 , 13	295:9 297:17	166:13 169:7	Borror 115:20	242:12 257:3
5,20	64:6	297:24 298:6	169:22,25	bottoml0:15	260:11
19	65:14	298:17 302:7	176:9 184:8	123:14, 15	brought 13 :11,13
23	71:18	302:9,10	185:19 187:6	265:2 293:16	21:9 25:23
20	82:13	308:12 315:2	187:16 192:3 301:1 345:14 46:18 49:16
4,	16 ,25	316:8 321:10	193:3 194:9	Boulevard 2:16 109:22,24
20	102:7	321:21 323:3	195:1 199:22 192:16 344:25 1:13,23	325:9 326:9	199:24 214:7	bounced287:l	Brown74:l 1:11,20	327:24 332:10	224:21 232:25	boxl0:23 26:6	buildl47:14 i:8 161:18	337:5 338:13	240:21 249:17 37:22 38:11	building 45 :11 .:25 192:6	340:7 , 12	249:20 264:16 39:2, 17 47:3 220:8 1:12,19,25	341:9 342:9	264:20 265:1 48:4,9 49:15	bulk20:4,7
.:2,5	348:3, 6 , 9 , 10	266:10 , 12	57:17 60:2, 13 85:25 86:8 , 11
1:24	352:20 353:7	268:5 273:4,8 60:14,25 61:4 86:13 87:2,6
/ior 95:1,4	believed 110 : 22	275:15 279:8	104:4 128:23	99:9 154:8
10,13	335:17	283:19 297:20 130:10,11	277:25 278:1
js 2 6 7:5	believing 221:25	299:15 300:20	boxes 56:22	289:21
aor 101:21	bell 269:8 299:1	314:19 320:16 128:19 , 19 ,20	bundle 135 :14,17
sf 19:24	benefit 44:23	320:20 324:2	128:21 129:18	business 112:3,4
;:11 , 13	69:18 86:4,25	162:21 165:5	109:5 110:16	43:5 62:14
': 16	87:3 88:24	165:6 , 9 , 16 ,22 110:18 111:23 80:14 82:25
304:9	97:24 350:2,6	165:25 166:8	117:10,25	88:23 91:16
H-R-O-R	350:25 351:11	166:10 167:16 130:12 131:9	92:17 103:3
):20	351:16 ,22,24	182:4,20	145:23 148:20 107:9 140:9
__352:8	187:7 189:3	148:24 152:7	153:9 160:3
C	carry 135:11 , 11	191:4 203:24	160:3 161:23	177:11 196:19
:1,1 355:1 cartoon 345 : 7 , 8	204:6 , 17	165:8 176:20	197:4 200:15
l'	’	345:10 , 12	207:8 210:25	176:22 189:2	206:21 220:9
let 129-8,17 case 1:4 4:19 ,24 213:8 217:8	191:7 223:12	293:10 302:22
lets 128:20	5:1 ,2, 16 ,21	223:13 225:1	235:7 ,21	307:3
i;5 ,8 130:5	7:8,19,20	226:5,11	280:20 318:24	certainty 11:9
i-16 153-24	9:21,22,23	228:25 232:20 319:2 320:6	136:24 229:15
4-12 14 **3	13:9,10 20:10	236:9,13	321:13 322:4	235:20,20
2’,3 49/2	20:20 24:17	238:5, 8	322:5,5, 7 , 8	304:25 311:13
4	A 6 6 • 18	24:22 25:25	245:12 246:17 322:12 323:14	CERTIFICATE 3 : 6
25 104:23	26:7,13 27:2	249:7,13	323:14,16,18	193:6
’•4 119-4	30:13,15	250:21 251:23 323:20 324:8	certification
,!2 154-19	31:16 32:5	255:21 270:14 325:15,16	188:15 355:15
.•18 287-3	33:23 34:1 , 12	274:25 289:19 356:2 358:6	certify 188 : 5,9
;!2 321-21	34:21 35:1,23	292:2 296:19	catch 268:24	188:12 355:5
::14,17"	37:13 39:24	297:1 298:18	269:1	355:9 , 12
i:4 327:12	40:4,15 41:8	299:7,7	categorically	certifying
:!11 ’	43:13,22 44:2	306:25 312:17 253:18	188:16 355:16
ad 12-13	44:15 47:5,13	313:1,16	categories 67:13	certitude 231:9
'l0 39-25	47:21 50:18	315:8 319:23	123:4, 6 128:1	cessation 174:11
17	87-11	50:19,22 55:1	320:4,5 199:7 244:6	174:25 199:20 ;. 3 203-18	55:6,10,11,12	321:22,22,25	category 9 9 :18 341:14
1:20 232:14	59:15 60:11	323:17,22	103:4 199:7	cetera260:7
; • 18 299-25	60:18 61:17	326:6,11	causative 187 : 3	Chairman 243 : 23
Lng 3 6-22*	61:23 62:18	328:13 331:6	196:2	challenge 287:12
13	’	63:2 64:16	339:22,22	cause 4:3 194:3 287:15,22
L 345*5, 14	66:6 72:16	351:19 352:1	250:17 251:13	challenges
sr 171:25	73:9 , 17 ,21 ,21	352:2 356:3	251:15 305:5	182:24
■*21 187-3	73:25 74:1 , 1	cases 1:7 5:6	caused 249:9	chance 165:20
:19 230:6	76:18 77:1,16	6:5,7,8,13,19 294:8 305:5	300:9
i:9,12,15	77:20,21,23	6:25 7:14,16	causes 17 8:25	change 17:16
i*16,20	77:25 78:5,21	8:17,18,25	211:7 248:13	33:4,9 76:23
•2,2,3,7	79:6,12,14,16	9:5,6 35:13	249:23 250:3	76:24 195:19
• 13,18A	80:4, 6 , 9 , 13	35:14 36:4,5	250:14,24	340:23 346:24
>!2 248-13	80:15,19,24	36:7,10 41:12 251:10,20	changedl3:20
;-14 250-15	81:15,15,23	41:14,17,18	264:3 265:6	66:3 70:25
•5,10,13	82:1 90:7	42:2,7,16,24	304:23 352:14 71:6,9,20
•15,20	92:10 99:17	43:20 44:2, 10	caveat 63:10	259:15 317:22
!:11A 264:3	100:22 101:2	44:10 47:5, 18	cc 358:24	318:23 352:22
1:6 267:5,8	101:10 104:8	47:21 48:17	Center 17 2:7	changes 13:23
i-25 304-16	104:10 105:5	49:14,25	195:3 225:1	14:8 189:5,22
.•19,23 ’	105:12,13,22	50:10 51:22	central65:18	218:23 356:5
;!6 352-15	106:1,14,18	52:22,23 53:4 74:4 84:13	356:22 358:9
:ity 5 4 •" 8	106:25 107:12	53:23 54:4, 7	87:18 88:1	channels 215:21
Lon 341-25	107:19 108:1	54:23 55:14	129:14	characteriza. . .
>•15 ’	108:8,18	55:18 56:6,22	Century88:10	68:11 85:11
ared 7 9*5	109:1 , 7 , 10 , 12	57:1 , 17 , 19 ,24 89:15 197:10	134:14
00-9 ’	109:14 114:23	58:2 59:18	217:5 218:3	characterize
83-24 112-3	115:1,8,16	60:19,21,22	275:16	40:25 41:4
::4* 116:11*	116:9 , 18	61:17 ,22	CEOs 307:9 , 14	321:11 330:6
;; 13	117:8 , 17 ,20	63:25 64:3,23	certain 11:15	characterized
7*5-25 257-7	118:7 ,25	71:18 ,21 ,24	31:24 32:17	86:19 210:23
: i*9	’	120:3 121:1	72:2, 6 , 13, 17	34:17 80:3	characterizes
a*r 2 0 • 8	127:1 131:4	72:22 73:3,3	126:10 138:3	152:17
Eul 237-8	132:14 139:1	73:8 , 9 , 12, 14	144:16 154:23	charge 74 :19,25
fully 46-10	140:6 , 7 , 12, 16	73:18 ,23 74:5 161:4 231:3	75:4 76:6 , 11
■•19 165*-11	140:19 ,23	78:6 , 14 80:10 234:23 257:5	78:4,5,6
11 15 311-17	143:15 144:1	81:6 , 12 94:10 259:13 271:25	charged78:20
18	’	144:7 , 11 , 16	102:9 105:21 316:9 321:12	charges 75:3,8 Lbean 16:15	145:19 148:22	106:5,20 321:17 77:15, 19
20,23	20:3	148:22 159:11	107:3,9,9	certainly 20:4	charging 76 : 25
a 342:16	214:10 , 16 ,23	78:1 ,2	301:11 , 15	249:7 256:17
: 335:23	214:25 215:5	circumstances	clinic 174:25	257:16 258:15
c 11:4 137:7 215:17 216:25 78:2 90:23	clinics 231:21	260:1 273:16
.:5,6	224:11 225:7	212:19	clipsl04:24	284:6 303:15
):19 299:10 226:18 227:7	City 2:17 15:10	125:22 127:22 303:18 314:20
1:6	228:25 232:10 66:21,22	127:22 289:2	318:21,22
cing156:2	233:4,6	74:10 192:17	close317:4	340:25 341:6
1:7	241:12,22	Civil 1:2 87:12	closetl30:12	341:7 343:10
Lsts 311:2	242:1 244:9	191:2	Coca-Cola 341:19 344:16 345:11
ago 14 9:3	244:14,22	claiml78:15	code 202:3	comes 44:8 70:19
1343:4	247:4 248:12	179:24,24,25	Cohen25:19	70:22 117:5
::9 , 11	248:15,21	180:9 181:9	50:18 , 19	128:2 185:25
Iren 255:8	249:10 ,23	209:8 290:18	73:17 77:19	217:15 230:5
):17 ,23	250:3, 14,24	309:8	77:21 82:5	243:20
i:18 347:4	251:13 253:10	claimed 314 : 24	144:7,11	comfortable 34:5
Iren's 343:2 256:6,14	claims 178:7 , 11	210:25 328:13 181:19 206:7
:e 295:12	258:10 , 14	178:18 , 19	Colgate 88:3	222:20 259:23
::11	260:16 , 19	263:15	colleague 276:1 288:10 330:20
:es334:8,9	261:5,11,18	clarification	colleagues	343:3
se 92:14	261:19 ,21	51:12 67:24	154:11 , 13	comicl77:5
i:8 335:5	262:12,14,15	127:10 195:8	155:10,18	344:21,25
5155:6	262:23 263:17	clarifications	156:9,10	347:13,16,19
stina 115:24 264:3 265:14	68:4	163:9 164:3	coming28:23
stine 2:9	294:8 295:12	clarified 95:20	319:17	149:2 159:11
!5 66:10	295:13 300:1	95:23 96:24	collected 153:20 210:24 229:17
1:9 223:9	300:14 301:6	97:4 105:25	154:5,15,25	229:18,18,18
i:16 337:23 301:9,14	127:13,18	194:11 276:6	233:15 251:8
::2	303:3, 9 , 12	163:21 195:17	collecting 154:9 253:1 299:15
lology 69:13 304:15,23	331:1	163:23	317:5 322:24
14	215:11	305:4,5,16,21	clarify40:22	collection	323:23 343:3
i:5	306:19 307:17 42:25 43:5	104:12 130:20	commenced 18 8:10
:h 147:12	308:5, 16	48:6 76:9	130:25 155:17 355:10
.: 18 177:4	310:20 311:17 101:22 106:18 155:19 156:20	comment 112 : 2 4
•: 19 344:20 313:7 , 9	136:8 194:16	158:23 166:21 127:14 210:18
c8 9:17	314:11 330:18 207:25 247:10 168:7 185:7	308:19,23
.:14, 14	331:21 332:4	278:8 314:1	274:9 , 18	336:7
rette 65:7	332:13 334:10 333:12 344:22	collections	commentary 182:1
14	92:18	334:16,21	clarifying	156:3 157:4	comments 182:13
::24 179:6	341:14,24	327:25	276:8	commerce 203:3
1:17 , 2 4	344:19 345:5	clarity 151:11	college 74 : 9 ,11	commission
i:2 211:20	345:11 349:18	class6:22 7:3	87:13,23	188:23,24
.: 22 248:11 349:21 352:14 7:11 8:13, 16	colonial 86:2	202:16 337:16
.:9,14,20	cigarette-ma. . . 8:18 , 19 ,22	87:8 350:1 , 6	355:23,24
. :21 261:20 90:18 215:13	9:1,10,13,15	colonization	commissioned
1:14,15	cigars 351:9 , 10	118:2,2,3, 6	350:25	330:6 ,7
=: 6,11	cigar-making	223:23 226:5	Columbus 132:25 333:23 338:1
):5, 9	19:16 90:22	226:11 250:24 140:23 143:18 338:4, 12,20
i:23 267:4	circle 28:16	258:16	Columbus's 131:9	commissioning
): 1 289:6	29:6 31:3	classes 19:4,6	column 27:7 29:5 330:13
1:12 291:20 32:11	classroom 118 :16 267:1 293:21	committee 7 4 :16
.:24 293:1	circled 31:24	118:18 235:13 293:25 335:19 194:25 195:1
1:4,23	32:17 33:17	class-action 5:6 336:21	195:2 202:10
:: 1,5	circles 29:17	6:24	columns 335:21	203:3 225:3
>: 14 299:25	circling 26:19	clause 302:24	come 5:9 ,22	233:19 308:8
::5 306:5	28:5, 7 , 10	clear 8 : 4 12:15 27:23 28:16	committees 74 :13
1:12 309:11 29:20	23:1 68:2	30:11,13 34:3 74:14
:: 22 333:6	CIRCUIT 1:1,1	124:21 148:15 45:15 74:2	common 9 3 :14 ,19
1:21,23	191:1,1	148:16 149:12 113:10 117:1	94:3 96:3,7
•:11 342:1	circulate 218:2	149:12 150:8	117:22,22	96:15, 19 97:9
.:12	circulated	228:20 247:19 126:15 135:12 97:13,20 98:2
rettes90:14 346:15,16	278:11 279:7	142:10 166:15 116:8 139:4
22	93:20	circulation	291:23 316:22 171:12 178:4	139:11 154:12
8	97:14	269:5,6,13	324:20 334:25 185:3,23	205:7,10,11
:: 4 180:9	271:8 272:11	337:7	197:13 199:8	205:15, 18
1:3,20	284:17 316:7	clearly 211:14	205:3 222:10	206:1 ,3,4, 19
':2,13	348:11	client 358:9	223:8 232:25	206:22,23
’:11 213:13	circumstance	climbing 301: 4	242:3 245:16	208:17,20
::2, 11 ,24	161:19 162:1	288:6	140:1 152:9	consulting 20:20
i:15 228:14 163:2 173:4	compound 15 7 :15 325:20 328:17 20:22 21:22
1:15 259:11 179:17 194:20	comprehensive	332:12	22:8 48:19
': 10	194:22,23	109:20 158:23	conference 9 6:18 75:5
anicate 5:19 195:14,23,25	199:3	conferences 15: 6	consumer 95:1,4
1:5,6	197:4,20	comprise 128:9	15:8,18 95:19 95:9,13
anicated	198:2,5,7,10	164:5	95:24	316:16
.3 66:22	198:14 213:22	conceal 226 :16	confirm 159 : 23	consumers 30 9 :14
6 149:5, 8	215:12 287:7	226:25	conflict 253:2	332:20
i:l 166:9	287:14 289:6	concealed 224:3	conformity	consumption
1:16	289:12 291:21 225:3,16	158:10	214:23 311:4
anicating	291:24 293:21	concealing	confusing 302:16	contact 52:9
':23	295:22 297:11 225:19	confusion 12:15	66:9 , 17 , 19
anication	310:3 312:18	concealment	congress 20:6	contacted 52:1
I,13	221:5	316:24 328:1	224:10	107:6 307:10	90:3,15,25
.:6 , 6	328:5, 8 330:7	concern 246:10	307:16 ,21	91:20 101:12
1:13,19	330:16,22	301:24 302:24 313:17	326:25
anications	331:2,6,19	concerning 35 :12	congressional	contain 204 : 5 ,16
:,13 52:10	332:12,21	35:13,23	202:6,9	contained 12:24
7,10	127:7 338:23 339:7	224:5 225:6	307:16 308:8	13:3,6 44:8
i:22 320:22 348:18	227:6,16	314:8	45:22 48:9
anityl9:16	company's 332 : 20	concerns 259:1	connect 106:2	49:15 78:22
15	177:4	company-sanc .. .	conclude 31: 2	connected 162 : 25 79:6 93:7
•: 17 344:20 337:12	164:25 242:14 163:19 188:13 100:4 101:1
anies 61:10	compare 4 4:5,6	281:16,25	355:13	104:22 127:23
6	, 15, 17	126:9 311:14	358:14	connection 19:14 128:6,18
:: 19 174:10 345:25 346:12	concluded 249 : 9	43:25 61:13	130:15 131:14
i:24 181:5	compared 124:15	354:8	104:9 105:4	131:22 132:8
!: 5 194:19	209:9 309:24	concludes 237:7	105:11,22,25	133:5,12
':3 293:1,4	comparing 159:7	conclusion	106:1,14,17	136:9 140:10
1:23 294:2	159:8	126:15 226:3	106:24 108:15 153:25 163:12
::5 296:20	comparison	227:21 242:3	108:17 ,25	164:19 169:2
i:24 297:1	283:13	256:17 257:16 109:3,6,9,12	169:10,10
1:14,17,18	compels 13:2	258:15 260:2	203:24 205:8	175:8 190:7
1:21 306:16	compilation	262:3 266:6	217:21 222:3	204:9 211:16
':9 , 15	136:21	281:10 , 11	244:25 262:1	238:12 263:12
1:7 310:10	compilations	292:18 302:1	266:5 270:24	274:8 275:12
i:23,25	125:5 126:12	303:19 310:13 318:15	276:20 278:17
.:3,21	128:3 137:1	311:18 343:3	connections	278:24 283:16
::7 313:6	compilel69:9	343:11	86:20 146:9	285:21 ,22
1:13,24	170:1	conclusions 34:9	consider 18 : 3, 10 291:16 298:3
:: 2,25	compiled 137:23	35:6,12,23	84:15 102:22	357:7
):22 328:1	153:20 154:5	152:10,15	103:13,16,25	contains 21:20
1:17,25	167:3 194:11	197:16 203:14 201:6,11	126:12 341:25
•: 2,14,16	276:6 318:13	216:12 245:16 202:5, 11 , 19	contemporary
':17,19,23	compiling 163:23 262:10 292:10 254:12 255:8	68:21
i:8,10,16	complaining	292:17 340:24 255:17 297:25	content 145:12
i:21 341:12 330:25	341:6	324:11 335:17	contention 139:8
1:15,16,21	complaint 249 :13	conclusive 267:8 338:1 339:21	context 146 :15
1:23 352:13 249:16,21	conclusively	considerable	146:21,24
any 4 8:21	250:7 , 12	253:15	103:9 166:19	151:23 201:20
17,18	complete 26:25	conducive 259:12 279:16	215:2 237:18
15.18.24	54:16,18	conduct 36:9	consideration	244:5 306:21 25 54:9 116:22,24 37:5 113:24 14:25 172:5 307:5 309:23
7.16.24	117:2,5 275:10,23 267:15 308:8 317:2 350:14
4,7	57:3 304:25 342:12 319:14	337:10	contextual
5,	9 59:23	completed 188:10	conducted 90 : 5	considered 26 : 20 146:15, 17
II,13,14	355:10 358:14 91:1,21 114:2 83:15 104:15	contextualize
16	,20 62:2	completely 53:11 197:10 , 15	302:11 314:12 107:19 152:1
9,11,17,19	156:18 251:4 231:16 267:6 322:13 336:12 201:16
2	64:6	352:23	325:19 327:14 336:13,22,24	continue 30:18
15	70:24	complex 261:14	327:16 332:1	considers 337:25 48:25 150:22
19	81:20	comply 23:10	332:2 341:3,3	consisted 7 :1	Continued 193 : 3
13	90:4,22	component 19:4,5 341:5	constraint	194:8
1	102:7,14 19:5 88:23,25	conducting 37:2 340:21	contradiction
!: 23 103:11 220:6 246:24	58:14 59:7	consultant 74 : 9	182:3
1:20 110:9	284:23 288:4	70:7 78:13	74:11 102:13	contradictions
:: 21	97:18 98:5, 10	counter 263:12	crazy 220:17	98:23 99:4,8
radictory	100:14 101:14	counterpoint	create 20:21	99:9,9,16,22
::8	101:16 ,24	181:15 351:18 21:2, 10 , 12	99:24 100:2
rol 172:8	103:12 112:6	country 145:22	22:2,5 338:15 100:13,19,25
1:16 355:16 114:16 122:19 241:24 242:1	created22:8	101:13,15,24
roversy	127:5,25	244:14 246:2	33:19 142:5	102:4,8
1:20 210:6	128:14,24	248:4 251:12	286:21,22	338:15 350:16
.:4,15	130:22 131:4	257:20 258:21	creates 296 :5, 9	CVsl7:22 18:6
::2,3,7	131:12 141:2	260:5,17	credentials	21:14,15
srsation	150:19 154:25 264:2,5 265:6 84:19	100:12 101:8
.9 41:10	155:13 156:12 265:9,12	credibility	104:5
13	68:3	165:16 166:2	268:3, 7	200:4 253:23	C-R-U-Z 115:21
14	154:14	175:5 179:4	counts 81:23	credible 220:3	_
i:23 222:3	179:10,19	94:21	254:3,7,12	_D_
srsations	188:7 189:21	County 1:1 188:2 255:9,17,25	Dl*4 191*4
!2 43:19	190:7 196:5	190:3 191:1	credit 254:3	daily 260*21
22	52:13 197:4 198:16 231:14 234:8	critical 201:15 261*3 282*14 .: 2 160:20 213:15 217:13 235:1 236:1	critically	Dana 115:23*
1:8 320:11	220:6 221:2	355:2 357:3	303:14 304:1	dangerous 300:11
sy340:19	227:25 229:1	couple95:22	criticized	300*13,15
Lnced 143:25 241:18 245:5	138:10 337:15 209:25 210:13 301*9 , 12, 15
):25 156:20 249:5,24	340:2 349:3	cropl9:2	303:3^12^22
ss 25:7,9,15 252:3 256:11	course 5:8 40:16	crops 351:24	304*3,13
23	35:18	265:21 270:10 41:2 43:21	cross 300:8	data 24 '2,16,21
24	42:6	274:13,13	44:15,22 51:8	crosses 301:21	200:9*,20 '
17	49:13	277:2 278:5	81:19 83:18	Cross-Examin... 201*14 258*19
25	60:1,4	284:8 285:25	87:15,17,20	3:4 193:4	301*24 *
): 23 278:19 286:7 , 8	87:21 88:3,25	Cruz 115:21,22	date 7**12 28*15
::10	296:16 298:2	89:2, 7 , 19	Cuba 19:1 , 11 , 12 33*2*50*1 *
10:14 12:11 300:2 302:5	92:13 94:17	87:4 88:24	78*20 79*6
16	13:15	304:19 312:3	103:5 113:18	90:8 351:23	80*19 124*14
18	14:2,5 320:25 322:10 138:7,9	Cubanl5:13	165*18 166*8 5 23:16 325:24 327:7 148:21 151:1 86:23 351:17 189*25 209*3
11,12	25:8 327:8 341:10 151:6 153:17 351:18 216*23 231*18 25 29:9 ,22 351:7 355:7 160:15 178:19	Cuba-U.S 200:6 233*7 242*5
17	38:1,2	356:21 357:7	197:10 202:2	culture90:9	264:20 270:2
4	93:10	CORRECTION 189 : 6 203:22 218:13	cumulative 282 : 5 308:20 317:20 •: 25 278:25 356:6 232:11 250:22	cure217:13	319^3,24 * i:21 333:11	corrections 272:11 287:23 218:18 320:6,7 342:3 1:15 345:10 190:9 357:9 325:13	current 13:15 353:4 356:25 1:23,25	correctly 44:14	courses 18 :22,23 21:17 23:16 358*1
:: 3,5, 6	59:18 64:23	18:24 19:1 , 8	81:2 88:7	dated*190:12
1:8,10	163:17 207:16 19:19 87:7,10	currently 14:20	277*7 357*12
sr 293:17	230:25 269:16 87:14 88:11	72:22 73:6	dates*41 * 21 ,*24
):13	274:7 322:16	88:13, 14, 17	87:15 165:1	41:25 lOl^lO
oration	337:9	88:20 89:6	298:10	162:12 270:1
1:13 216:3	correlated 72:13 90:7	Curricular	352:20
>:13	correlation 72:8	court 1:1 4:1	171:17	daunting 68 :17
set 6:14 9:2 139:2	7:21 8:9	curriculum 13:16 68*22
.6 10:2	coughing 217:22	27:21 38:7	13:20 23:17	DAVID 2:15
2	26:1 , 17	Council 194:24	81:23 82:1	23:17 216:20	192:1*5
8	29:25	counsel 12:17	138:2,2	cut 69:12 176:7	day 2:9 11:1,1
15,25	20:24 22:17	184:11 191:1	342:13	20*13 24**16
18	39:14 23:8 26:24 194:1 223:2	cutoff242:4	40*18 45*6 23 43:7,15 29:10 35:21 223:16 321:5	cut-off 319:3,24 48*20 52*2,7 16 52:21 38:5 42:9 325:12 353:17 320:7 52*11,16* '
5	57:5	49:22 50:20	353:20,23,25	CV14:3,6,15	56-23'57-18
20	61:1 60:12,25 61:3 354:2 358:21 17:15,19 60^3 61*15,16
4	66:7	129:20 188:12	Court's223:6	20:14,15,17	61*25 62*1^6
18	71:12 188:13 194:16	cover 153:8	20:19 ,22,24	62*10 63*3^8
14	73:20 334:2 338:10 285:19 21:6 , 9 , 10 , 17 63':9 64:6 , 19
22	75:22 355:12,13	coverage 27 9:25 21:19 22:8,11 65:14 66:8,10
2	0 82:17	counsel' s 46 :14	covered 152 : 25 22:13 23:7 66*12,14,18
13	84:6,14 61:5 233:24 234:3 71:11 74:4 66-19'74-21
19	91:17	count 182:25	240:1	93:5 95:17 , 18 75*21 76*18
5	96:1 , 17 282:12	Coxl45:5 147:3	96:2,23 98:2	7 9! 15 8^20
3,7,11,15	counted 244:17	craft 151:14 98:6,11,14,21 89:23 90:3,16
10	100:13 167:8 198:12 10:14 11:16	desire 339:21	different 21:14 i:20 101:12 223:2,16 12:1,18 13:3	desire'sl8:4 21:15,15 22:3 .: 18 111:15 226:8 323:4 13:7 24:2, 6	Desi's 295:12 32:11 37:11
.: 18 113:24 326:10	25:19 32:3	deskl30:ll	43:21,22,22
:: 4 , 8,9	decisions 36:18	33:11 50:1 ,2	despite 265 : 8 , 11 54:4 75:3,3,5
i:2 118:1	36:19,21	50:7,14 51:4	detaill32:21	75:8 76:14
•: 14,24	65:23 103:6	51:6 55:24	286:3	98:14 99:4
': 8 130:23	103:23 160:4	56:1 , 8 57:20	detailed 125:25	109:25 125:13
::15,23	167:11 228:21 59:8 60:6	135:3 169:17	125:15, 16
1:6 149:21	325:12 327:16 62:7 75:5	246:6	132:17 133:9
.: 16 ,25	340:20	81:23 82:5	details5:12	133:9,10,11
::18 163:14	declare 189:20	106:14 112:4	35:5	139:24 144:6
1:15 164:4	190:5 356:20	114:22 115:2	determination	144:10 148:23
1:14,17,25	357:5	116:1,6,10	100:25 113:16 149:4 178:1
1:3 188:18	deem25:20	117:21 127:11 140:1 142:24	178:16 183:17
i:12 192:9	deemed33:19	143:23 148:5	168:23,24	203:17 206:17
::10 234:2	274:10	148:9 , 10	234:5, 19 ,22	207:1 208:8
1:2,4	defendants 47:23 149:22 161:23 235:17 240:12 208:14 209:22 i:14 301:6 225:1 313:16	188:6,7,9,10	288:2 316:15	219:23 224:14
.: 9,14	defined 116:25	189:2,21	316:16 321:6	224:18 226:13
1:3,12	defines 21:16	190:6 191:15	321:7	233:16 247:21
1: 17 320:11	defining 49 : 3 , 6	194:1 210:25	determinations	252:8,17
1:9,15	definition 85:4	220:17 232:19 234:10 287:24 253:23,24
):3 326:23	85:7 , 13	233:3 300:5	326:6	255:5 256:14
i: 25 327:11 285:18	328:13 354:8	determine 57:14 257:1 ,20
':19 331:1	definitions	355:6 , 7 , 9 , 10	77:23 138:3	258:20 259:6
.: 20 334:10 246:6 327:9	356:2,21	156:22 168:2	259:18 284:25
::16,21	degree 30:18	357:6 358:14	168:19 208:5	300:1 ,23
):18 357:12 34:9 84:5,20	depositions 8 :15 219:14 222:6	316:5 320:5
1:3	174:6 206:6	58:1,7,15,16	235:22 239:1	321:22,23
135:16	229:14 253:1	58:18,20 59:5 239:10 244:8	327:9 331:7
::4 286:15	degrees 253:23	86:15 106:11	282:20 ,21	335:9 339:6 ,8
::14	deleted 295:6	110:7 , 11 , 16	338:20	339:23 351:24
8:23 355:23	delivered 282:2	110:19 ,23	determined 141:4 351:25
2:5	deluge 280:6 , 6 , 7 111:8 , 19 ,22	323:25	differentiate
19:20 ,20	280:18	111:24 112:1	determines 235:5 78:3
i:14 177:4	demands 3 51: 2 5	112:16 113:1	determining	difficult 44 :19
':14 229:25	demonstrating	113:8 114:11	283:15 339:10 65:7 78:11
::7 , 16 ,21	182:18	114:15,25	detriment 226 :19 227:18 230:4
Lng 89:14	deniedl84:25	115:3,7,12	developed 223:11 292:11 304:24
.: 14	Denise 115:20	116:9 229:4	323:23	306:5
3 86 : 20	department	233:9 239:4,5	development	difficulty 68:8
•:24 322:20 214:24 235:5	273:12,13	350:17,18	124:19 205:12
; 68:19	depending 17:22	depositories	developments	232:16 306:2
16 229:20	134:25 138:24 36:20 68:23	279:16 351:16	Digest 174:13,15
358:7	182:11	154:10	develops 45:7	341:15 342:24
i	23 0:22	depends 31:15	depository	deviated 67: 7	Dimaggio 262 : 22
:e 318:4	33:14 99:1 , 14 156:16 167:10	devoted 81:11	diplomatic 86:21
ies 173:25	100:7 108:11	derive 74: 6	devotes 84:20	direct 3:3 4:8
i: 13 311:7	117:4 136:6	derived8:25	diagnosed 230:20 106:1 108:15
lent 22 8:24	140:3,3	71:10 229:3	231:1	144:14,22
nber 293:23	148:25 152:4	265:16	dialogue 345:9	188:16 193:3
rtification 178:18 180:4	derives 222:18	Diario 132:5	194:8 237:14
!0	252:25 254:15	describe 249:8	dictate 40:24	355:16
ie 117:6	254:15,25	described 85 :19	dictated 235 :10	directed 162 : 22
.: 11 142:25 255:4,21	195:10 209:22	dictation 40 :25	direction 65:23
1:7 340:22	282:17 288:17 213:12 246:14	die 304 : 6 , 6 , 10	111:16 141:9
led 30:11	depicts 127:1	describing	died 23 0 : 24 , 25	142:3,4,5,5,8
12,13	deponent 3:8	306:23	304:19 349:23 167:14 185:5
.: 14 , 16	189:25 190:1	description	Diehl 236 :19 , 20	185:8 188:16
ies 6 9:7	193:8 356:25	126:16 182:17 236:25 238:12 264:25 329:15
11	357:1 358:8	descriptive 31:4	difference	329:23 332:18 iing 142:15	deposed 33:5,20	deserve 308:5 123:12, 17 355:16
sion 7:22	55:1	Desi 295:11 , 11	124:10 144:19	directive 321:3
.0 21:17	deposition 1:15	design 92:19	177:17 206:4	321:4
6,8	107:25 4:1,19 8:15	designating 50 : 2 252:20 292:5	directives 6 6 : 25
): 8 160:1	8:20 ,25 10:5	designed 17 0 :18	334:7 , 16 ,21	101:5 164:8
:tly 140:19	250:25 352:15	122:4, 10 , 19	332:17 333:4	196:14, 18 ,21
:tor 220:7	dismissed 267:11	123:8 124:19	333:5 336:9	196:23 197:1
jree 114:18	disordered 278:7	133:7 134:8	341:22 342:12 197:2,3 201:2
:: 8 220:21	disregard 252:22	141:2 147:19	345:4	205:4 206:8
::7 269:23	253:11 , 14, 16	152:21 176:6	documentation	238:24 243:4
.:3 303:1	disregarded	181:16 184:12	340:23 353:10 245:14 274:8
1:1	267:11	185:21 194:10	documents 11:15 275:19 277:4
jreement	disseminate	240:24 244:7	25:25 26:25	278:14,17
::19	198:3	249:21 266:17	27:3 28:25	280:23 286:1
ard 185:6	disseminated	285:23 291:2	29:23 30:12	296:16 ,21
':2,3	44:17 103:18	293:16 311:12	30:12 31:17	297:2,3,3,8
arded 32:13	170:25 173:25	314:6 317:7 , 9	31:24 32:4, 17 297:11 , 15
Lpline	174:2 180:1	318:17 331:1	32:21,24 33:8 309:22 311:20
i:22	180:18 185:14	333:4 335:1	34:17,18	312:2,2,5,6
Lose 19 8:10	186:24 197:24	339:8 341:22	35:10 ,25	318:10 319:6
::5 225:6	198:6 215:20	344:25 346:18	38:15, 18 39:6 321:2 324:9
Losed 9:21	216:7 217:3	348:14 352:13	39:17 45:18	325:5,25
23 73:2	219:1 , 19	doctors 259:16	46:4, 16 ,20	327:18 340:13
5	95:18 227:6,16,22	260:6 267:7	47:2,12,19,20	doing44:13
11,21	239:11 260:19	doctor's21:3	48:3,9,10 57:23 60:22
22	100:16 274:11 275:11	document 10 :2 0	49:12, 15, 19	65:2 72:9 , 12 i:20 109:17 279:20,21	11:22 12:1,6	59:19 60:16 75:17 90:19 i:25 123:18 305:5 306:17	12:8 14:1,11	60:19 61:3 127:2 142:17 1:19 144:7 308:3,15,21	21:12 22:2,2	78:23 81:1 152:5 154:9
::11 236:13 309:2 314:7	22:5 27:15, 19	104:4,22	154:21 185:6
i:4 292:16	316:2,12	28:2 29:6	106:13,23	246:23 249:17
Losure 13:19 343:7 345:17	30:4,24 40:2	110:6 ,23	262:1 ,2,5
6	37:23	disseminating	40:11,17	111:13 112:22 263:3 275:8 25 40:1,12 294:3	43:18,19	112:25 113:1	275:25 296:18
13	44:8	dissemination	44:21 46:13	113:6,7,8,12 315:24 328:25
15,23,24	68:7,12 91:2	47:7 98:16	113:23,25 329:2 330:10
9	100:4,21 91:22 218:15	102:1,3 110:1	114:3,14	352:21
i:ll,14	219:14,20	114:4 121:10	115:18 120:19	dollars 263:14
Losures	228:23 232:18	122:6,10	120:24 122:24 269:4
23	99:23 233:2 239:6	126:10 132:24	123:4,22,23	domainl39:10 .:13 279:25 287:25	133:5 134:2, 9	124:3,5, 18 158:14,24 repancy 288:16,25	135:3,3,22,24	125:4,7 198:15 219:17 1:16,19 304:22 317:21	135:24 136:1	126:13 127:21 239:12 263:13 1:10	dissertation	136:6,8,18,25	128:3,4,13,17 304:15,22 riminate 69:9,12,15	137:2,10,13	130:15 131:20	domestic 30 7:15
':12	90:11	138:25 140:5	131:22,23	352:2,3
assed62:18	dissertations	141:4 147:14	132:8 133:8	Dominican 87:4
•:20 121:1	18:8	148:21 150:11	133:12 134:18	Doublel58:7
1:12 149:20	distaste 228:16	151:23 180:21	135:1 , 14	doubt 300:18
.:7 162:13	228:19	201:20 204:13	136:13,22	dozen 309:25
': 13	distinction	204:16 ,24	137:1 ,4, 12, 13	Dr 209:25 210:13
assion 41:4	103:18 175:24	211:10 212:11	137:23 138:13 214:9 243:23
6	151:8	316:17	212:15,20	138:17 ,21 ,25	draft 40:19
1:2 3 237:20	distinctions	213:7 226:7	139:3, 16 ,20	drastically
i:18 249:19 206:11	240:24 242:19	139:22,25	257:20
1:11 272:7	distinguish	242:20,22	140:10 142:15	drawl03:18
:: 18 332:23 316:19	250:10 251:4	142:19 151:19 262:3
jssions	district 234:12	256:19 266:13	152:19 156:6	drawing 292 :18
. :21	diversity 139:20	266:17,18,19	156:14 157:9	292:18
ase145:24	203:17	266:22 268:13	157:12,18	drawn266:7
:: 7 178:5	divide 30:8	269:15 270:12	158:2,21	driving 239:20
1:3,10,21	DIVISION 1:2,4	271:6 , 9 ,23	159:19 162:4	ducesl0:14
1:14,18	191:2,4	278:22 279:2	162:5,16	11:25 21:12
i:3 197:11	DLA2:22 192:22	290:10 293:12	164:3 165:24	24:1,5,8
1:9 211:5,8	doctor 4:10 , 12	293:17 , 19	167:24,25	35:16 37:20
::7 215:17	23:9 ,24 24:14	299:6 , 17	168:20 169:3	50:5 60:6 ,8
1:4 279:17	26:24 32:15	303:15, 19	169:9 ,21	Duke83:ll
:: 8 349:19	34:16 43:2	307:23 308:1	175:8 177:13	duly 4:6 188:5
•:24	53:22 58:3	308:20 313:13	185:1,7,16	355:5
ases 178:25 59:1 80:17	313:14 314:1	186:3 194:15	duplicate 278:19
1:9 ,2 3 ,2 5	83:8 103:21	315:14, 15, 16	195:24 196:1	278:21
1:4,5, 15,22 120:4 121:10	317:8 329:11	196:6 , 8 , 10 , 12	dynamics 225:12
36:20	84:3 235:5	89:17 161:24	149:12 150:12	145:12 171:4
3-H-L 236:21	educational	325:15	159:15 228:1	282:25 325:18
:23 192:23	171:18	engagement 54 : 4	essential 151:21	exactitude 56 :11
__effect 209:9	54:5 325:16	152:14 246:24	exactly 23:4
E_ 229:8 ,20	England 17 0:22	essentially 41:6	27:12 122:19
2	188:1 , 1	249:12 261:13	Engle 1:7 5:2, 16 72:18 141:23	171:14 312:7
):1,1,1 '	286:19 296:3	5:20 6:13, 18	148:13,24	Examination 3:3
j113 355:1	296:4 306:22	6:22,25 7:3	333:17	4:8 193:3
; • i 356:1 , 1 332:6	7:11 , 19 ,21 ,25	establish 44:12	194:8
;: i	effective 288:21 8:10 , 13, 16 , 18	established	examine 151:24
Ler 30:8	288:24 294:3	8:19 ,21 9:1 ,5 230:1 247:24	examined 4:6
19	41:1 ,20	effects 93:14 9:6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 13 294:2 319:1	144:9 194:6 4,6 43:14 96:3 97:10 41:16 42:1	establishing	233:25 261:25 l'24,24 211:20 224:6 47:21 61:17 270:24	examplel3:24
11	46:15 224:10 225:6 61:22 73:8 , 9	estate 1:9 4:20	17:24 18:5,20
20	55*23 225:17 ,20 73:11 74:5 191:9	20:6 24:24
2	63:11 226:17 ,25 100:21 101:2	estimate 53:1 , 8	27:3 29:20
13	78:21 237:9,11 189:2 191:7 53:10 54:13	31:16 45:5
8	95:20	317:5	223:2,6,12,15 54:15 56:12	47:4 69:8,12
24	104:4	effort275:8	223:22 226:5	71:5,7,7	72:16 75:4
):7 151:7,9	efforts 215:22	226:8 , 11	72:24 207:16	78:17 86:22
: •3 159*22	216:6 231:13	249:7 250:6	267:23	89:14 90:18
i; 16 175:14 275:10	250:24 322:4	estimated 269:5	91:8 99:14,17
'•12 181:7	eight 45:18 46:1 356:2 358:6	271:7 284:17	99:17 101:8
>:18 203:23 46:2,5,21,24	English 350:24	estimation 67 :1	103:18 105:7
1-21 209:10 54:6 78:4,5, 6	enjoy 295:14	216:5 252:18	107:2, 13
; j 4 217:7	106:3 204:14	enjoyable 2 9 5:14 302:22	117:12 123:13
!:1 224:25	342:21	enormous 72:17	et 260:7	125:21 126:17
i:8 243:25	Eighth2:23	284:12	ethics202:4	129:12 131:8
i:7 252:3	192:23	entail57:12	Europe69:18	131:10 132:22
i:4 263:20	eight-year-old	ENTER 189:5	351:4	134:3,17
1118 271:8	342:23 343:13 356:5	Europeans 143:19	137:24 142:11
1:6,22	either 4:15 17:9	entered 48:16	evaluate 92:5,14	148:23,25
!:9A 274:6	28:24 47:20	189:22 356:22 338:20 339:9	149:2, 15
i:7 277:10	48:20 114:17	entire 71:1	evaluating	150:7,9,10
'111 285:9	117:23 166:11 150:25 219:17 139:11	151:24 155:16
'•12, 17 ,24	206:25 231:10 242:9 246:13	evaluation 37:10	156:9 , 19 ,20
>i5,10 '	235:11 251:12 259:25 268:16 37:12 41:7	157:5 159:12
':l'321:14	253:13 256:23 278:2 280:10	evaluations 36:4	165:10 167:9
1:11 325:14 264:2 265:7	317:17 334:3	39:24 40:15	168:9 170:13
':4 331:1,5 271:24 285:8	entitled 308 :1	evening 293 : 5 , 22	170:15,21
^7,19 ' '	286:9 290:11	333:5 351:17	294:4,19	172:7 173:12
■:12 335:4	304:6 336:9	entity 164:11	295:24 296:9	174:1 178:4
1114 340:1	338:3,20,22	312:19	343:20 344:1	181:23 182:16
:8 351:1	346:7	entries 123:6	event 20:21 80:9	187:2 195:12
Lest 216:23	electronic 12:11	entry 83:24	113:22 118:23	198:7 200:7
f 6:5 44:22	12:16 154:21	enumerated 216:4 195:18 250:14	214:21 ,24
.: 9" 132:18	Elmo 299:21	249:23 250:4	events 231:22	215:11 217:22
i:16 233:17	Emphysema 249:2	250:25 314:3	eventually 45 : 8	222:10 , 12
i; 16 287 : 4	employ 310:24	environment	168:8 222:21	230:18 231:15
: 125 293:3	employee 188:12	259:6,6,12	222:23	234:15 252:10
1:23 350:11 355:12	epidemiology	everybody 242:4	255:24 256:3
sd82:12	employment 45:19 92:16	302:18	259:15 271:10
5rl4:3	46:8 47:21	episode 30 7:13	everybody's	275:20 283:20
*21 179:24	48:15, 18 49:4	equal 346:6	302:23	290:9 291:4
. :21	49:7	equally 343:4	everyday 305:25	306:8 318:24
Ly20:21	enable 56:25	equals 219:20	306:4	319:4,25
4:16 185:24 117:7	equation 162:11	everyone's 186:2	320:24 322:23
smic 90:9 ,23	enclosed 358:8	347:11	evidence 34:6	326:22 341:19
3my20:l	encounter 221:13	errata 3 : 7 190:9 181:25 209:8	examples 337:15
Lon 126:21	260:21 284:10 193:7 357:9	322:17 323:4	exception 130:25
1:2,4	encountering	358:8 , 9 , 12	evident 330:8	190:8 357:8
. :15	261:17	error 244:20	evolution 43:16	excerpt 121:11
:>riall6:5	encourage 314 : 7	Esquire 2 : 3 ,15	evolving 9 8 :16	122:13 124:25
1:15	Encyclopedia	192:3,15	exact 16:11 53:4	300:4 334:3
jrials 181:3 254:20,23	358:24	55:17 56:16	exchange 321:11
ation 83:25	engaged 62:11	essence 99:5	110:18 121:3	326:8
ade 9 8:18	expansion 204:22 171:7 179:14	19:2, 18 20:4	facultyl8:6
1:7,9	expansive 167:25 213:11 214:8	24:19 31:5	fail 170:6
aded 17 7:21	expect 111:9	217:8 250:20	34:7 45:25	failed 224:5
;: 10	149:10	263:23 288:11 48:5 53:12	225:5
asively64:3	expectation	302:4, 6 , 8 ,20	64:2 124:12	fair 44:25 51:14
5	259:9	303:25 304:1	148:19 153:1	68:11 72:3
se 35:13,25	expectations	331:3, 6	157:23 166:21 85:11 ,25
1:3 213:22	66:23,25	338:16 ,22	172:19 216:1	98:19 ,20
1:2 318:9	321:15	339:22 343:1	216:21 258:5	100:17 101:13
ated 19 0:10	expected 204:6	343:11 345:8	259:11 316:1	117:4 126:13
': 10	214:9	345:13 347:23 316:3	135:6 139:4
2ise201:15	expended 263 :14	347:25 348:3	external 213 :17	139:13,17
astivel7:19	experience 16:15 348:6	213:20,23	143:8 256:21
': 13 158:23 17:20 ,25	expertise 48:25 215:8	fairness 26:21
i:8 170:3	18:10,11,13	195:13 232:17	extraordinarily 264:14
::9 , 18	18:14, 15, 18	255:14	124:21	faith 221:24,24
>:10	20:22 21:4,7	experts 170:12	extrapolate	222:2
ait 3:13, 14 21:21 ,22 22:9 170:18 326:20 248:8 257:11	fall 304:7 ,9
.5, 16 , 17 , 18 23:8 45:20	Expires 188:24	260:3, 6	fallen 134:1
.9,20,21	47:22 68:20	355:24	282:15	135:22
!5 10:11 , 12 71:11 86:1	explain 78:11	extrapolated	falls 225:10
14,14,19	99:6,18,25 80:7 121:9 264:20 263:1 292:7
25 12:5,20 101:23 102:6	160:4 175:11	extrapolating	false224:4
23 13:19	102:12 103:1	176:8,9,23	241:25	225:5
2,7,22	103:3,4	244:2 317:1	extrapolation	familiar 10:22
21	24:4,5 110:22 117:1 324:20 335:2 260:8 282:24	10:24 11:5,9
24,25	156:6 254:1 335:3	eye268:24 269:1 54:25 67:16
11	30:4 255:14 338:16	explained 64:22	eyes 134:1	110:15 126:22
9	40:3, 7 , 8 347:9 , 10 , 19	explaining 17 8:3 135:22 131:18 133:1
14	45:16	experiences	explanation 5:23	e-mail 111:25 134:23 137:12 16 98:22 107:19 348:1 5:24 45:4	e-mailed 12:18 195:4 202:21
22	99:10	experiments	176:24 185:25	_ 202:22 226:12
. :4,5, 11	267:3, 7	explanations	_F_ 237:4 267:24
1:2,7,8,12	expert 4:24 6:6	64:22 242:16	F 188*1 355*1	294:16,18
1:16 ,20	7:14 9:21 ,25	246:6 , 14	face 351:4 '	299:22 337:17
1:11,11,14	10:4 13:19	exports 90:10	fact 29:24 62:10	familiarity
1:15,21,22	14:6 36:10	expose343:14	107*3 114*25	64:24
:: 11 , 13	40:1 ,3 45:21	349:19	115:7 , 9 , 11	familyl07:17
i:l 132:25	47:25 48:16	exposed 220:14	13 7:15 138:3	229:18 232:12
):5 193:14	51:18 52:23	220:18 221:1	143:20 147:7	306:8 349:23
1:15,16,17	53:5,24 54:8	221:5,12,19	161:9 167:4,6	famous 351:18
1:18,19,20	54:24 55:2,15 221:25 222:1	178*4,22 ' '	farl5:17,18
1:21 204:3	56:6 57:1	222:4,13	187:13 197:14 19:11 20:9
1:12 240:22 58:6,8,17	232:1 234:20	198*3 219*16	23:12 32:22
1:14,15	61:21 62:17	238:25 239:2	220:11 224:5	34:3 35:5
•: 18 293:13 63:24 64:2, 10 239:11 281:17 225:6 227:17	43:17 45:7
1:14 299:19 70:20,23	281:19 282:1	239*1,2,11	48:23 49:8
':24 333:1	71:17 73:2	323:25 343:14 240*11 , 18	65:24 66:25
1:5 341:20	74:5,19,25	343:21,24,25	257*22^25	67:3 69:13
.:22 345:2	81:19 82:12	344:12, 18	260 * 20 '263 * 16 75:9 76:17
):5	92:1 ,4, 16 , 18	345:16 346:3	264*5 265*13	88:25 213:21
Dits123:11	92:21 ,24 93:2 346:6 , 8 348:7 276*19 277*17 221:22 261:25
i:5	94:17 99:23	348:12	298:16 303:1	273:22 277:9
:21:2,13	100:3,21,21	exposure 220:6 , 7 303*16,20	285:3 293:21
i:16	101:2, 18 ,23	220:24 221:3	304 * 23'308 * 11 293:25 319:25
;ed 247:1	102:7 , 12,22	221:13, 14	308*12 309*8	320:7 321:1
:ence 22:3	103:10,19	222:4,7,19	313*5 314*5	322:25 326:6
22	160:9	104:9 105:5	281:24 284:8	314^12 318:7	332:17 335:18
1:6	105:12,22	expressed 114:14 318:16 321:12 335:23
id 45:9	106:17 ,24	114:15 222:11 325:4 327:10	fashion 154:25
1:12 167:14 108:18,25	expressly 306:10 353:10	201:22
!: 15,21	109:10,14	extend69:14	factorl87:3	faster28:22
. :15	120:11,14	extensive 18:5	factories 351 * 14 119:15 324:3
ided 6 7:11	121:1 , 13	18:11 197:10	facts 24 * 2,16 ’ 21	February 50 :17
12	120:16 127:17 138:2 282:11 350:1	190:7 283:16	federall07:4 ::23 138:4 142:17	extensively 34:4 308:2,5 314:3 125:22 126:3 ids 146:12 161:18 ,24	extent 5:7 9:12 316:17 357:7 126:5 172:3
5:13 76:10	249:6 , 8	fits 201:19	235:10 , 12	102:20 ,25
34:5 48:10	findsl96:12	five45:17 50:1	249:23 250:4	103:22 104:1
1:7 177:19	fine 4:15 8:3,7	50:13,15,21	264:15 300:10	104:11 105:6
':21 198:23	14:4 21:23	50:24 51:1,5 follows 4:7	105:23 106:15
i:7 219:2	22:4,22 23:18 145:5 286:15	194:7	106:19 107:1
!:2 0 288:10	25:11 27:20	332:22 349:17 footing 346:6	107:23 108:8
•: 10 313:8	27:20 38:3	349:21	Fordll0:12	108:10,22
. :6 343:2	46:12 53:20	FLEXNER 1:17	114:11,17	109:2,19
Lng 222:14	77:8 , 13	191:17	116:10 156:15	111:3, 10 ,21
Lngs 25 8:25	119:19 153:7	flip 334:24	158:23 159:10	112:2, 10 , 13
1:2	176:22 218:1	flipping 134:9	160:7 , 15	112:17 113:3
76:23,24	316:15 319:20	floorl30:13	161:14,17	113:9,13
swship 9 9:2	331:13 351:17	Florida 1:1,18	162:1,4,17	114:1,6,13
30:12 301:8	finger7:12	1:24 2:4 4:2	163:9 167:10	115:10 116:12
.: 11 302:11	finish 28:22	6:5, 7 ,24 7:21	209:25 210:7	116:23 118:8
1:2	43:3,10 58:24 8:10 19:12	210:13 276:8	119:7,17
Le 258:13	146:1 200:14	34:4, 8 64:10	276:17 , 19	120:2,5, 17
Les 258:8	317:10 , 13	64:17 73:15	277:1 , 7 , 16	123:2, 16 ,20
Le-domin...	344:6	74:4 81:11	326:21,22,24	124:4,7 125:6
1:4	finished 46:13	84:13 86:22	foregoing 188:6	126:14 128:7
andez 214:9	firm 4:17 10:22	87:18 88:1 , 15	188:15 190:6	130:17 131:24
Ler 52:5	10:25 11:1 ,3	88:16 89:3	355:6 , 15	132:10 , 16
1170:12	20:13 21:21	106:7 109:4	357:6	133:6 135:5
1:23 255:4	24:15 51:17	129:14 164:14 foreignl9:25	135:10 136:3
1:23 267:8	52:1 ,4, 6 , 7 , 10 164:18 171:3 foresee 340:10	136:11 , 14
): 1 296:2	52:14 61:15	171:5 188:2,4 forgetl6:ll	137:5,11,17
is 255:5	62:6 ,20 63:2	188:23 190:2	171:4	138:8 , 14,23
;21:24	63:10 64:5,8	191:1,18,24	forgive274:6	139:5,12,18
re 8 0:18	72:10 112:15	192:4 194:2	forgotl52:ll	140:2,17
4,24	82:15	330:21 331:19 213:13 214:10 form5:20 8:1	141:3,13,18
16,17,19	firmly 351:19	215:5 223:2, 6	9:5 16:17	142:1 , 7 , 18 ,21
::5 283:6	firmsll:l 63:5 223:16 230:6	31:18 32:6,25	142:22 143:7
1:11 322:3	63:20 162:18	233:17 235:5	33:13 34:13	143:16 144:3
::24	first 4:6 6:12	236:2 237:2	34:22 35:2	144:8,12,18
red 69:20	6:18 ,21 7:2	243:12 320:6	44:3, 11 45:1	144:25 145:16
res 255:22	7:10 , 19 11:6	322:7 , 8	45:14 48:1 ,22	145:20 146:16
57:6,9,13	11:10 12:11	323:13 325:15	49:5 51:19	147:4 149:23
22	128:20	19:11 41:21	325:16 355:2	54:1,11,14	150:6,17
::3	51:16 52:4	355:4,23	55:3,20 56:10	152:9 157:14
142:16	55:5 64:19,22 357:2	56:14 57:4	158:16 159:21
•:12	66:11,15,17	focusl6:14	58:10 59:10	160:11 163:25
3 128:25	66:19 68:2	32:14 67:25	59:17 61:2	164:20 166:1
1:3 ,4	69:8 87:11 ,20 85:20 ,23,23	63:18 65:16	167:18 , 19
ig129:5,7,8	87:21 90:11	86:24 87:3	67:9 68:1,10	168:1,5,17,22
•: 17 130:5	99:20 103:4	88:13 90:13	68:18 69:5	169:5, 14
i:16 153:24	106:20 121:7	119:15 174:22	70:10 71:23	170:19 172:13
117:13,14	121:12 122:13 274:17 318:23	72:4,20 73:10	172:18 173:8
srs 17 8:22	123:11 124:24 321:5, 8 , 15, 19	73:19 76:21	173:21 174:4
L 237:10	132:6 140:23	322:18 323:2	77:2, 17 78:8	174:20 175:6
icially	146:8 152:6	323:8,11,16	78:24 79:8,13	175:10,22
1:13 355:13	156:24 157:16 323:19,22	79:17 81:21	177:23 178:9
22:13 43:18	157:16 160:14 324:9 325:3,4	82:14 84:2	179:8,20
13	78:13	166:18 176:10 325:25 326:11	85:10,17,22	180:3,11,20
1:24 117:2	188:5 212:10	351:2	86:3,14 87:5	181:17 182:6
': 9 162:10	214:8 227:20	focused86:l	88:2, 9 ,22	182:10 183:4
i:7 181:25	243:21 247:7	131:20	89:4,10,22	183:22 184:5
': 17 230:17	250:2 264:11	focusesl6:19	90:17 91:4, 18	184:14,24
•: 13 274:19	267:1 , 12	323:18	91:24 92:3, 9	186:15,20 ,21
):8 306:2	278:12 294:10	focusing 8 8 : 25	92:23 93:16	187:4,5, 14
!: 2 0 322:20	302:24 303:8	folks 319:18	93:21 ,25 94:4	189:22 196:4
!: 22 323:5	304:14,22	followl85:25	94:8 ,20 95:2	197:12,22
i:3 352:8	305:1 319:23	221:18 320:3	95:15 96:9,16	198:4,11,17
Lng 157:4	323:11,14,23	followed 67:6	96:21 97:21	199:1 , 10 , 16
):15 226:4	332:6 , 8 , 11 , 17	following 81: 7	98:4, 15,24	200:12 201:23
i:3,23	334:5 352:14	156:21 164:8	99:11 100:6	202:7,18
Lngs 43:23	353:5 355:5	202:10 224:1	100:24 101:3	203:4,15
16 223:22	fit 221:9	224:23 226:14	102:4, 10 , 15	204:18 205:13
1:13,16	313:11,18,25	framel60:9	241:25 243:18	234:7,25
':23 208:15 314:14 315:1	321:19	243:22,23,25	239:2,10
•:15 210:2	315:23 316:13	France 200:7	244:9 ,21	241:5, 11
i:15 211:6	316:21 318:2	Frank 266:20 ,22 246:1 247:2	247:22 273:9
1:9,24	318:14 319:11 269:25 270:9	247:11 265:4	273:14 279:11
1:19 214:1	319:22 320:14 271:15,21	269:17,20	280:20 281:7
):9 , 18 ,25	321:20 322:1	284:13,20	298:6 , 16	289:7 304:18
1:9,15	322:14 323:10 285:12,23	341:5	305:15,19
': 1,11,18	323:21 324:10 286:6	gambler 300:8	313:8 ,22
1:8 , 17	325:6 326:3	free 351:21	301:20 302:18	314:22,23
•:6,22	328:14 329:4	freshll8:20	302:23,25	315:4, 6 , 11 ,20
i:20 221:3	330:1 , 12, 19	238:23	gambling 301:22	317:19 337:1
.: 6,21	331:22 332:14	friends 232:13	Gary 115:24	342:19 345:15
1:8,12,25	333:19 336:15	front28:3	gather296:14	346:2 348:7
:: 7 225:8	337:14,21	119:25 122:11	gathered 150:12 Ginger 341:24
):21 226:20 338:25 339:14 174:8 237:20	157:6 164:7	342:16
':2,24	340:18 342:25 265:16	204:14,21	givel4:l,l 43:9
1:11 , 17	343:8 , 9 , 16	Fuentez(ph)	gauge 216:21	52:25 53:4,8
•:2,11	344:2,3,7,15	115:22	Geel35:18	54:13,15,16
.: 5 232:3	345:17,19	full 37:23 105:1	gender 260:11	54:18 56:16
':12,13	346:11,22,25	116:22,24	general 9:9	71:3,4 107:2
1:7,14	347:22 348:2	117:4,22,23	41:18 43:23	110:23 111:1
':3,13,24	349:9 , 16	118:4 268:15	44:7 , 9 , 16	116:22 117:16
1:3,14	350:8,13,20	285:19 333:11 45:19 47:22	117:19 118:6
::16 ,23	352:4, 16 , 17	336:9	53:8 57:23	130:10 132:23
):6,11,14	353:3 356:22	fully 19: 24	65:6 105:15	137:6 143:14
1:3,21	format 40:18	33:22 34:25	111:12 131:19	149:18 170:15
':5 248:5	111:12	35:3 77:23	144:4 156:1	176:14 181:23
i:8,9,16	formation 215:12 118:19 132:11 168:7 , 10	196:11 201:16
.:1,16	formed 33:22	132:14 142:9	178:20 179:2	203:18 226:21
1:15,24	34:25 35:3	153:2 156:20	179:11,16	237:10 243:6
1:12 254:4	104:7 236:8	261:15	185:9 208:25	244:3 255:3
::8 ,24	289:18	full-page 26 7:21 253:6 254:18	255:20 257:23
): 10 256:16	forming 92:13	268:2, 7 , 10 , 11 254:21 259:24	267:22,22
i:24 257:13 140:11,15	268:14,17	260:11 281:15	283:20 302:14
1:3 260:9	143:1 , 13	270:17 284:16 284:9 291:10	312:6 335:12
i:24 261:6	165:25	285:4,11,13	341:13 347:4	340:8 347:23
.: 12,23	forms 132:13	fulsome 26:23	generalia 26:20	348:6 352:10
1:6,13,17	230:16 245:4	function 235:15	generalized 7 :25 given 34: 7 55:22
1:10,19	245:10	fund85:3	26:10 123:4	55:23 56:3
■,:1 265:15	formulate 83 : 20	further 31: 20 , 21	generally 35 :14	64:22 113:18
): 25 268:4	formulating 70:7 34:10 68:4	36:5,23 37:1	133:9 161:15
i:6,21	Fort 15 7:7 158:5 112:7 117:2	41:15 47:22	161:21 190:6
.:16 272:4	158:6 159:9	161:7 184:18	59:3 60:20	195:20 239:19
::2, 12	159:25	188:9 , 12	61:22 83:3	258:3 267:4
): 13 276:23	forthl9:13	234:21 244:25 91:12 93:24	277:9 288:8
•: 18 281:4	188:9 355:9	266:2 267:12	99:24 139:6 , 8	292:21 323:19
1:9 283:8	forward 358:12	325:7 326:14	139:9 143:9	324:7 325:2
1:18 284:1	found30:20	340:5,10,22	145:25 167:22	326:18 341:5
::15 285:14 44:22 110:25	351:15 352:20 222:18 253:4	357:6
;: 13 288:22 120:22 146:9	353:14 355:9	254:6 , 10 , 11	gives58:21
i:6,20	157:6 169:17	355:12	255:6,8	208:19 243:7
1:15 293:6	181:24 206:9	future 339:5	266:19 274:3 giving 118:12,22
:: 9 ,21	208:23 259:15	_ 284:4 322:4	118:25 127:8
>: 15 296:1	foundation 44 : 25 _G__geography 148 : 25	141:8 175:11
!: 7,11	45:2	gained 64:24	George 243:23	222:15
’: 19 29 8:15	Founder 243:23	105:16 108:14	Georgia 2:10	glad 23:10 54:21
.: 17 303:4	fourl4:15,22	287:3, 6 '	192:10 358:4	166:13 344:25
1:13,24	36:3 37:17	gaining'l06:3	getting 57:13	glamorous 262:15
): 10 , 17 ,22	72:17 82:4	Gallup 200 • 10 , 16 139:22 247:9 glancel4:7
:: 13 307:12 218:22 219:5	201*11 2*08*25 354:5	123:11
': 18 308:18 267:13 286:15 209:5,13,16	Gilbert 1:9 4:20 global 13:13 ':4, 12 349:17 ,21 209*24 210*1 5:1 106:9	gol3:12 22:4,7
i:7,12,16	fourth 308:11	210:8 , 11 , 12	147:1 191:9	23:2, 19 30:19
i:19 311:11	four-drawer	211*2,212*5	228:24 230:8	32:17 33:7
.:23 312:9	129:7 ,25	212*14,23*	230:19 232:8	36:19 46:12
1:13,15,22	four-page 204:13 213:1 241:1,1 232:21 233:3	59:1 77:11
8,8	104:12 125:22 126:3	half87:ll,12	217:9,20	261:22 262:10
1:11 114:4	126:5 172:3,4 184:22 241:24	219:3,19,21	262:12 263:9
1:8 132:1	311:16 341:3	241:25 248:4	233:4,5 237:2 263:16,18
1:17,19	governments	257:11 260:20	248:17 251:22 264:6 265:12
1:19,21	172:4	262:2 294:4	252:14 253:10 265:14 267:14
': 15 152:13	Graham 255:l	295:23 296:9	260:20 261:9	267:19 270:8
!: 23,24	Grand2:16	half-inch 134:9	261:22 262:12 282:7 283:25
i:2 161:3	192:16	half-inch-or-so	263:9,16,18	303:10 305:3
::9,9 168:2	graphic 335:23	134:21	264:6 265:12	305:3 314:10
1:16,22	great 19:21 90:8	Hammond 181:9	265:14 303:10 328:3, 18 , 19
):8 208:2	141:7 160:23	hand 11:24 25:15	305:3 328:19	329:3,17
1:10 218:1	170:4 229:14	27:3 28:6	329:17 330:11 330:11 334:6
.:22 240:15 229:25 256:3	29:8 30:4	339:11 340:15 339:11 340:15
:: 24 246:17 272:25 334:7	31:12 40:7	349:8 , 15, 18	341:4 344:19
':20 260:13 334:16 ,21	110:3 122:6	353:8	349:8 , 14, 18
i:8 269:25	greater 284:8	135:13 188:18 hazards 232:16	353:8
:: 5 275:14	312:17	266:13 307:23	248:15,20	Healthful 23 6:25
':4,11,17	grew 14 9:2 283:4 340:1 355:18	328:3 329:3	238:12
1:11 327:2	ground 327:3, 6	handed 26:24	334:7	healthfulness ::4 348:9 330:3 29:22 121:10 head 55:21 73:25 178:7 179:7
67:25	group 258:8	161:10 333:4	77:18 81:25	179:18 ,22
.: 16	grouping 291:6	341:22	82:12, 16 ,23	healthy 178:11
145:22	groups 260:6	handing 345:4	129:20 163:11 236:18
j 7:4 11:24 328:10	handlel05:17	241:20 304:10	hear 211:18
2,4 27:18	growing 146:4	hands 20 7:25	heading 334:6	220:9 261:3
8	31:16	growth 350:11	handwriting 28:7	335:11	heard 5:2 6:24
11	43:6,19	guess 7:5 8:1	handwritten	headings 264:8	36:24 81:7
6	51:14	9:17 23:13	25:21,23 26:2 headlines 134:24 84:24 113:2
12,20	28:10 33:20	26:16,25 27:6 headquarters	147:2 162:1,2
12,13	60:7 36:1 39:10	29:1,15,16,23	230:6	209:3,11,16
2	77:6	40:21 49:11	30:1 ,2,3,5, 14 health 5:8 41:15 210:20 220:15
11	83:8	50:9 55:22	38:21 39:13	65:4 68:8	236:17 280:5
i:20 103:3	59:11,11 69:6 39:17,18	91:3,5,10,11	280:8,9,13,18
•: 17 121:9	72:1 83:14	278:10 279:1	91:17 93:14	291:12 323:5
1:2 127:11	86:7,12	Hans345:7,12	93:24 94:3	332:8,10
:: 1 134:13	104:23 118:15	happenl52:7	95:25 96:3, 12	hearing 260:18
::20 141:11 157:11 162:23 165:19 211:18	96:15,20 97:5	hearings 30 7:20
.:16 152:20 166:9 ,21	231:22 241:21	97:10 , 17 ,20	heartl49:14
!:23 154:20 168:15 171:9	244:8 266:4	97:22,23 98:3 172:1 178:5
i: 19 166:6	194:21 198:5	happened 2 8 :13	98:9 125:23	249:4
':5, 7 , 14	198:13 222:23 107:24 202:22	133:14 136:16	heavily 295 : 23
1:3 170:3	241:2 274:17	203:19 210:4	144:5 145:9	heldl7:8,14
):6 ,23	274:25 275:16 216:2 247:3	145:15 168:11 114:12 315:17
i:10 224:9	333:16	353:6	170:14,15,16	317:17,25
. :9 243:5	guessing 255 :13	happening 35 : 6	171:3,25	help 9 : 5 119:14
:: 18 246:17	guidance 111:1	happy 23 : 2 , 5 , 19	172:9 , 12	160:2 161:12
': 16 260:7	324:17 , 18 ,25	62:5	178:7 , 15, 18	177:8 218:19
1:25 266:13 325:1,2,25	hard78:15 81:10	178:19 179:2	247:21 324:24
i: 13 273:2	326:1 ,4, 18 , 19 124:15 129:23	179:4,5, 10 , 19	helped5:20
i:20 299:17 327:5,10,10	137:21 171:10	179:23,24,25	308:7
•: 17 314:18 327:12	205:2 300:17	180:1 ,4, 8 , 19	helpful59:5
): 8 ,10	guide 324 :16 , 17	302:2 305:1	205:8 , 10	107:16 110:25
;: 18 323:6	guideline 325:12 307:7 336:7	216:8 , 14,24	243:7
1:6,21	guidelines 67:3	345:9	217:4, 9 ,20	helps 80:10
;: 15 338:22	guidesl71:17	Hardy 2:16 148:6	219:3, 19 ,21	Henry 203:11
341:24	gun 235:16	149:21 192:16	224:6 , 10	hereinabove
1	s 342:2,15	_ 272:20	225:6 , 17 ,20	188:9 , 10
alez 52:5	_H__harm 349:21	226:17 ,25	355:9 , 10
4:10,11	H3*12 189*1	harmful 263: 4	227:7 ,20	hereunto 188 :18
5	19:25	193:13 243:23	Harpers 124:14	228:25 231:21 355:18
16 152:13	356*1	Harper's 168:9	232:9 , 15	hesitant 255:3
': 3 170:15	habit*247:6	175:15 217:4	233:4,5 237:2	hesitate20:9
i:16 187:6	335*17,25	hazard94:3	237:11 248:15	high209:23
1:6	336:4,12,23	96:15,20	248:17,20	349:3,5
Le 5:17	337-8 " '	97:20 ,22 98:3	249:1 251:21	higher84:3
sn 47:16	habits 214:20	205:11 216:8	252:14 253:10 182:18 313:23
rnment	habitual 349:19	216:14,24	260:19 261:9	314:24 315:20
Lights 308:9 118:17 145:22 10:13 12:21	297:18 ,22	275:24 289:9
-quality	146:10 151:14 23:22 28:1	310:5 324:15	289:14,17,25
):15	153:16 213:13 29:12 40:9	326:7 350:11	290:1 ,4, 18
sborough 1:1 213:17 ,21	121:6 122:9	350:17 , 18	291:2,24
': 12 191:1	214:10,15	142:13 240:23	imports 90:10	299:3 , 6 , 8 , 12
.: 14 234:8	215:4, 6	266:16 293:15	imprecise 150:14 327:22 336:9
):1 ,25	273:10 279:12 299:20 307:25 331:11	337:19 341:8
158:5,17,19 288:11 289:8	333:2 341:21	impression	341:9
8	322:21 ,23,24	345:3	149:19 178:20	includes 20:19
anic 16:15	history's 160 : 23	identified 35 :14 179:11 208:19 21:10 57:7
18	86:2	hit 300:9	36:5 46:8	276:16 296:14 99:25 122:13
srian 36:14	Hodgenll5:21	168:7 196:16	327:4 352:24	175:17 , 19
21.24	hold 43:2 196:17 240:25	impressions 36:4 196:7 213:17 21 68:20 208:4 213:9	identifies 50:10	inaccurate	215:6 224:25
6	, 10 83:15 221:18 241:7	identify 166:17 244:22 258:7 291:5
16.19.20	325:7,17,20	identifying	inadequate	including 21:20
21	84:23 326:1 49:25 126:8 242:25 47:22 127:21
5	112:23	holding 30: 4	ignore 263: 21	inaudible 38 : 5 171:7 194:20 1:16 146:10 313:20 ,22 309:13	incidence 304:22 263:15 311:16 i:16 , 17 ,24 314:23 315:19	11 191:16 355:7	inclined 298:23	inclusive 188:7
::12 177:7	326:14	358:9	includel7:24	355:7
1:19 201:14	home 57 :12,13,15	illegible 342:7	18:7 , 9 20:12	income 70 :19 , 22
.:24 219:11 130:1 ,3,4, 6	illness 205:2	68:13 80:14	74:6 258:17
1:19 229:15 147:11 153:24 209:4 349:20	98:17 99:19	inconclusive
1:8 235:15	282:3 297:4	illnesses 230:2	100:10 101:5	267:10
!:5 244:4	homes 287:8	230:3	101:6 102:18	inconsistent
:: 11 255:14	honestly 10:23	illustrate	102:19 103:6	252:22 253:8
1:23 292:12 123:4 279:4	132:23	103:7 104:5	incorporate
1:15,21	300:18 310:22	illustration	124:25 136:17 164:24
::9 317:2	311:17	175:12	144:16 , 16 ,23	incorrect 10:17
:: 19 345:21	hopel68:8	imagel26:8	144:23 172:20 184:13 302:22
i:10,15	hopefully 153 :10	immediate 32 : 7	172:25 173:10	increase 282 :18
3rians67:19	Horn 181:9	impact 214:20	173:23 174:1	Increased 27 9:25
18,21,23	hospital 231:19	260:22 262:7	174:23 175:1	indentured 351:3
. :9 110:8	hour 74:19 75:2	262:8 , 11	176:4 180:23	independent
.:7 147:5	75:12 76:19	263:3, 6 , 16	185:1 , 16	113:24 114:2
::5,17	77:6	284:12 306:11 186:3 194:12	163:6
::13 167:12	hours 47:14	306:18 307:11 198:24 199:13	independently
': 12 230:14 71:25 72:9 , 12 308:15 309:10 199:14 200:18 160:6 175:20
):14 259:22 75:8 77:23	327:13 342:23 204:13,20	index 3:1 120:2
1:6 304:24	78:4,5, 6 , 17	impacted 327:15 246:10 255:23 120:6 ,7
':4 340:20	80:21 ,23 81:5	imply 219:7	270:11 , 18 ,24	121:11 163:3
srian's	81:10 82:4	importance 9 0:8	271:4 289:2,5 193:1 238:4
. :21	house 281:20	103:8 177:8	289:11 291:20 290:19
srical 15:10 287:19 ,20	287:24	323:7 339:4	indexes 124:20
10	36:23	Howard 236:19 ,25	important 19 : 2	included 18 : 6,15	indicated 12 :18
2,3	88:8 238:11 19:21 92:7 18:19 ,22 23:7 32:1
13	146:4	huge 134:3	108:7 , 8 , 11	38:16 , 19 ,23	108:19 154:18
.:7 , 12, 13	143:11	119:3 139:21	39:3, 6 , 18 , 19	280:20
. :21 152:14	human 267:5	140:1 , 11 , 15	47:3 49:18	indicating 264 :1
!: 25 153:3	311:4	142:15 146:5	69:16 99:21	indicator 340:14
1:5,9,11,15	hundred 11:5, 8	146:11 149:16 100:12 101:23	indigenous
1:21,23	hypothesis 70:8 151:5,25	104:19 105:8	140:24
1:10 177:9	hypothetical	152:11 , 12	107:21 110:5	indirect 220:7
1:1 186:12	283:20 346:18 153:15 154:16 120:14 138:13 220:25 221:1
1:21 295:3	Hypothetically	156:17 160:25 138:18 ,21	indirectly 106:2
:: 12 339:10 346:19 ,23	167:18 168:4	170:17 172:22	individual
i:15	H-O-D-G-E-N	168:20,25	173:12,14,20	126:19 136:9
sries 8 7:4	115:21	169:1 198:3	174:5, 8 , 17	210:9 213:3
sry 16:16	_ 214:18 215:10 175:1,4	344:10
20	68:13	_I_ 220:5 253:25	181:11 186:7	individually 5:7
16	83:11	idea 147:1 152:9 254:2,6	195:8 199:8	individuals 59:4
18	86:2	255•12*281•1	272:12 273:5	200:16,20,24	321:22 323:25
3.8.24.24	305-9 316*1,3 274:10 283:1	234:5 235:24	industryl9:7
12,14,16	ideas*41:3,5 ' 283:15 288:4 236:4,12 63:16,21
24.24	89:8 323-23* '	288:6,7,15,18 242:17 270:13 88:18,21 89:3
11.20	identification	288:20 292:22 270:17 271:7	89:9,12,21
13	180:24	45:22,24,25	250:7,8	institution	223:18 296:18
.: 4, 15	48:4 60:13,20 251:25 252:19 200:3	interpretation
1:2,13,16	61:1 65:2,3,5 252:22,23,25	instructed	23:14 33:15
1:23,24,25	68:7 , 15 70:14 253:1 ,2, 6 , 9	320:12 321:25	interrupt 152:22
1:2, 9 , 9 ,24	80:14 90:18	253:11 , 14	322:11	interview 36:12
): 1 , 16	91:2,22 98:18 254:3, 7 , 13,22	instructing	36:13 183:7
1:3,13,16	98:18 99:19	255:9,18	53:16	interviewed
i: 19 187:2	99:21 100:4	258:2 259:15	instruction	202:24
': 10, 12	100:10 101:1	259:24 260:1	119:18 324:12	interviews
::15, 16 , 18	101:9 102:19	260:19 ,22,23	324:13	100:11
::19,23,24	104:5 105:16	261:2 263:12	instructions	Inter-American
):2, 9 , 10	105:16 107:7	265:23 266:6	111:25 112:3	18:1
i: 21 197:9	107:15 108:2	269:7 , 10 , 11	112:7 116:15	intuition 222:11
': 19 199:11	111:5 117:2,3 270:8 ,25	116:16 162:8	inventory 141:23
•: 14 203:3	118:20 119:1	276:2, 6	323:19 324:5	143:6 155:24
1:11 213:18	125:12,16	279:20,21	324:6,11,23	investigation
1:23,25	127:8 130:5	284:5 288:25	instrumental	202:6,10
): 6 , 7 , 8 , 15	135:15 140:20 290:14 292:21 314:12	215:3
>: 16 ,2 2	144:17 146:4	292:22,23	intend 33:23	investigations
::2,25	146:7 , 12,22	294:3 295:6	143:14 165:4	203:2, 10 , 14
):2,3, 13 , 16	147:6,11,11	297:13,14,18	168:1,16	invited 15: 20
): 19 226:16	149:5 150:1	297:22,23,25	223:25 224:22 16:2 96:24
;:2 5 296:16	152:4 154:23	300:5 302:12	225:18 226:14	invoice49:21
•: 12 309:7	154:24 155:5	304:17 305:4	226:23 228:22 79:1 , 9 , 10
i:23 311:20	155:6 , 7 , 10 , 12 306:17 ,25	intended 17 :19	invoiced 78 : 22
1:2,2,5, 6	155:14, 19 ,21	307:2,5, 6	152:2 199:3	invoices 47 : 9,11
1:13 313:5	156:13 157:9	308:2,9,14,24 274:8	48:7 49:10
:: 5 315:17	157:13,18	315:3,12	intention 34:10	75:21 79:7 , 12
': 17,22	158:24 159:18 319:3 321:10	94:11 160:13	79:15, 19 ,22
1:10 333:7	160:7 163:8	323:24 324:15 165:14 179:14 79:24 80:3
1:17,24	163:10,12	326:8,10,25	214:12 226:18 81:1 82:19,24
': 19,24	164:3 170:25	327:7 , 11	246:22 263:24	involved 35:13
1:1 ,2,4, 12	171:9 176:25	332:6 340:8	Inter 16 :11 , 12	42:1 297:1
1:19 348:15	178:7 179:2,4 344:17,19	interacted 230:9	involvement
1:16,18	179:9,18,25	345:17 349:12	interconnected	47:24
stry-com. . .	180:18 185:12 349:13	87:1	in-person 66:18
1:24	186:24 187:15	informed 212:18	interest 37:23	irrelevant
3try-con...	197:14 198:2	259:4	197:23 267:14 215:17
!:17	198:5,7,10,14	informs 340:4	interested	irritate 180:9
stry-done	200:11 201:15	ingredients	188:13 283:11	island 57:24
1:24	201:24 207:15 178:23	332:20 355:13 82:1 90:24
3try-san...	207:21 214:19	inhabitants	interesting	islands 69:19
1:13 337:11	215:19,23	140:24	207:10 295:20 350:24
c230:12	216:1,7,11,17	initial52:9	304:2 351:16	isolate303:6
.: 2 239:14	217:3,5 218:4 66:9 67:7 ,25	interject 12:14	issue 65:7 93:13
•:22 328:22	218:7 , 10	68:5	internal 185:1	93:18 94:2,6
1:19	219:3,15,16	initially 25:18	185:10 , 11 , 16	94:14, 18 ,23
rence 239:15	219:18 , 19	injurious 267:18 186:3, 17 , 19	94:25 95:9 , 12
•: 16	220:1 ,3,4, 6	innuendo 3 0 8:5	194:14 196:1	96:3, 14, 19
rring 230:13	220:14, 18 ,21	inquiryl6:7	196:21 ,23	97:9 , 12, 19
jence 19:22	220:24 221:2	inside 216:2	197:1 ,2,3	98:2 136:17
::7	221:3,12	insistence	198:6 213:17	142:8 145:14
aenced 271:3	222:4, 7 , 19	149:17	213:20 ,21 ,21	147:6 206:9
1:5	224:3 225:4	instance 126:17	213:22 215:6	283:14 314:10
jences 95:1	226:17 ,25	207:12 274:4	215:10 225:12	issues 35:12,13
9	, 13	227:6 , 16 ,21	instances 99:14 293:20 296:16 93:23 96:7 , 11
cm 19 8:8	228:24 229:3	134:17 ,20 ,24	297:3, 8 , 11 , 15 97:16 ,23
1:10	229:16,25	157:1 182:12	311:20 312:2	133:14 136:16
rmation 5:10	230:1 , 15	182:14,20	312:5, 6	235:21 283:24
1	11:21	231:4,7,10,20 183:11,13	329:22	338:21
3,6,9	232:15,18,20	184:1,4 235:6	internalize	item24:13 37:17
15,17	233:2,8,14,16 275:19 296:17 252:19	117:13 126:2
20	31:20	233:21 235:17 302:13	internalized	126:5 127:2,2
21	,22,24	239:7 , 17	institute 19 5:3 265:18	136:9 , 19 ,21
9,12,19,25	243:1,2,7 225:1 243:24	Internet 5:11,13 137:18,18
5	43:17	244:1 245:23	298:22 333:8	6:16 9:14	160:13,14
8,9,16,18	248:7,25	333:13,24	154:21 185:6	175:14 210:19
': 7 270:9	276:2,4	304:16 , 19 ,23	180:7 181:7	332:20 336:8
.:23 272:1	319:17 320:11	305:6	181:24 184:17 346:17
•:23 307:22 323:9,15	kids 345:11	187:1 , 12, 15	knowledgable
Lze 75:24	325:3 326:23	kindl3:13 36:14	194:10 195:11 202:25
Lzed 124:5, 8 326:25 327:11	36:15 37:4	195:15 197:6	knowledge 5:7
::9 , 12	327:19 331:1	48:20 54:25	198:3 201:4,5 9:12 24:20
):9	331:19 358:3	198:14 209:21	201:19 202:21 59:4 93:14, 19
3	12:3,24	journal 16:12, 14	219:3 268:20	202:23 209:21 94:3 96:3,7
I,9,11	16:19,21	270:18 284:18	210:5,6 213:4 96:15,19 97:9
19	125:4 93:12 170:12	330:23 340:11	214:18 215:1	97:13,20 98:2 ):18 126:16 170:22,23	kinds 7:17 36:21	218:22 219:24 106:3 107:8
':21 ,23	171:2,4	83:20 ,21	231:25 232:17 108:2,3, 14
1:2,6,8	268:12	110:24 162:10	234:2 235:14	111:5 139:4
i:14 131:14	journalist	177:8 219:24	236:15,16	139:11 144:4
1:21 139:3	182:15 316:23	284:25	239:16 240:3	190:8 200:3
•: 7,10	Joyce 115:21	Kinsey 209:10	241:12 242:17 205:7 , 10 , 11
1:14,15	Jr115:23	Kitts351:l	242:18 243:10 205:15,18
:: 5 194:11	Juanl6:13	knew 82:22	246:4, 7 251:4 206:1 ,3,4, 10
1:23 251:5	judgel24:15	239:20 311:22	253:21 254:20 206:20,20,22
_ 127:24 198:12	311:22 349:17	254:21 255:12 206:23 208:8
J	judging 211:14	know 7:5, 17 14:8	256:1 ,4	208:8 , 12, 14
ary 15:11	judgment 106:12	21:16 ,24 23:3	257:10 ,23	208:16 , 17 ,20
H 81’.2	126:20 135:1	25:18 27:12	259:19 262:25 211:15 213:22
22	269-25 135:2 158:18	31:8 32:10	263:5,8,24	215:7,15 ,:2 342:7 158:20 160:3	33:14 34:3	268:11 269:5 216:11,13 Lfer 1:2*3 177:7 198:18	36:18 48:23	269:7 , 15 219:18 222:12
18 8:4,22	209:5 239:25	48:24 49:18	271:23 272:2	224:2, 12,24
:23 194:1	305:23 344:16	51:8,12,12	272:8,8,10,13 226:16 227:8
):4,2 2 '	345:23 347:3	53:13 54:12	272:14 275:9	227:22 228:5
! ! 21	JUDICIAL 1 : 1	55:18 56:9 , 11	276:3 278:7	228:9 , 14
L"135•14	191:1	61:4,18 62:3	281:19,20,22	230:12 247:1
9:2,20	July 211:16	68:13 69:10	282:5, 6 283:1 247:8 248:23
1-8 '	241:3 247:10	73:23 75:9,9	283:11 285:3	255:16 263:1
62-22	248:10 251:8	76:17 77:15	286:14,19,23	263:4 303:9
145-4 147-2 264:1,9,11,13	80:12 81:18	287:6 289:9	309:11 312:17
/115-22 ' 264:16 265:4	81:25 82:9 , 11	289:10 290:3	313:23 328:3
8.4	'	269:21 270:3	82:15,18	290:3,4 292:4 328:19 329:3
32:9 11:1,1 333:8 334:11	98:25 99:3,20	296:14,15	329:17 330:11
13* 24-15 '	jump 187:7 273:2	101:10 107:13	297:21 299:3	330:17 331:21
18	48:20	jumping45:16	107:14 108:11	299:8 301:1	332:3,12
2,7,11,16	49:12	110:16 111:12	302:15,17 336:6 338:21
23	57:18	juncture 318:5	112:19 115:11	304:2,4,5, 8	349:12, 13
2	61:15,16	June 241:2,21	116:24 117:23	306:1 307:21 357:8
25 62:1^5	242:1 247:10	121:20 123:5	308:2,5, 19 ,21	known 5:1 223:21
10	63:3^8	256:5 270:1,2	126:18 127:15	310:3,8,9,17	224:4 225:4
9	64-6 , 19	jury 223:22	127:17 ,21 ,22	310:20 ,21	317:19 ,20
14	66-8,10 225:15 226:2	127:25 128:5	311:3,8,14,15 345:8,13
II,14^17	226:3 249:8,9	128:5,8,9,17	312:7,10,10	knowsl66:6
19	? 7 4 • 21	__131:21 134:18	312:12, 17	310:10 , 14, 17
2i	7 6-18	_K__134:22,25	316:1,10,11	310:22
15	89:20	Kansas2:17	135:18 136:18	316:18 318:6	_
23	90:3,16 192:17	137:20,21,24	319:17 320:17	_L_
25	91:20	Kapland 73:25	140:13,14,22	321:4 324:19	labels 107:14
10	100:13	keep 47:14 75:8	140:25 141:15	324:22 325:10	labor 351:21 i:20 101:12 79:23 130:3	141:16 142:4	326:10 327:12	lack207:6
.:17 111:15 131:2 146:11	143:10 , 19 ,20	329:10 , 12	Lacyll0:12
.:18 113:24 148:18 150:3	145:13, 18	336:5 337:15	114:11 , 17
::4, 8 , 9	150:4,21	148:17 , 19 ,24	341:17 342:6	116:10 156:15
1:2 119:24	152:12,13,21	151:1,2,24	345:22,23,24	158:23 159:10
':8 130:23	152:23 185:23	154:16 155:11	346:2,5, 12, 13 160:7 , 15
::15,23	186:2	159:2 162:3	346:15 347:6	161:14, 17
1:6 149:21	keeps 297:15	162:12,16	348:4,5	162:1,4,17
.:15,2 5	kept 57:6	165:3,18	350:23,23	163:9 210:7
::18 163:14	Key 19:11 , 17	166:6 , 11	352:1 , 13, 19	276:8 , 17 , 19
1:15 164:4	86:23 89:15	167:10,13,24 knowingl68:3	277:1,7,16
::14, 17 ,25	350:7	168:9 175:24	224:4 225:5	326:21 ,22,23
:: 9 194:10	kidney 251:5	177:17 180:4	229:9 242:3	laid65:8
scape 17 7:10	42:22 43:3, 7	132:16 133:6	225:8 ,21	321:20 322:1
•:21	44:11 45:1,14	133:15,17,19	226:20 227:2	322:14 323:10
aage 17:17	46:6 , 19 48:1	134:13 135:5	227:24 228:11 323:21 324:10
1:15 149:15	48:6,22 49:5	135:10 136:3	228:17 229:2	325:6 326:3
1:10 331:17	50:4,23 51:19	136:11,14	229:11 231:5	328:14 329:4
!:22	53:12,18 54:1	137:5,11,17	232:3,23	329:7 330:1
54:3 53:9	54:11,14 55:4	138:8,14,19	237:13 238:14 330:12,19,25
23,23	54:2	55:20 56:10	138:23 139:5	239:3,8,13,24 331:10,16,22
3	89:17	56:14 57:4	139:12,18	240:5 243:3	331:25 332:5
1:5 194:3	58:10,24	140:2,17	243:14 244:16 332:14 333:10
):5	59:10 , 17 60:7	141:3, 13, 18	244:23 246:3	333:19 335:2
sr 166:21	61:2 62:6 , 15	142:1 , 7 , 18 ,22	246:21 247:5	336:15, 19
1:2 237:20	63:18,22	143:7,16	248:5 250:16	337:14,21,24
':24 259:17	65:13, 16	144:8 , 12, 18	251:1 , 16	338:25 339:14
i:4 352:6	66:10 67:9	144:25 145:16	252:15,24	340:18 342:25
sst 348:11	68:1 , 10 , 18	145:20 146:1	253:12, 17 , 19	343:8 , 16
145:23	69:5 70:10	146:16,20	254:4,8,14,24 344:3,15
;:2 5 287:3	71:23 72:4,20	147:4 149:23	255:10 , 19	345:19 346:11
':5 288:9	73:10 , 19	150:6 , 17	256:16 ,24	346:20 ,22,25
i	14:5 19:1	76:21 77:2,5	153:1 157:14	257:13, 15,21	347:22 348:2
20,23,24	77:9,17 78:8	158:16 159:21	259:3 260:9	349:9,16
3	86:4,5	78:24 79:8,13	160:11 163:25	260:24 261:6	350:8,13,20
25	87:14	79:17,20,22	164:20 166:1	261:12,23	352:4,17
3,7,7	80:2,5,12,20	166:11,12	262:6,13,17	353:3,15,19
.:11	80:25 81:21	167:19 ,21	262:21 ,24	353:24 354:5
ios 87:15	82:14 84:2	168:5, 17 ,22	263:10 , 19	358:2,7
srdalel57:7	85:10,12,17	169:5,14,20	264:7,14,19	Lawson's218:19
1:5,6 159:9	85:22 86:3,14	169:23 170:19	264:22 265:15	lawsuit6:24
•: 25	87:5 88:2, 9	173:8 ,21	265:25 268:4	lawyer61:7
:9,15,22	88:22 89:4,10	174:4,20	268:6 270:6	66:11,13
.7 11:1	89:22 90:17	175:6,10,22	270:21 271:16 113:15 162:25
13	21:21	91:4,18,24	176:8,11	272:4,15,21 163:19 220:17
15	51:17	92:3,9,23	177:23 178:9	274:2,12	lawyers5:22
1,4,6,7,10	93:16,21,25	179:8,20	275:13 276:23 7:13 9:5,14
14	61:15	94:4,8,20	180:3,11,20	278:8 279:6	41:7 66:14,17
6.20	63:2	95:2,6,15	181:17 182:6	279:18 280:7	89:20 90:1,2
5.20	64:5	96:9,16,21	182:10 183:4	281:4 282:9	113:23 127:7
8	72:9	97:21 98:4,15	183:22 184:5	283:8,18 141:7,10,20
':4 112:15	98:24 99:11	184:14 185:18	284:1 , 15, 19	149:6 ,20
1:2 162:18	100:6,24	185:20 186:5	285:14 286:13 162:18 163:1
1:9,15,22	101:3,19	186:15,20	288:22 290:6	163:20 223:17
1:4,10	102:10,15,20	187:4,14	290:20 292:20 279:5 292:21
):4, 10 , 12	102:25 103:2	192:9 194:25	293:6 294:9	320:12,23
):19 240:1	103:22 104:1	196:4 197:12	294:21 295:15 323:9 , 15
i:2 250:23	104:11 105:6	197:22 198:4	295:17,21	324:7 325:3
.:3 272:19	105:23 106:15	198:11 , 17	296:1 , 7 , 11	348:20 ,22
::7 330:21	106:19 107:1	19 9:1 , 6 , 10 , 16	297:19 ,21	layl70:9 171:7
.:19 332:24	107:23 108:2	200:12 201:23	298:15 299:13	lead 65:23 70:9
1:2	108:10,22	202:7,12,18	300:16 301:17 85:18 214:2
107:4	109:2,19	202:20 203:4	303:4,13,24	349:18
5n 2 :9 5:25	111:3, 10 ,21	203:15 204:18	305:10 , 17 ,22	leadsll9:2
:,2 3 8:3	112:2, 10 , 13	205:13 206:13	306:13,20	leaflet 308:21
21	12:12	112:17 113:3	206:16 207:23	307:12,18	learnll2:16
14	13:8	113:9,13	208:15 209:15	308:18 309:4 306:7 353:1
17	21:1,8	114:1,6,13	209:19 210:2	309:12,18,20	learned 5:12
1.20	23:1	115:10 116:12	210:15 211:6	310:7,12,16 17:17 332:11
15,19	24:7	116:23 118:8	211:9 212:9	310:19 311:11	leavel78:23
6,12,16	118:10 119:7	212:24 213:19	311:23,25	leavesl9:12
4,10,14,18	119:10,17	214:1,5 215:9	312:9,15,22	lectured89:8
20	29:13	120:5,10,17	215:18,25	313:11,18,25	lectures89:6
6	,25 33:13	120:21 121:7	216:9 , 15	314:14, 17	left 147:21
13,22	35:2	121:24 123:2	217:1,11	315:1,23	334:8
15	37:16	123:8 , 16 ,20	218:8 , 17	316:13,21	left-hand 267:1
20	38:2,13	124:4,7 125:6	219:6,22	317:10,13 336:21
21,25	39:5	125:10 126:14	220:20 221:21	318:2,14	legal 70:20 ,23
9,11,15	128:7 130:17	222:8 223:9	319:11,22 240:6 251:4
3	42:13,19	131:24 132:10	224:7,13	320:14,18	292:12 358:12
Lly236:1,11	282:7 327:11	150:25 153:19 306:1,4	207:11 217:2
Dility	351:10	153:19,21,22	LLP2:16,22	237:5 246:5
i:21	limits 65:11 , 17	154:1 155:24	192:16 ,22	248:25 256:2
slation	69:7 198:15	158:3 163:3	272:20	261:24 275:3
':14 171:23	line 7:6 132:6	164:16 165:2	local 171:24	275:5 277:10
):3,3	149:9 150:21	166:16,16	log 131:10	288:5 290:11
sslative	184:10 , 10	167:16 ,24	logically 322:17 297:8 , 16
':5	189:6 239:19	168:2, 19	logs 132:24	299:1 329:11
;h 99:15	356:6	170:5 171:13	lone 318:6	334:12 341:1
i: 22	lines 182:23	173:4 175:2,4	long 48:25 68:22 341:13,14,15
sr 258:5	link 19:10 44:12	175:9 177:6	109:24 118:17 341:16 351:5
•:20	178:5 183:2	185:9 186:4	119:4 146:9	351:6
sr 145:4, 6 , 8	183:10 , 12, 13	196:15, 18 ,20	170:5 238:22	lookingl3:24
':2,8	183:16 , 18 ,20	196:23 200:13 238:24 259:5	23:4 25:22
.:25 152:1	183:25 184:24	201:1 234:11	325:15 353:8	31:14 45:17
::2 193:9	184:24 186:13	235:23 236:6	longer 332:24	53:7 71:4
3	8:19 78:4	186:18 196:2	236:7 , 14	longevity 334:7	132:25 134:23
12	100:8	197:11 211:4	237:5 238:3,4 334:17,22	135:16 137:19
1: 8 136:7	215:16 252:11	238:16 ,22,24	look 10:22,23,24 137:22 147:6
::12 172:4	252:16 , 17	249:8 , 8 250:4 11:5, 9 , 13	147:10 157:4
;:1 187:16	279:17,24	269:12 270:15 22:4,7 23:2	158:5 172:24
1:25 234:4	297:5 304:15	281:5 286:3	31:7,15,20	175:23 177:20
i:21 254:10	351:4 352:7	286:17 289:16 56:15 57:15	185:11 216:17
1:9 283:21	linkedl78:23	289:23 290:18 71:1,2 80:25	233:9 237:18
.:13 298:10	213:3 267:5	291:4,5, 17	99:18 118:13	237:18 239:6
:: 25 345:1	linking 209:4	292:7 , 14	121:22 122:20 245:2 248:2
1:19,23	links 145:24	299:6 , 10 , 12	124:11 125:2	248:10 258:6
L171:23,24	271:12	303:16 304:12 125:13 126:1	259:4 263:20
.:24 207:15	lion's 86:17	335:6 338:6	126:2 134:24	301:19 304:1
.: 14	list 10:1 12:3,6	listed 4:23 10:2 135:2,19	320:8
Ls 54:4	17:19 18:11	10:4, 16 14:21 137:7 142:20	looks26:18
•:23	35:17 37:21	40:3 61:21	157:23 159:14 201:14 268:12
ring 115:23	38:16 39:16	71:11 74:4	160:13 165:2	337:17
rty 16:9	39:20 49:24	93:6 95:18	165:20 166:4	Lorillard2:19
aries36:20	50:3,10,11	96:23 120:24	166:15,16	192:19 194:22
::10	58:11 104:19	125:4, 7 , 19	168:14 171:1	293:20
ary 15:22	104:21 ,22	130:15 131:4	173:6 179:13	lot 30:21 32:11
6	78:12	109:20,24	135:23 136:25 180:21 199:18 104:3 152:20
1:5	110:6 120:1	140:14 204:24 212:10,13	237:21 301:18
84:21	120:10,14,15	251:6 334:8	213:6 214:6	325:19 327:3
i:21 275:2	120:25 121:12	338:16 350:16 230:21 234:15	lots220:21
.: 5 , 7	121:16 122:3	listing 119 : 23	235:3,17	Love 294 :16 , 23
i:ll,13,15	122:14,21	169:15	236:14 238:15	lower76:10
.:10,12,15	124:6,23	lists 95:17	238:17 242:19 257:25
1:3,12,22	125:8,18	104:21,23	243:21 246:18	Lucille 295:11
::3 342:24	126:4, 7 , 12,22	123:18 124:16 261:10 274:23	Lucy 294:16 ,23
': 10	127:4, 12, 15	127:11 , 16	276:15 277:11 295:11
^ime 22 9:25	127:19 128:18	160:13 249:25 282:17 286:2	Luisl:15 3:2
stt194:22	130:15 131:4	290:10	289:20 290:10 4:5 10:16
; 165:21	131:15,23	literally 309:25 290:11 291:17 189:2 190:17
i:3 317:1	132:9 , 13	literature 17 0:8 296:15 301:18 191:15 193:2
):14	133:5, 13	170:9 171:7	308:11 317:2	194:5 356:2
:ly 267:11	134:12 135:23	207:11 256:1	looked 24 :18,24 357:17
3295:13	136:2,10	litigation 1:7	31:9,17,19	lunch 57:11
ffise 207:6	137:1 , 10 , 14	41:15, 16 ,22	33:16 34:6 , 8	119:12 138:11
;247:14,16	137:18 140:11	45:19 47:22	107:5,15	147:16,17,24
i:5 320:12	140:14,21	189:2 191:7	113:6,8 119:3 147:25 148:2
1:1 326:5	141:2,5,6,10	356:2 358:6	119:3 126:23	148:4,5 149:6
nation 65:19	141:12,17,19	little 10:23	131:19 133:2	149:20
.:21,25	141:22,23	19:17 52:2	134:5 144:3	lung 248 :13,14
nations	142:4,5,9,14	224:16 226:13 170:23 171:2	250:15 251:10
20,24,25	142:20 143:3	228:3 267:12	171:3,18,19	251:13,15,20
11	99:16	143:3,5,11,13	livedl06:21	171:22,23,24	252:11 264:3
1:19 259:7	144:6,7,11,15	321:23 348:12 172:2,5,14,22 265:6 267:5
•:13 324:12	144:20,24	livesl49:l	174:7 176:3	352:15
;ed 55:18	147:22 148:13	living 236:19 ,25 183:6 184:17	Luzll5:24
•: 18 280:21	149:3 150:12	238:12 276:10 185:4 205:5	Lynette 115 : 21
2:22 192:22	301:14	56:24,25	180:25 183:5	71:10 86:20
/—E—R—I—N—G	mark 9:25 10:11	57:17 58:2	183:6 185:2,4	91:5, 7 255:2
): 23	11:24 14:2	59:3 61:7	185:10 , 11 , 17	255:2 261:1
S115:24	27:24 29:24	67:10,12,13	186:4 194:12	mean8:17 10:7
__30:10,21,24	68:19 78:13	198:20,24,24	28:10 32:12
M	31:3 115:20	78:18 92:5	199:2,15	34:14,14,16
5	H5:24	122:6 266:14	104:7,8,15,16	200:17,21,22	35:3,3 36:21
.-15 '	293:12	104:18,25	200:25 201:1	45:9 54:2
liie 9 0*19	marked 10:12	105:2,3,3, 7 , 8	201:3 211:17	61:24 62:19
Lnes 215*13	12:20 13:19	105:11 , 18 ,21	217:2,25	67:1 , 13 76:1
aley 115:22	14:6 23:21	106:4,5 107:5	234:6,23,23	83:17,22 84:3
zine 291*5, 7	27:17 ,25 29:7	107:11 ,20 ,22	235:23 236:4	85:1 91:12
'*24 343"• 5A	29:11 30:20	108:4,5, 7 , 9	236:5, 7 , 8 , 12	92:6 98:17
sines 170-8	31:7 33:8	108:17 , 19 ,24	238:1 ,5, 7 , 13	100:7 104:17
:6,14 '	40:2,8 59:15	109:7,8,9,16	238:21 240:25	105:25 114:19
’*23 176:3	121:5,10	109:17,17,22	242:6,21,24	118:1,4
':4 219:25	122:8 240:22	110:21 116:21	243:2 245:4,8	119:20,21
1:3 273:25	266:15 293:14	117:7 118:13	245:11 246:16	122:18 124:9
.jl,4 '	299:18,19	119:2,11,21	246:17,18	124:14 127:15
11	19 316*11	307:24 333:1	119:22,24	247:17 261:25	132:12 134:4
111:24 '	333:5 341:20	120:1,20,23	263:21 265:4	136:6,8
69:i9	341:22 345:1	121:16,16,19	270:10,11,14	138:15 140:15
; :24 205:5	345:2,4	122:15,25	270:19 271:7	141:10 142:24
i*5 274:17	market240:21	124:12 125:24	271:14,24	143:10 144:14
stream 287: 3	marketing 92 : 25	126:21 127:1	272:2 273:16	145:11 ,23
'.6 '	95:1,9,13	127:8,16,23	273:19,24	151:4 156:7
-"ain 20*17	286:25	128:6 , 10	274:8 , 14	157:23 163:22
'•6,20 ’	marketplace	129:1,8,12,12	275:12,14,24	166:5 167:5,7
Gained 130:2	310:5	129:13,16	276:5,17,21	170:10172:6
'•23 ’	marking 27:19	130:6 , 13,21	277:1 ,20	174:9 175:7
-aining	markings 27:6	131:1,3	278:1,3,4,17	178:2,18
':6	32:21 34:17	132:18 134:12	278:24 280:24	179:2,6
-ains21:14	278:20	134:19 136:7	285:7,21,22	184:15,22
”: i ’	Martinez 4:13, 16	137:15,20	285:25 286:9	185:5 186:19
r34:9 35:6	Martinez-Fer...	138:13,18,22	286:10,16,17	204:21 208:6
8	103:8 ’	3:2 4:5	141:7,11,12	289:3,5,18,21	213:23 218:21
.:21 132:21	10:16 189:2	141:20 ,21 ,24	290:2,5, 10 , 18	221:22 222:11
^7,19 ’	190:17 191:15	143:4,6,13	291:3,16	235:13 237:23
’ * 5 ? 3 0 7 * 14	193:2 194:5	144:3,21 ,22	292:6 , 13, 14	240:19 243:5
city 86-*12	356:2 357:17	145:1 ,2	297:16 298:4	244:3,5, 14
rs 351*14	mass 93:3	147:10,22,23	299:4,5,9	245:22 253:7
ig 23 * 11	massive 231:12	148:18 ,22	304:1 309:19	259:18 262:25
18	158*17	master 18:7	151:18 153:18	312:11 , 13	263:22 270:17
,:24 184:21	master's 84:4,5	153:19 ,20 ,25	318:8 , 9 , 11 , 12	271:10 273:18
'*7,12 '	match 159:3	153:25 154:5	318:20 ,21	287:18 288:17
i*ll 222*25	matched 157:6	154:6 , 8 , 8 , 10	319:3, 6 , 6 , 10	290:3,25
1*19 309*24	160:14	154:13,24	319:15,15,18	291:1 296:23
: * 15,16 '	material 18 :25	156:3 162:7	319:19 ,25	302:14 303:17
!•13 ?	67:20 104:3	163:2,4, 13, 14	320:8 , 13	304:3 306:14
2*9:24 237:9	116:17 144:23	163:15,21 ,22	321:12 323:6	318:19 321:3
;.4" '	185:5, 7 , 14	163:24 164:1	326:5,20	323:5 327:10
ates 235*4	224:3,4,5	164:4, 6 , 7 , 13	327:23 337:20	327:20 329:11
Festation	225:4,5,6	164:15,19,24	338:5,7,12	329:20
2i	274:10 292:8	165:1,4,15,21	339:5 340:2,5	meaning201:l
Le 262:22	materials 24:10	166:14, 15, 17	340:8 , 10	337:22
Eacturer	24:15,23	166:20,24	341:10 351:13	meanings 85:2
;: 9,14	25:24 27:1,13	167:3,5,6,17 matter 175:25	means 28:12
112 ^	31:18 32:11	168:7 , 10 , 13	177:25 178:1	62:20 84:18
Eacturers	33:4,16,16,18	169:4,11	206:6 213:11	108:3 115:11
14	306*15	34:4,4,5,7,11	170:2,17	214:8 220:3	124:17 142:9
! •6 313-15	34:24 35:10	171:3, 7 , 8 , 12	224:1 ,23	188:15 200:2
Eacturing	35:21,21 36:1	171:17 173:1	226:10,15	246:7,8 262:3
•6	36:17 38:6,12	173:11 174:3	240:7 246:12	265:20,22
script 17:4	38:14, 17 ,20	174:19 ,21	250:23 251:3	268:15 287:18
5	'	38:24 39:4,7	175:8,21,23	257:10 259:11	288:13 294:13
i278*23	47:6 53:7	176:4,17	358:17	322:6 342:7
Lnally	54:17 56:23	177:8 , 19 ,21 matters 70:20 ,23	355:15
;26:22,23	178:1 231:14	misapprehension	Narrowing 90:13	317:5
1:17 112:11 304:7 318:6	43:8 290:24	national 171:23 neighbor 217 :16
i:ll 203:16	messages 177:4	mischaracterize	241:25 243:15	217:17
1:7 276:10	177:11 , 16	320:18 ,20	243:17 , 18	neither56:8
i:18 312:16 263:22 309:14	misleading	244:9 246:25	117:22
are 141:7	metaphor 301: 21	201:22,25	247:11 256:20 network 293 : 20
i:23 216:16	method31:ll	209:25 210:14	265:4	never 96:18,22
1:1	32:9 36:24	224:5 225:5	nationally	102:6 113:1
jrement	37:2,3 151:8	misplaced 137:24	256:20 345:7	114:7 ,9
1:9	151:12,13,16	missedl02:2	345:13	139:15 147:9
aring214:19 151:22 152:25	missingl56:4	nature 64:20 ,23	195:22,25
anics 345:24 153:3,5, 9 , 11	243:1 ,2	65:12 66:23	197:7 , 8 219:7
a 44:18 93:3 153:15 156:21 246:13 342:14	71:13 93:19	219:7 , 11
i:10 104:23 156:23 158:11	Missouri2:17	95:25 96:8	221:12,19
:: 13 170:24 288:24 309:3	192:17	97:13 170:14	225:13 255:11
): 13 197:24 339:10	mistakel0:19	178:2 185:10	285:1 295:3
1:8 215:20	methodically	mistaken 338:11	224:6 , 11	295:16 297:7
': 25 219:1	135:9	misunderstan. . .	225:7 226:17	303:18 315:2
•:18 231:21	methodologies	290:22	227:1 231:16	327:15 349:4
1:12 319:25 138:4	misunderstood	274:1 297:14 new 14:11 15:10
i:8	methodology	58:4	307:7 330:18	16:21 24:23
=al 170:13	103:16 112:20	MITKA 2:22	331:21 332:3	31:22,23
.:2,5	146:10 274:22 192:22	332:13 351:20	33:15,19
i:18,19	methods 37:11	models 254 : 23,25	necessarily 72 : 5	47:11 66:21
':9	112:20 160:21 259:9 261:5	72:13, 15 80:6	66:22 67:10
2ine 17 0:23 246:14 309:3	moderate 237:11	86:16 125:9	67:12, 13, 14
1:23	metro 27 6:15	modern86:l 87:7	126:20 135:24	68:19 74:10
sval2 0 0:7	mice267:3	moment33:2	161:8 171:20	120:22 126:21
am 2 8 7:2 5	Michael 110 :14	40:10 277:19	174:6 182:3	127:8 144:20
1:15 294:3	114:12,18	298:19 335:12	202:13 207:13	144:22 145:1
161:1,14	116:11	money 81:18	208:18 ,22	145:2 165:9
Lng 15:11	Mickey 262:22	82:12	210:22 213:16	165:10 170:22
9	66:11 , 15	microfilms	morning 4 :10 , 11	215:5 219:23	174:24 178:4
18,19,21	162:23	25:8 79:3,4	222:13 229:24	182:17 252:11
23	67:25	mid 241:15	96:25 151:9	240:19 246:24	286:17 322:23
5	223:11	273:11	Morris2:25	268:25 269:2 news6:23 7:2,17
1:17 323:12	migrating 19:13	192:25 194:20	304:6 , 6	117:13 125:21
1:14	migration 86:21	194:21 195:14	345:11 349:22	147:13 159:9
Lngs 41:11	milderl80:7	308:3, 6 , 9 , 12	necessary 252:2	166:12 170:21
21	52:13	million 269:8	313:13,14	252:5,6	newspaper 7:10
sr 229:17	270:4, 7 271:8 314:4, 6	292:12, 15	9:17 26:19
i:24	271:10,11,22	315:14,16	358:9	27:5 28:17
srs 18:6	272:2 284:17	316:18	need 31:15,20	29:2,21 38:22
1:5,11	millions 173:24	mortality 182:18	33:25 51:8 , 11	156:10 157:21
:: 13	173:24 263:13	Move 335:10	51:12 71:2	158:22 160:8
srships	263:13	movie 262:5, 14	101:12 107:13	162:6,21
23	mind 7:25 14:2	262:15	107:14, 18	164:13, 17
58:1 , 7	28:9 43:25	moving 152:21 ,23	116:21 117:7	169:19 173:18
Lon 44:15	67:4 74:2	186:2	118:9 140:14	174:19 176:3
::16 113:5	118:21 146:11	multi-page 134:8	149:16 153:11	181:13 182:21
i:23 152:11 148:18 150:3	municipality	167:13 195:10	216:6 229:6
i:6 208:25	150:4,21	90:21	195:14 212:10	268:5,12
': 19 274:4	152:9,22	Myersl94:22	212:13 235:19	271:9 272:1
): 8	208:19 238:23	M.D 10:16 , 17	246:18 251:25	275:7 , 11
Loned 15:7	267:25 303:22	__277:4 307:4	276:7 ,20
9	19:3	mine 227:9	_N__319:21 340:10	280:24 283:2
11	6 4:13	minimum 295:22	name 4*17 16*11	353:23,25	284:24 308:22
16 106:12	minor 13:23	62-7*66-12*	354:2, 6	316:20 319:4
:: 21 157:2	344:11,24	116:14 161:15	needed49:l	320:7 322:12
i:24 195:5	minus244:19	161:20 203:12	150:22 196:16	340:13 342:24
::21 20 8:22	minute 7:21	23 6:22,24	needs 105:24	344:13 348:11
':1 212:2	27:14 46:10	329:20 330:4	127:13,18	newspapers
i:2 272:5	77:12	names*73:23 '	176:13 181:23	117:10 155:17
1:12 326:14	minutes77:7	110 • 18* 115 • 12	181:25 201:14	155:19 157:10
!:3	80:18 82:7	Nancy 115 • 21 '	306:21 317:2	157:25 162:10
Ly 199:4	119:8 150:19	narrative 117:24	337:9	165:9 , 12
age 177:14	352:10	narrow 221:10	negative 22 9:22	170:8 171:6
.:14 172:23	38:17 ,21	264:23 269:13	102:10 , 15,20	206:16 207:23
1:7 268:2,6	39:14,18,19	288:8 293:16	102:25 103:2	208:15 209:15
1:7 269:14	45:7 47:6	336:3,7	103:22 104:1	209:19 210:2
i:17 271:14	58:2 94:21 ,22	numerous 340:9	104:11 105:6	210:16 211:6
.:22,25	109:25 110:3	341:2	105:23 106:15	211:9 212:9
::6,8	118:3,20	N.E2:10 192:10	106:19 107:1	212:24 213:19
1:18 316:6	152:13 171:3	358:3	107:23 108:10	214:1 215:9
1:9,10	174:22 181:6	N.W2:23 192:23	108:22 109:2	215:18,25
i:24 321:1	181:8 188:7	__109:19 111:3	216:9,15
.:16	230:21 238:18	O	111:10,21	217:1,11,14
■reek 274:20	278:10,13,14	oath 151:4	112:2,10,13	218:8,17,19
:: 21 ,23	279:2 286:18	307-10*, 15	112:17 113:3	219:6 ,22
rette 174:12	292:9 355:7	©bject 7:4,23	113:9 , 13	220:20 221:21
:inel87:13	notice 10 : 5, 6 , 8	37*16 , 17 46*7	114:1 , 6 , 13	222:8 ,22,25
': 16	10:8 , 10 , 14	48-22,53-12*	115:10 116:12	224:7 , 13
sen 28 7:14	11:3, 7 , 14, 17	50^7 61:2	116:23 118:8	225:8 ,21
son 287:7	11:18 ,20 12:6	84!2 119:17	118:10 119:7	226:20 227:2
49:24	12:16,18,22	123-2 126*14	120:5,17,21	227:24 228:11
1:19,21	50:2 115:19	132-10 134-13	123:16,20	228:17 229:2
129:20	123:3	136:11 182:10	124:4,7 125:6	229:11 231:5
1:11 241:20	NOTIFICATION	187:5 210:15	125:10 128:7	232:3 237:12
ssponsive	193:9	260-24 274-2	130:17 131:24	237:13 238:14
): 10	notified 109:13	288:22 290:20	132:16 133:6	239:3, 8 , 13,24
adults 242:5	notion 148:15	301:17 314:17	133:15 135:5	240:5 243:3
pastors	304:11	329:4 336:15	135:10 136:3	243:14 244:16
1:21	November 29:5	344:2,3,7	136:14 137:5	244:23 246:3
smoker 337:2	166:9 , 10	objected 24:10	137:11,17	246:21 247:5
smokers	293:23	35:16 60:8	138:8,14,19	248:5 250:16
:: 19 308:2	No.3 35:9	objection 7*: 24	138:23 139:5	251:1,16
1:4	number 10:2	8-1 ,5,5 16-17	139:12,18	252:15,24
:obacco	13:15 24:1	27 • 19'32•6 * 25	140:2, 17	253:12, 17 , 19
25	26:6 29:6	33-13 34-13	141:3,13,18	254:4,8,14,24
82:3	31:4 35:10	34-22 35-2	142:1,7,18,22	255:10,19
al332:21	46:1,2,5,21	42-14 44-3,11	143:7,16	256:16,24
lern 8 6:6	46:24 47:16	45-1 , 14 46-15	144:8 , 12, 18	257:13, 15,21
0:12	49:13 53:4,9	48-1^2 49-5	144:25 145:16	259:3 260:9
3ly20:14	53:23,23	50-5'51-19	145:20 146:16	261:6,12,23
rized 59:19	54:10 55:17	54:1 , 11*14	147:4 149:23	262:6 , 13, 17
cy 1:24 4:2	56:16 71:21	55-3^4,20	150:6 , 17	262:21 ,24
1:4,23	71:24,25 72:6	56-10,14 57-4	157:14 159:21	263:10,19
.:24 194:2	72:12, 13 93:8	58:10 '59:10*	160:11 163:25	264:7 265:15
):4,23	121:3,22	59^17 62:15	164:20 166:1	265:25 268:4
1:10,21	122:3,22	63-18,22*	167:19,21	270:6,21
:ions 19 0:9	123:13, 13, 14	65-13^ 16 67-9	168:5, 17 ,22	271:16 272:4
':9	124:11 126:2	68:1 , 10 , 18 *	169:5, 14	272:15,23
10:1 27:10	131:25 137:3	69-5'70*10	170:19 173:8	274:12 275:13
10	30:5	138:12,16	71-23 72-4,20	173:21 174:4	276:23 279:18
18	98:6	139:2 145:5	73-10,19* '	174:20 175:6	281:4 282:9
::13	158:11 161:15	76•21'77•2,17	175:10,22	283:8,18
18:6 123:10	161:21 205:4	78:8,24 79:8	177:23 178:9	284:1,15,19
1:13	244:21 247:12	79-13,17 *	179:8,20	285:14 286:13
s24:24 25:1	247:13 257:10	81-2l'82-14	180:3,11,20	290:6 292:20
3,7,8,18	258:9 267:13	85:10,12*17	181:17 182:6	293:6 294:9
20,21,24	267:22 272:7	85•22'86•3,14	183:4,22	294:21 295:15
3,6,7,10	281:2 282:13	87!5 88-2,9	184:5,14	295:17,21
12.16.21	282:15,22,25	88-22 89*4,10	185:18 186:5	296:1,7,11
1,1,9	283:14,15	89-22 90-17	186:15,20,21	297:19,20
14.19.21	287:13 293:22	91-4,18,24	187:4,14	298:15 303:4
23	29:1,15	317:4 336:17	92-3^9,23	196:4 197:12	303:13,24
16	,23 30:1	numbered 18 8 : 6	93-16 ,21 ,25	197:22 198:4	305:10 , 17 ,22
2.3.15	240:25 355:6	94-4,8,20	198:11,17	306:13,20
8,12	32:12	numbering 27:18	95-2^ 15	19 9:1 , 6 , 10 , 16	307:12, 18
19,20,23	123:17 142:12	96-9^16,21	200:12 201:23	308:18 309:4
9	, 18 34:18	numbers 124:17	97-21 98*4, 15	202:7 , 12, 18	309:12 310:7
20	37:22	126:8,8 130:7	98:24 99:11	202:20 203:4	310:12,16,19
24	38:4,8	142:11 218:2	100-6,24*	203:15 204:18	311:11,23,25
10.13.15	243:9 264:23	101:3^19	205:13 206:13	312:9,15,22
1:11,18,25	9:3,12 11:10	342:11,19	265:5,8,9,11	210:9,10
::14 315:1	11:13 12:17	347:17 353:14	283:13 285:12 211:2 212:5
):23 316:13	13:12 14:13	354:7	288:23 294:6	212:12,14,23
i: 21 318:2	15:5,8 16:14	old241:ll	305:15,19	213:1,3,4,5,6
1:14 319:11	17:7 18:13	247:22,24	311:7 312:14	243:18 298:7
•:22 320:14	19:9 23:9	256:6 295:3,5	314:21 315:7	298:20 299:22
i:17 321:20	25:5 26:9	295:10 341:23	315:11 338:22 299:23 302:7
:: 1, 14	27:11 29:16	342:2, 15,20	345:20 346:24 311:8 329:25
1:10,21	30:7 32:20	345:16 347:9	348:6	330:4,5 333:8
::10 325:6	35:15 36:3	olderl44:20	opinions 24:17	333:17 , 18 ,20
i:3 328:14	39:21 41:19	242:15 244:21	24:22 31:18	333:25
1:6 330:1	42:4 46:14	245:20	32:5 33:4,10	organizations
i:12,19	47:1,12,15	omit226:16	33:22 34:1,11 63:17,19,20
.:22,25	49:9 51:1 , 7	omitted 103:19	34:20 35:1 , 12 98:7 171:25
::5,14	51:16 52:15	224:3 225:3	35:23 60:10	195:4,5 230:5
1:19 337:14	55:14 57:8,19	once50:7,7	104:8 108:8	309:25 310:20
':21 ,23	57:22 58:14	56:21 160:21	114:12, 17	311:16 341:4
1:25 339:14	61:4 64:2	207:20 227:17	116:22 117:8	341:4 344:20
i:18 342:25	70:3 72:6	252:19	117:16 , 19	organized 152:12
1:8 , 9 , 16	73:17 74:3	ones 29:18 30:11	118:7 120:3	original 25:13
::15 345:19	77:4 78:10	30:19 31:6 , 7	132:14 137:16 122:3 358:8
1:11,22,25	79:25 81:17	31:12 32:13	138:5 143:14	358:12
': 22 348:2	82:9 84:8	50:2 66:16	165:16 ,25	originally 10 7:8
•: 9,16	85:15 87:7 ,23 73:16 74:2	167:16 , 18	origins45:9
i:8,13,20	88:5,11 91:16 95:21 96:25	168:1 204:5,8	Orlandol:18
::4,16	92:1 98:6	104:19 105:19	204:8 , 9 , 14, 17 15:2,24 84:13
1:3	101:21 109:21 105:20 129:24	204:19,20,24	191:18
:tionable	110:2, 16	131:5 161:5	204:25 205:4	outline 152:13
1:5	115:14 119:10 167:11 168:3	213:8 236:8	outset52:10
:tions 24:8	120:12 123:7	168:4, 15,20	238:8 245:5	outside 225:10
stive 17 6:24	127:19 ,20	168:20 169:16	245:11 289:18	overlap 128:25
rvations	133:24 135:21 181:7 182:7	292:15,17	131:11 166:19
1:9	140:10 148:4	205:6 234:16	339:22	overwhelming
Lned 83:11	155:9 156:25	236:10 , 11	opportunity 43:9 233:15 317:3
25	155:12	158:19 159:16 277:7,10	56:15 161:21	317:4
::4	162:3,25	285:9 310:8	164:23 165:18	overwhelmingly
Lning 18:12	164:9 ,25	339:7 , 8	210:19 284:8	307:6 351:13
19	84:8	170:7 171:6	one'sl66:9	295:24 296:5	o' clock 273:1
1	171:16 175:16 187:6 335:8	296:10	0'Hala73:25 3usly 21:17	180:23 186:8	ongoing 48:24	opposite 307:1	_
9	73:17	186:10 194:14 168:6 318:4	310:1	_P_
19	108:6	195:7,17,22	onward 275 :16 , 17	options 335:5,6	p27*6 293*20
:: 19 151:4	196:8 201:9	open 249:16	337:7	pack 300-13
1:15 220:5	204:23 207:6	openedl67:10	oral67:20 68:13 301:5,9,13
::15 250:14	207:25 208:2	operate 147:6	220:22 221:5	303 i 2^11
.:7 329:20	210:24 212:21 152:5 292:6	288:19	334:9 , 15,20
i:9	213:8,16	operating 76:22	Orange 1:18	342:1
sion 196:13	214:14 217:15 114:20	188:2 190:3	packet 13:9
!: 13	218:4 219:9	opinion 24:3	191:18 355:2	page 10:15 14:14
aer 14:24	219:17 221:1	35:24 140:11	357:3	14:21*25:8 '
c 33:23	222:21 223:19 140:16 142:16	order 19:24 30:9 27:5, 7 29:4,5
12	223:25	223:25 225:23 142:21 143:1	30:10 33:25	37^24 81:4 '
::9 ,22	227:5,20	183:19 206:24	35:11 44:4	121:7 , 12*22
):18 226:14	228:12 231:25 207:17 216:24	107:18 116:22 121:24,25
;: 2 3 315:8	237:7 246:9	217:8 , 14	125:12 152:23 122*2,3, 13, 17
):10	256:18 257:18 221:11 223:6	156:18 210:18 122:18 ,20 ,21
ze 130:2	258:25 260:12 223:25 224:9	308:23 344:22 122 * 22'123 * 13
:es 17:8,14	273:3 275:4	224:22 225:18	353:20 354:4	123:14,15,21
:ial 202:5, 8	277:3, 7 , 16	226:14,23	ordinarily 36:15 123*22 124*24
!:9 203:19	278:19 280:12 228:23 232:8	37:5	125:2 126:1
:iallyl6:7	280:19 281:7	232:21 233:1	organization	128:2,13
2	282:5 291:12 240:17 243:22	125:24 164:11 134:5*137:2 itimes	292:25 319:16 243:24 245:10	172:12 200:10 173*3,18 '
):23,24	319:23 322:8	248:12 251:9	200:17 , 18 ,21	175-18 184*9
10	46:2	326:23 327:2 253:10 261:13	200:24 201:7	184*10 189*6 ::3 295:4	330:15 334:2 261:17,19	201:11 209:13 243*21 264*12 6:12 7:20	338:10,19 264:4,18	209:17,24 264*15,23 '
):2 268:15	202:3 205:19	177:22 199:21 249:11 251:10 331:12 334:9
1:16,25	205:21 206:8	253:23 255:1	251:11,11,12	334:15,20
): 19 293:19 213:11 214:16	255:2	251:18 256:5	personal 1:9
1:22 334:5	215:2,4,10,19 Peachtree 2:10	256:9 , 10	4:20 70:15
::5 335:11	218:3 225:13	192:10 358:3	257:9 258:9	130:20 191:9
):12,20	225:22,24	peer 94:13	260:4,4,4	221:13 258:25
i:6	227:4,20	penalties 190:5 264:1 ,5 265:6	personally 39:15
3	99:17	230:13 231:23	357:5	265:8,11	131:13 155:1
::22,23,25	237:20 242:17 penalty 18 9 : 2 0	280:17 287:8	155:6 268:20
):1 ,2, 11	245:6 , 7 , 8 , 10	356:20	287:13, 14	276:6
1:9 , 11 , 17	249:6 263:22 pending 43:6	293:1 ,4, 10	person's261:21
::10 188:6	265:24 270:11	314:19 325:11 294:1 300:14	pertain 112:22
': 5 355:6	270:25 289:21 penetration	300:17 ,22,25	135:18 139:1
1:8,10,12	291:6 292:10	287:8,16,17	301:8,11	164:14,18
ig 134:5	299:5 303:7 Pennsylvania	303:1,20,21	pertaining 58:1
7:17 284:24 308:22 309:13	18:21	334:14,19	65:4,6 69:23
ilets 172:2 312:23 315:5 people 83:22	335:25 336:1	111:22 112:21
r 15:7	323:17 328:9	86:17 106:21	336:11 , 13,21	148:8 255:2
•: 13 233:20 339:9 340:4	146:13 177:17 336:23 337:7	277:5
1:14,22	342:13 350:4	177:21 202:14 337:16	pertains 1:9
.: 19 ,21	351:3	202:23 203:17	percentage 47:23 13:10 43:21
1:2,14,18	participate 16:8	209:6 216:18	70:22 89:17	191:9 240:1
rs 28:13	74:13	218:20 ,21 ,24	166:23,23	280:10 322:21
::21 155:21	participated	218:25 220:1	167:2 244:19	pertinent 65:18
):22,23	40:16 314:2	220:9 222:2	257:8 ,24	100:9 107:6
!:23 26 9:12	participation	227:17 230:4	percentages	317:15 322:25
1:10,11	41:2	230:14 238:25 256:15	Peruses 14:11
!: 12,12	particular 27:10	241:24 242:1	perception 261:3 46:13 102:3
.: 22	42:15 58:1 , 19	242:15, 18	263:8 , 17	Petel57:10
jraph 24 9:22 59:4 65:22	243:12 244:10 296:6 , 10	276:11 , 13, 18
1:2 2 251:6	77:24 81:15	244:10,21	perceptions	Petersburg
i:25 267:2	105:19 106:1	245:2 246:10	343:2	155:17,20
': 6, 13	107:19 112:22	247:12 248:3	perform 36:15	156:11 , 19
neters	140:22 144:1	252:21 253:23 48:16 159:23	157:10,22
.:17	144:1 147:8	254:16 ,21	performed 47:23	158:14,25
nount 2 6 7:15 147:14 173:18	255:6 , 7 256:6 85:15	159:20 ,25
5l 60:22	199:18 201:1	256:8,12	performing	160:7 162:6
': 4	203:5 207:14	259:17 260:16 297:25	276:9 , 11 , 17
its 255:25	208:22 209:2	260:17 , 17 , 17	period71:l 80:3	ph 66:12 73:25
.:4	210:18 214:2	260:20 261:3	203:6 232:7	73:25 110:14
15:21	228:6,7 229:5	261:4,10,18	258:2 279:10	115:22 164:13
5:5 19:14	229:12,23	261:19 262:1	279:14 280:3	Philip2:25
9	37:3	234:13,18	262:4 263:3	280:5,11,25	192:25 194:20
11,14	235:9 258:8	264:2 266:3	281:18 283:7	194:21 195:14
12	42:11 274:23 281:12	270:5,7	286:12 289:13 308:3,6,9,12
20,22	59:2 281:15 283:12	271:10,11,22 291:21,25	313:13,14
22	61:19	286:3 298:17	272:3 284:17	318:20 319:24 314:4,6
16	81:11	307:4,13	296:12 303:11 321:12 322:18 315:14,16
2	85:6,8	312:18 315:13	303:17,20,21	322:21 323:2	316:18
13	90:9 ,24 323:2 340:3	304:4 305:24 326:2 329:8 , 9	phone 161:15 1:10,16 343:22 346:14	306:1,7,8 329:10 339:12	photocopies
):15 106:2	350:14	315:4 319:19	348:8	25:20 159:1
:4,7,17	particularly	people's 263 :17	periodicals	photocopy 27 : 4
1:13,14	86:7 87:1	267:14	316:11	29:2,3 173:17
-,:2 146:3	201:20	percent 11: 5 , 8	periods 162 :12	285:16
1:10 152:14	particulars 27:4	14:17 35:3	162:14 274:11	phrase 205:14,18
': 16 162:7	43:22	55:9 57:16	275:12 288:3	228:8
::11,11	parties 188 :12	70:19 79:9	321:23 340:13	physical 50 :11
i: 20 170:20 355:12	105:9 149:10	per jury 189:20	physically 40:21
!:24 174:7	parts 28:16	207:17 , 18 ,20	190:5 356:20	142:10 154:20
::21 175:25 88:21 336:10	209:3, 11	357:5	154:22
': 10 181:11	party 188:13	211:21 ,22	person 84:20	Ph.Dl:15 3:2
.:12 185:3	355:13	213:2 230:23	162:25 163:19 4:5 10:18
): 7,9	pastor 229:21	231:9 240:16	217:19 ,21	18:12, 19
i:22 199:12	pastors 259 :20	241:23 244:10 239:22 244:17 83:11 , 17 ,23
': 17 , 20	patients 230 :12	244:13 245:19 300:10 303:7	83:24 84:8
i:15,22	pay 19:15 177:18	246:1 ,4 248:3 311:9 316:18	86:1 99:25
1:2 190:17	Pleasures 124:13 301:24 302:4	possiblel8:5	202:5 203:23
.: 15 193:2	plots 352:8	302:6 , 8 , 17 ,20 65:4 67:5	263:5 333:7
::5 356:2	plus 128:24	303:25 337:12 82:24 141:24	preparing 27:1
':17	244:19	337:19,24	150:8 170:5	163:2,21,22
274:20	point5:ll 30:16 338:3,20,24	178:25 180:6	preposition
are 337:7	43:11 70:2, 11 340:16	222:16 228:20 142:6
.: 24 342:1	74:2 77:5	polls 92 : 4 , 7 , 11	228:20 234:24	presence 19 : 21
5245:22	101:21 102:2	92:14 200:9	235:24 247:19 90:22,23
i:l 307:2,4 106:22 129:10 200:10,16,18	305:14	present34:l
1:6	133:13 134:1	200:24 201:6	possibly 112:19	45:5 66:10
ss 197:13	135:22 136:15 201:11 241:2	204:13 230:2	88:10 152:15
14:18	147:10 164:24 241:4 242:16	postl7:23 99:25 338:22
3	277:4	186:6 194:16	243:17,19,21	343:20 344:1	presentation
ars 151:14	194:17 228:1	246:6 258:1	poster 172:10,11 15:12,14,23
.:15	229:21 237:23 258:19 297:17 172:17 308:22 15:25 45:6
3	174:10	238:16 240:10 297:24 298:3	posters 172:5, 6	96:18 118:22
1:24 250:11 240:10 241:17 298:6,7,21,25 172:7,18	presentations 1:18 241:18 244:24 299:3,12 231:21 15:20 16:3
sint 22 9:23 245:13 294:15 338:11 339:4	Post-it 116:14	89:14 96:2,6
1:7	300:25 304:14 339:8 ,20	potential 177:1	96:11 , 14,24
\ 2:22	304:21 305:2	340:9 341:2	potentially 21:4 97:5, 8 , 9 , 12
1:22	305:7 , 13	popular 170:14	257:19	97:16 , 19 ,23
56:3,4	325:7,9	288:13 294:22	practice78:9	98:1
10	66:21 326:15 352:21 345:24	83:9 112:14	presented 14:24
7	85:9 352:24	popularity 287:3 116:8 118:3 41:5 65:1
.: 23 188:9	pointed 17 8:22	294:18	118:11 , 16	89:19 95:19
i:l,2 285:1 178:25 264:24	population 15:2	154:12 340:22 112:23 252:21
>:9	pointing 178:4	86:23 89:17	preceding 50 :1	253:8 304:9
sd 29:4	278:4 332:18	207:19 ,20	precise 86:16	308:9 314:4
11,25	341:15	208:9 209:11	149:15,18	322:15 323:3
': 9 321:17	points 244:19	218:13 240:16 150:14 162:8	presenting 32:4
ss 20:6	257:5, 9	242:9 243:10	331:13, 17	118:23
!: 16	policy 20:1	245:20 259:25	precisely 214 :12	preserve 30 0 : 23
Lng 304:12	polished 45:8	260:11 262:2	230:7	press 90:12
itif f 115:15	political 86:20	343:12	preciseness	181:2
itif f s 47:23 91:15	portion 29:21	150:1,5,15	presumably 7 2:2
itiff's3:13	politics 91:8	45:20 47:24	precise-type	100:15 223:10
.4,15,16,17	poll 201:22	153:4 278:9	331:11	273:13
.8 , 19 ,20 ,21 208:25 209:14 280:15	precision 149:17	presumell:19
12	12:20 209:17 ,20	portions 334:4,4 151:22 208:19 36:6 276:10
21	27:25 210:1,9,11,12	pose 22 7:25	preconceived	presumed 276:18
11	40:8 210:13 211:3	posed 225:12 70:8	prettyl9:3 60:1 ): 18 121:5 211:11 , 13, 16 279:5 303:10	predates 41:25 60:4 259:23
:: 8 193:14	211:24 212:12 334:13 336:4	predominately	305:7 310:5
1:15,16,17	212:17 241:1	posing 113:15	38:17	prevalence
1:18,19,20	241:25 242:8	245:24	prefer62:6	261:20
1:21 240:22 242:14,15,17	position 24:14	228:9 , 18	previewlll:9
!: 15 293:14 242:23 243:12 24:14 35:20	preference	previous 13:9 •: 19 307:24 243:15, 18 ,22 74:3 147:14 275:18 101:23 151:2
1:1 341:20	243:25 244:9	168:2 183:2,9	premise222:9	225:11 226:22
):2	244:15,21	231:1 265:19	preparation	231:6 250:10
32:23 33:1	246:1,7,13,25 313:6 315:6	36:10 40:17	257:2
1:24 339:1	247:2, 9 , 11 , 11 315:16 , 17	58:16 90:7	previously 46:8
•: 2,4 340:6 251:8 256:5	317:16 ,22,24	118:4	46:18 68:20
ling 31:14	256:20,22	positions 194 :15	prepare 6 : 8	76:25 194:6
13	290:11	260:1 264:1	213:24	37:13 39:15	324:8
3	32:7 67:8	265:3,4	possession	39:23 59:22	pre-Ph.D18:3
7	76:23	269:17 ,20	141:25 143:6	118:1 127:4, 6	pre-1950 277:5
': 15,19	270:1 ,2,3	167:5 338:17	141:10	277:17
nations	287:11 299:21	possibilities	prepared 13:8	price 75:12
::7	300:4 329:22	234:12 303:16 40:14, 16	166:15
; 2:4 192:4 332:7 334:11	304:2 352:25	94:17 107:25	primarily 28 0:21
sel4:8	337:13, 13	possibility	117:16,18,19	primary 86:24
:: 2 123:9	polling 92:2	31:22 34:2	117:21,22,23	98:23 151:18
': 15 184:7	200:9 ,20	166:4 178:21	118:2, 6 , 11 , 13 152:19 154:19
.:15 358:9	201:14 243:18 205:2 222:17	118:17 , 19 , 19	163:7 321:1
1:12	270:2 298:13	252:13 277:24 143:17,21	351:2
Ltive218:25 312:18 351:2 provenance	58:11 60:9	329:1,3,17
; 244:3	production 350:6	346:17	143:3 163:23	330:11 , 17
r60:21	351:2,7,8,12 provide 11:3,15	proving 235:21	331:20 332:3
24	69:2	351:20	21:19 22:13	psychology 263:2 332:12 333:6
3,15,25	productive 84:22	22:17 , 17 ,25	publicl:24 4:2 333:22 338:21
20	100:15 160:17	23:5,8,8	42:15 65:2,3	339:10 340:8 i:19 324:9	products 95:5, 10	25:10 35:4	65:6 68:7 340:14 353:7 ):5 326:1 199:19 ,20	42:9 46:14, 15	91:2,21 93:2 353:11 355:4 1:15,16 267:18 311:4	47:19 49:22	125:22 126:3 355:23 358:10 cities 341:18	49:22 50:3	126:5 139:10 358:21
!:18 324:16	profession	51:18 56:12	146:8 147:12	publication
ate 341:4	256:13 260:15	57:20 ,21 58:8	158:14,24	14:14,21 ,25
ability	professional	59:8 60:5,12	170:25 171:22 17:5 30:10
:: 16 283:6	16:15 17:2, 7	72:24 73:24	172:9 177:1	200:1 212:19
ably 5:18	17:10 , 13,20	99:9 , 10 , 16	177:16 181:2	212:21 243:16
4	19:10	18:11,18 20:8	117:8 125:12	181:3 182:5	274:23 322:25
23,23	45:8 20:12 67:2	125:16 127:9	183:6 185:13	343:17 346:14
8	56:21	71:11 85:25	146:5,24	186:25 188:4	publications
•: 12 120:6	87:2 108:3	155:18 164:4	188:23 191:24 13:24 14:12
1:19 135:20 112:21 160:19	167:15 177:20	194:2 198:8	93:6,13,18,23
':8 194:17	160:23 171:20	225:9 230:18	198:10 , 15,21	94:2 99:6
):17 235:2	188:4 216:5	260:14 276:1	198:25 205:1	131:9 151:19
i:22 250:10 229:15 232:8	276:2 282:24	205:23 206:1	170:11,14
):21 278:2	232:20 233:1	282:25 338:14	206:5, 7 , 9 ,24	171:18 ,24
i:9,14	254:1 255:14	338:15	207:2,4,6,9	172:2 217:3
;: 18 330:7	267:7 283:13 provided 5:24	207:13,21	267:20 268:3
1:6	288:23 345:20	8:21 9:7 10:5	208:5, 6 , 10 , 16 275:5
Lem 25:14	355:4	10:9 , 10 12:8	208:16 212:13	publicity 267:4
1:14 214:7	professions	13:18 14:6 , 9	212:15, 17 ,25	publicized
::6	257:3 259:17	24:10,15,19	213:24,24	197:24 269:15
Lematic62:5	professor 4:14	29:1 35:21	214:20,22	269:20
Lems 219:10	84:12 167:10	36:2 38:11 , 13	215:7 ,20	publicly 173:25
.: 22	professorial	38:19 ,20 40:2	216:2,5, 8 , 12	174:2 180:1
adure 111:12 87:2	44:1 51:4	216:13, 16 , 17	180:18 198:2
sed 7:6	professorships	55:6 56:2, 6	216:21 ,24	198:6 199:3
sss 59:6	87:25	57:1 59:15	217:5, 9 218:5 209:14, 17 ,25
i:15 162:22	Progeny 1:7 5:2	60:24 64:14	218:7 , 11 , 16	210:13 212:5
::3	5:21 6:13, 18	64:16 100:13	219:17 ,20	215:23 216:7
ace 20:24	9:5, 6 41:16	100:15, 19	224:2, 12,24	217:19 240:11
6	25:3	42:2 47:21	104:15 105:3	225:16,18	240:11 260:18
21	42:11 61:17,22 73:8	107:22 108:1	226:15,19,24	274:11 275:11
21	99:8 73:9 74:5	110:21 111:13	227:6,16,22 279:21 296:20 ::10 200:5 100:22 101:2	111:14 116:2	227:22 228:13 297:1,3 305:4 .:4 189:2 191:7	116:4, 7 120:2	231:23,24 306:16 308:3 aced 41:5 223:12 322:4	121:13,15,18	232:14,18,20 308:14 313:6
7	49:12 356:2 358:6	122:14,21	233:2,8 237:1 314:7 315:21
23	79:7	program65:l	124:23 155:9	239:6,12	343:7 345:17
4,8	100:3 291:8	155:10,14	243:22,24 352:14
.: 15 ,17	programs 293:2,2	156:10 , 13	247:1 , 1 ,3	public ' s 227 : 8
::4 108:4	293:5,22	157:9 , 12, 18	252:2, 7 254:7 306:18 308:16
.:20 200:2	294:1 295:23	157:18 158:12	254:12 255:15	publish94:12
::8 , 9 209:8 296:9	158:22,22	255:16 263:13	published 14:15
.:3 352:6 , 9	progress 14:14	160:10 162:17	265:13 270:3	14:19 93:8 , 12
acers 333:21 14:21 93:8	162:17 163:9	270:19 271:2	94:6 , 9 ,25
aces 310:4	107:13	164:3,4	279:20 287:25 95:8 , 12
acing 24:13	project 65:22	166:14, 17 ,24	288:15,25	271:14, 15,21
11	144:15	68:17,19 69:3	194:11 201:3	294:3,7	271:24 272:1
act 71:21	70:5 146:5	230:1 238:5	295:25 296:6	308:25 316:10
5,14	178:3 225:14	239:5 276:20	296:10 297:14 322:20 342:21
::8 179:7	projected 287:7	277:1 , 7 , 16	303:9 304:14	350:16
1: 18 295:25	pro jectory 146 : 3	278:5, 9 ,25	304:22,22	publisher 17 : 4
!: 6 ,10	projects 92 :10	292:22 319:18	307:3,5	publishers 133 : 9
i: 9,10,17	prominent 276 :12	321:19 323:8	309:10 , 10	publishing 16 : 20
': 10 309:8	promoting 263 :14	327:5, 18 ,20	313:22 314:10	Puerto 7 :16 , 20
1: 9 310:3,3	prompt 358:17	providence 27 :13	314:10 315:4	14:24 15:2,7
1:4,9,11,14	properly 201:10 providing 23:24	315:5,20,25	15:24 16:13
.: 6,8 312:8	provel39:3	35:17 37:21	328:2, 19	18:2 41:13
24	44:9	306:21 307:4	247:20,21	R2:3 188:1	275:20 279:13
5.14	55:10 326:23	248:11 251:23 189:1,1 192:3 280:18,22
11.12.14	puts 16 8:1	253:7 254:15	355:1 356:1 , 1 281:8 ,21
19	56:21	214:24	254:16,17	358:24	282:11 300:3
22	57:6 , 17	putting 67:5	260:10 261:14	radio 341:24	300:17 303:8
23	59:3,18 103:23 163:17 264:17 265:17	raised210:8	303:14 304:12
10	64:8 , 9 171:13 177:6 271:4 279:7 , 9	ranging 174:24 305:7 ,24
14	66:13	177:13 185:9	279:16,23,23	rarel02:19	313:14 316:4
20	68:21	200:14 251:17 281:24 283:19	ratel82:18	328:21 342:17
12	77:16 281:14 317:14 291:9,12,19 257:20 258:1 342:18 345:9
22	82:25	330:4	294:10 299:13 258:20 259:17 346:9 347:13
25	84:6	p.ml:20 191:20 301:19,25 259:20	347:19 353:17
4	90:21 354:8 302:17,21,25	rates76:15 353:19 356:20
15	99:20	_ 303:6,7 309:5 256:21	357:6 358:9
): 7 ,21	_Q_ 309:20 313:12	raw 245:14	readable 152:15
i:4,5,10,14	qualifications	314:15,16,18	reach 218:13	reader 170:9
1:21,22,23	83*9	314:19,21	281:9 310:13	171:7 273:15
': 3 , 3,5,6,8	qualified 138 • 4	324:4,25	311:18 344:24 273:25 284:10
': 21 108:13 202:14	'	334:6 , 10 , 13	reachedl47:7	readers 341:15
1:20,24	qualifier 62 • 13	335:16 336:4	231:23 271:11	readership
::17 131:1	86*18	'	336:5,6,8	271:11,22	346:15
.: 3 , 8	qualifiers	340:17 344:4	272:2 284:17	Reader's 174:13
1:24 323:14 237:21	346:20 347:24	reaches 146:13	174:15 341:15
171:9	qualify 251:25	351:15	reaching 138:5	342:24
!: 17	quality 138 * 24	questioned	218:13 292:16	reading 28:22
sd 158:12	quantitative	155:11	292:17 302:1	46:13,25 47:6
1: 18 163:8	184:16	questioning 7:6	339:21	49:19 58:16
Lngl54:23	quantity 139:19	150:22	reaction 225:9	110:4 112:14
art 92:1,16	question 18 :17	questions 7 : 25	read 6: 23 7:2,10 112:16 113:7
18,21,24	29:14 33:6 45:17 65:19 7:21 8:9,12	114:11 117:10
2	127:17	36!3 43:4,5,5 83:21 110:24	8:20,24 9:18	132:17 161:22
::14	45:18 46:1,2	111:2,9,11	25:20 28:2,4	214:3 221:14
arting	46*5,9,21,24	112:18,21,22	28:22 32:8,8	241:13 268:22
': 18	47*16 49*13	112:25 113:15 32:10 34:14	273:18 280:20
ase 17:23	49*24 50*9	119:16 127:19 34:23 46:10	303:7 , 14
21	85:6,6 51-11,13* 138:10 148:16 58:1,6,15,18 305:12 336:4
8	99:1 53•22? 54 * 3 149:9 ,22 58:20 60:17 337:9 358:14 ::6 127:11 57!! 53-4 161:5 177:13 69:20 108:12	readings 328:9 1:15,19 60:6,7 65:11 186:23 211:14 110:12,13	reads29:4
.:14	69-l' 95-7*	212:3 225:11	112:12 114:12 273:17 300:7
ssely 103:21 97-25 105*1	273:4 279:4	114:17 115:6	342:15
ases21:15	108*16 123*9	279:22 282:18 115:7,12	readyl60:4
!:4 146:21	124*17 127*14 300:7 307:21	118:3,20	161:9 198:18
):1 322:11	131-21 137*21 339:24 353:16 131:13,16,22	209:5 240:7
aant 42:13	138*15 143*18	quick 77:12	132:8 , 11 , 11	243:10 263:11
ae 6 9:8	143^22 150:23 83:10 138:10	132:14, 18 ,20	287:5 296:3
1:17,22	151:16 152:24 185:24	132:21 133:4	reaffirmed
i:20	153*4 157*15	quicker 119:15	133:12,22,22	160:22
aed 113:19	160:12 163:16	quickly 13:13	134:19 137:13	real 77:12 83:10
aing 70:12	163:18 169:6	126:9 132:20	147:2 164:22	realities 84:21
i:22	169:7 ,24 '	134:25 135:8	164:23 168:11	reality 221:14
Lewl98:21	172*15 176*6	Quincy 145 : 4, 11	175:14 184:6	realized 68 : 22
): 10 297:13 176*10,11,12	147:2	184:8,10,12	really 7:19
: 12 13:10	176-13'l77-9	quit 44:19 65:7 189:20 190:6	13:25 33:1
23	102:6	178:16,17 '	205:2,12	205:16 209:4	37:6 43:15
•:23 132:12 179•16' 185 * 15 227:18 230:4	209:11 210:5	70:12 113:20
.:1 , 6 , 19	195*7 207*10	232:16 306:1	210:19 211:10 118:16 128:4
:: 10 145:21 211:18 217:24 306:5 307:8	211:19 218:21 135:18 137:25
i:20 156:21 221:8 223:14	313:2,3	223:1 224:17	167:1 208:20
i: 22 159:12 224*14 226*13	quitel74:14	224:19 226:7	228:15 254:16
.:11 166:23 226:22 233:11 210:3	229:5, 9 , 10	254:19 262:19
':2 172:2	233*12 239*9	quitting 68:8	233:20 237:23 266:5 287:1
):20 179:1	239*17 241*21 306:2	245:1 , 15	294:13 301:18
::12 219:13 243*8 244*8	quote 237:8 , 14	246:14 257:5	301:22 302:3
:: 4 247:19	245:17 , 18 ^21	quoted 213:6	259:8 266:25	347:3,5 351:1
.:17 257:23 245*24 246*15	_ 267:12 273:12	realm 221:23
:: 13 296:23 246:19 247:6	_11_ 273:13,24	262:18 292:7
1:13	reception 343:12 242:22 250:6	16:19 19:6	109:8 , 17 ,20
ns 222:17	recess 83:6	264:9 265:2,3 63:20 69:15	109:23 119:11
sn 8 : 7 29:17 147:17 187:17 278:3 307:13	72:6 , 11 77:25	119:21 ,22
4	99:3	352:11	350:14	81:6 87:13	120:10,14,15
!:20 109:24	recipient 152:2	refers 242:4	91:10 , 11 , 12	120:20 ,25
5:25 126:11	recognizing	245:2,19	91:19 95:24	121:12 122:3
': 13 129:1	304:13	reflect 23:15	97:5 98:8	122:14, 15,21
1:10,13	recollection	26:5 45:19	100:9 101:1	122:25 123:18
>: 4 206:8	11:10 , 12, 18	47:20 48:4	101:18 106:4	124:5,23
1:8 228:6,7 17:6 53:14,19 121:24 134:7	106:5,7,13	125:8,17,18
1:13,20	65:8 114:10	196:1 202:13	107:21 113:1	126:4,6,12,22
!: 12 257:2	230:22 274:3	203:16 264:4	117:8 129:13	127:1 ,4, 11 , 12
': 18 269:23	recommend 299 :11	reflected 50 : 20 151:15 180:8	127:15, 16 , 16
):16 281:3	record 8:5 9:20	59:5 153:2,5	218:14 230:2	127:19 ,23
1:12 287:11 12:17 23:2,15 153:20 168:12 230:2 283:14	128:6,9,18
':14,21	24:7 25:6	205:3 258:1	283:24	129:12, 16
):18 303:1	26:5 35:16	reflecting 44 : 22	relates 89:3	130:5, 15,21
):6	37:17 42:15	47:18 49:14	117:20 205:1	131:4,15,23
enable	46:7 47:14	reflection 143:4	relating 36:4	132:9 , 13
1:16 283:6	50:5, 6 75:8	reflective 57:16 95:4 171:19	133:5, 13
3ns 258:6	134:7 147:21	126:20 134:11 179:18	134:12 135:23
LI 12:6 16:4 194:17 199:22 150:25 156:1	relation 19:18	136:2,10
16	25:19	199:23 249:18 156:7 161:13	260:25	137:10 138:13
14	49:8 , 9	249:19 266:8	211:3 246:25	relations 69:17	138:18 ,22
12	54:7	266:11 272:17 247:2,12	86:6,21 87:14	140:11,14
18 64:23	272:18 273:7	259:25 317:16 88:4,8 93:3	141:1,5,6,11
1 110:18	278:9,11	reflects99:6	200:6	141:12,17,19
.: 17 113:19 279:7 300:16	141:22 228:22	relationship	141:24 144:6
::19 ,21	308:7 330:23	256:7 315:16	64:7	144:7 , 11 , 15
>: 13 147:23 332:23 333:10 315:17 353:10	relative 188 :12	144:19 ,24
!: 1 151:8	348:10	refrain 348:4	355:12	147:22,22
::3 173:2	recording 67:21	refutation	relatives 348:14	148:13 149:3
S:13,19	records 22:7	181:14 182:3	348:17 ,20 ,22	149:3 150:11
1:5, 12, 13	47:17 48:7	refutations	releases 181:2	150:25 153:18
= :1 207:15	49:14 56:16	181:19	relevance 140:24	153:19 ,20 ,21
):24 211:1	56:18,20 71:3	regardl8:4 24:9 216:4	153:22,25
):25 236:22 75:25	168:13 179:1	relevant 7:5,7	154:1,24
1:24 241:13	record's82:10	186:13 204:6	21:4,6 30:22	158:3 162:7
i:ll 269:16	recovered 342:8	204:17 323:13 36:19 42:14	163:2,3,13,21
1:20 275:2	reducel46:17	335:8	60:10 61:7	163:22,24
!:12 306:22 178:24	regarded 267:8	80:14 99:19	164:6 , 15, 19
': 22 322:16	refer 25:13	regarding 41: 7	99:22 100:4, 7	165:1 166:15
':5	104:25 119:22 66:23 68:7	101:1 103:25	166:16 , 16 ,24
Lve12:25	127:12,14,18	91:3,22 98:9	107:25 113:14	167:3,15,24
.:4 112:15	170:21 341:1	150:1 , 14, 15	117:15 134:19	169:3, 10
>:17 163:15	reference 37 : 9	178:7 180:18	135:15 142:20	170:1 171:11
::1 196:19	94:16 200:1	205:7 , 10 , 11	142:23,25	173:10 174:3
1:15,15	referenced 116:2 209:17 215:16 143:13,21 ,25	174:19 175:8
':11	162:7	224:10 226:17 145:14, 18	175:21 176:4
Lved 10:8,21	referred 35:11	226:25 232:15 148:17 , 19	176:17 180:24
11,12	16:7 35:22 37:21	237:1 248:10	168:10 195:13	185:2,17
4	58:20	38:10 266:19	253:9,9	215:24 243:4	186:4,4
16	61:3,5	280:5 285:24	275:23 276:17 312:24 317:20	194:12 198:23
5	98:6	referring 10:25 283:16 288:2	323:6 329:9	199:2, 15
::21 116:19 28:14 35:9	295:25 309:8	334:4	200:17 ,21 ,22
): 17 126:7	36:23 38:4	309:11 324:7	reliability	200:25 201:1
;:9,2 3	40:1,12 41:14 325:3 340:15	242:25	201:3 211:17
’: 11 , 12	41:18 ,20	regardless 222 : 5	reliance 24 :10	234:6,23
1:17 154:11 42:17 45:10	regional 243:19	24:15 25:24	235:23,23
': 9,10	47:10 , 12 48:4	Registered 188 :4 35:17 ,20	236:4,5, 7 ,8
i:7 163:14	48:7 50:14	355:4	37:21 38:5,11	236:12 237:25
::12, 17	59:13 71:16	regularly 273:17 38:14, 16 , 17	238:2,4,5,7
.:7 196:18	89:11 91:7	310:21	38:20 ,24 39:3	238:13,21
1:8 233:21	128:21 155:16	rehashing 330:3 39:7 , 16 , 19	240:25 242:6
;: 8,17	164:16 203:5	relate 78:13	104:7 , 16 , 18	242:21 243:2
': 2 321:10	208:20 211:13	related 7:16	104:25 105:2	245:4 246:17
Lving 30 9:14 211:25 229:12 15:3, 14,25	105:8 107:22	247:17 270:10
1:11 , 13, 18	270:24 272:10	requesting 339:6 267:10 272:9	244:4,6
.:7 , 13,24	315:10 355:6	339:8	275:8 ,23	245:15 267:15
!:2 274:8	REPORTED 1:23	requests 11 : 15	276:3,5	302:14
i: 12,14, 2 4	191:23	require 206 :10	282:10 287:23	responsive 2 0 : 25
1:5,21,25	reporter 3:6 4:2	206:15,21 ,25	296:18 297:8	45:25 46:4, 16
':20 278:17 27:21 38:7	208:8 , 11 , 12	297:13 298:1	46:21 47:16
1:24 280:23 184:11 188:4	208:13 282:11 305:2 312:23	48:11 49:13
): 7 ,21 ,22	188:16 193:6	required21:l	314:13 318:4	50:6 58:12
):24 286:9	194:2 353:17	208:9	318:7 , 18 , 19	61:7
!: 10 , 16	353:20,23,25	requirement	318:22,23,24	rest 79:5 83:25
':3,5,17	354:2 355:4	85:21	319:14,20,23	257:20 258:21
i:2,5, 19	355:16 358:21	requires 21:12	320:4,13,23	261:25 342:7
.: 3 ,16	reporting 211: 20	22:19 152:20	321:9 , 17 , 19	result 209:23
:: 7 ,14	reports 36:3	195:8 206:20	323:1 , 8 324:7	results 211: 20
1:3 299:4,6 42:6,11 43:14	rereadll3:5	324:16 325:4	212:6 267:10
•:9,12	44:1,24 59:11	reruns 295 : 3 , 5, 9 325:7 , 17 , 19	retained 51:17
•: 17 318:8	59:13, 14 94:9	research 20 : 5, 7	325:20,21	51:20 52:22
1:8,10,12	94:16,22	24:21 32:10	326:1,5,12,15 53:5,24 54:24
•: 6, 15	136:20 202:5	36:15, 18 ,22	327:14, 16	57:19 58:6 ,8
':22 337:20 202:8 , 9	37:2 44:14,23 328:2, 10 , 17	61:9 , 12,21
1:4,6,12	203:13,16	44:24 45:12	328:25 329:2	62:10,17,19
1:5 341:10	214:22,25	51:23 57:23	329:13,16	62:20 63:1,6
sd 35 :11 ,22 216:6 230:17	57:24 58:13	330:10 , 13, 17	63:19 64:10
.:11	267:3	58:14,21 ,23	331:20 332:2	64:19 65:12
jious 124:11	represent 128:12	59:2,6,7	332:12 339:13 325:14 331:3
165:15,24	180:15 296:25	60:21 65:1,2	350:1,4,5,10	returnl35:19
1:1 , 16	300:22 313:15	65:9 66:1	350:15 351:5	returned 56:22
!: 19 245:11	representation	67:5,7,22	351:11 352:21	Reverend 145:4
:: 15	61:20 66:6	68:3, 6 , 6 ,25	researched	147:3
Lng 137:16	80:17 ,23	69:3 70:5, 8 , 9 269:12 296:21	reviewl2:19
1:9	160:16 ,24	70:12, 17	318:13 340:14 25:24 27:1
nber 6:2	167:17 180:17	77:24 78:13	researcher	31:25 32:4,18
i:24 145:10 210:3,17	90:5,6,10,13	196:17	32:19 33:3,8
1:6 203:12	representations	90:14,15,20	researching	34:10,14,17
•:20 289:4	238:19 313:17	91:2,21 92:10 153:16 286:6	40:10 54:17
1:23 305:12	representative	92:13 98:8	reserve 166:4	56:25 57:9,11
': 20 325:18 1:9 4:20 63:1	103:10 , 14	respect 261:10	93:12 102:1
nbering	150:11 182:1	107:3 113:24	342:15	105:11 106:13
::7,7	191:9 199:4	114:2 117:1,3	respond46:ll	106:23 108:17
zed 240:1	203:11 231:18	117:6 118:24	161:9 180:22	110:7 , 11 , 19
leration	343:22 345:6	119:4 132:19	237:17 303:11 111:8 114:25
15,17	representatives	133:13 135:12 309:20	135:3,8,9
«i 16 0:16	230:10	136:15 139:15	responded 248:3	165:4,15,24
at 33:6	represented	140:1,3	respondents	232:18 293:20
):1 123:9	163:1 ,20	151:17 , 17	211:21 246:4	296:16 312:5
:: 16 261:16 238:9 281:2	152:6 , 9 , 15	300:12 301:8	314:8
:itious	334:2 348:21	154:9 , 19	301:11 , 14	reviewed 8:12
23	348:23	158:10 161:8	303:2 304:8	10:20 17:3,5
;itive30:23	representing	162:22 163:7	334:15,20	59:15 94:14
case 18:16	51:17 52:14	163:23 167:13 335:7 , 16 ,24	104:9 105:4
1	201:10	52:16 162:18	168:6 170:20	336:12,13,17	105:20,21
):8 265:10	182:15 330:22	176:25 177:19 336:19 ,22,23	107:21 108:7
i:18	represents 61:16	178:4,24	responding 304:4 108:19 ,24
3w 3 2 7:6	62:21 ,22	184:18 187:1	response 24 :13	10 9:7 , 9 , 11 , 18
rt 37:13,14	reproduction	194:24 195:2	46:22 60:5	114:22 115:5
23	40:12	188:15 355:15	195:3,23	65:10 108:19	119:24 126:25
14	41:2,20	Republic87:4	197:10,15,17	135:7 146:2	131:14,16
20,25	42:4	request 23:10 , 11	197:17 ,23	150:18 181:11 133:4,24,25
14	44:2,25 46:16 48:11	198:8,19,22	182:22,25	134:11 155:15
':22 188:6	111:16 113:23	198:23 199:17 195:7 196:6	182:7 236:18
i:6 202:16	114:3 116:4,5	204:14,25	225:10 320:2	298:25 311:19
:: 21 203:23 116:6 339:17	215:21 216:12	responses 149:13 311:20 312:1
::5, 10	340:10	225:2,2, 11 , 14 181:20 ,20	312:4, 12
): 19, 22	requested 75 :14	227:4 234:21	184:17	reviewing 117 : 9
•: 10 211:19 75:16 111:17	235:18 237:1	responsibility	155:4 286:5
1:9 , 12	114:7 , 9	240:13 246:23 201:18 ,21	revolution 15:13
':5,10	116:17 184:9	248:16 267:8	239:22 243:6	Reynolds2:12
I	48:20	214:17 218:10	337:1 342:19	193:13 236:19 270:1 287:11
19.20.23	221:18 224:15	345:15 346:2 236:25 238:11 293:25 301:1
6,25	54:8	241:9,10,17	348:7 356:1	308:4 313:14
25	55:2, 7	245:7 247:9	Rodriguez's	safe 31:2 98:7 335:13 336:16
15,24	56:3	247:22 264:24	273:9 279:11 164:25 242:14 342:1,9,16
7	57:2	268:17 269:17	280:20 289:7 256:18 257:11 345:14
5,9	59:22	271:19 273:21	313:9	saferl40:20	scanl32:20
10	, 12, 16	274:15 275:7	Roger 164:13,18	sake 131:1	scannedl34:4
20	62:2, 9	275:15 276:16	Rogers 341:24	151:11 186:2	scattered 38:15
II	, 17 63:2	277:22 278:22	342:16 233:12	scenario 304:8
6	,20 65:14	281:25 287:16	Rolando 115:25	salary 71: 9,10	SCHILLER1:17
24	71:18	287:17 289:15	role 201:15	sale214:25 191:17
18 81:20	300:23 312:2	254:23,25	salient89:16	scholar 84:15,17
13	90:4,16	312:12 330:9	259:9 261:5	samplel99:4	84:18,19,20
1,21	102:7	333:22 342:13	Ronaldll5:20	244:15 340:12 85:5,8
1:13,23	347:16 358:14	roof 220:8	sampling 157 :24	scholarly 14:23
1:11,20	right-hand	Roosevelt 66:12 244:18,20	93:6 94:11
i:8 116:18	293:17 ,21 ,25	roots 43:17,18	Sanl6:12	103:13,15
.: 18 , 25	335:13,19,23	Roper 200 :19 , 20	sanctioned 236 :1 118:23
1:1,20	rigor 103:15	200:24 201:6	236:11 237:5	scholars 85:16
!: 12 194:20	ring 269:8	298:7 ,20	238:17 ,20	scholarship
): 14,22,25	rings 299:l	299:21 302:7	Sandersl:23 4:1 84:24 85:1,3
': 19 297:10	riskl98:9	329:11 , 13,20	188:4,22	85:4, 7 ,20 ,23
1:1,5,8	risks 44:17 65:4	329:24 330:5	191:23 194:1	85:24 103:17
i:16 331:2	177:1,1 227:7	332:7 333:8	355:4,22	135:12
.:5, 18	227:8 ,20 ,23	333:25 337:13 358:21	schooll8:21
1:23	228:25 232:9	337:13 341:5	sat 13:8 24:18	117:12 171:15
i	15:2	249:1	rose 287:13	41:2	177:4 216:20
is 15:24	Rodiguez 1: 9	rough 71: 7 72:24	saturated 20 7 : 20 233:24 234:1
7:16,20	191:9	roughly 122:24	saturation	234:8,18,24
24	15:7	Rodriguez 1:9	130:1 258:10 207:14 240:10 234:24 235:1
13	18:2	2:6 4:19 ,21	run 28 :14 ,15 ,19	Saturday 343 : 20	235:9,11,24
13	43:24	5:1 7:7 9:23	158:5 171:1 344:1 236:1,10
10	52:5,14	44:15 47:5,13	275:6	save 31:23	259:6 344:19
10,11,12	60:17 61:17	running7:24	299:15	349:3,5
14, 19	61:23 73:21	Rutgers 87:25	saw 70:16 178:21	schools 147:12
21	,22 57:7	78:18 , 19	R-A-L-E-Y 115:23 180:6 182:7	229:18 233:17
17.23	59:3	80:24 81:6,7	R.J2:12 10:1 285:6,11,16 234:10 236:23 18 63:10	81:14 106:9	48:20 52:20	316:4 335:4	science 279:19
8	, 9 , 14	107:16 108:1	52:23 53:6 ,24	saying 8:2 32:16 279:20
13,20	109:10,12,14	54:8,24 55:2 42:21 58:12	scientific
21	73:12	114:22 115:14	55:7,15,24	62:16 72:19	151:16 170:8
16	81:22	115:15,17,20	56:3,7 57:2	118:15 133:7	170:9,22,25
25	84:1,7	115:24,24,25	58:5,9 59:22	136:22 141:25 171:6 318:4
4	90:21	143:15 144:16	61:10,16,20	171:10 173:16 340:16 341:1
15	99:20	145:19 147:1	62:2,8,11,16 177:24,25	341:2
):7 ,21	165:6 , 9 , 16 ,21	63:2 64:6 ,20	181:22 182:2	scientists
1:4,5,10,14	165:25 166:6	65:14 70:24	182:8 206:14	152:18 171:21
1:21,22,23	191:9 192:6	71:18 76:18	207:22,24	181:21 184:20
':3,4,5, 6 , 8	204:6 , 17	81:20 82:13	208:1 218:6	310:24,25
':21 108:13	223:12 228:24	90:4, 16 91:1	218:15 220:5	scope 45:19 46:8
1:20,24	229:5 230:8	91:21 102:7	243:4,13,16	47:20 49:3,6
1:17 131:1	230:19 231:23	102:13,23	253:13,15	64:21 65:11
.:3, 9	232:9 ,21	103:11 ,20	259:23 271:13 65:25 66:5
1:24 323:14	233:3 234:7	110:8 116:18	271:17,19,20	68:3 69:3,6
; 4:12 10:10	234:25 239:2	161:18 ,25	279:23 288:10 70:6 237:1
23	29:13	239:11 241:5	163:1,20	302:1 309:25	267:25
15	50:12	241:11 247:22	192:12 194:20 311:10,12,13	scoutsl77:5
5	60:14	273:15 281:8	195:14,22,25	317:24 319:12 344:20
4	72:22	284:6 304:18	197:19 297:10 319:13 322:2	search 5:13,15
6,11	74:24	304:19 305:15	328:1,5,8	340:19	5:18 9:14
12	93:9	305:20 313:1	330:16 331:2	saysl0:16	22:21 85:24
::21 136:5	313:22 314:22	331:5,18	117:13 124:13 154:21 185:6
.:9 142:6	314:23 315:4	338:23	174:15 175:15 275:10
):2 147:8	315:6 , 11 ,20	_ 222:24 227:5	searched5:ll
.:14,14	315:25 317:19	S	243:22 244:8	searching 6 :15
1:8 199:9	321:24 323:17	S3:12 189:1	247:7 249:22	154:22 176:19
:: 5 223:18	335:18 336:2	347:10	129:2 134:6	31:3 138:12
sns 218:22	336:3,3,11,24	sentl9:12 57:17 157:13 160:8	138:16 , 17 ,20
1:5	342:2,3	60:2 79:11 , 15 164:23 166:10 260:7 284:2,3
id 7:4 9:3	343:17	111:18 131:5	186:23 188:9	303:22
8	43:2,10	seeing 12:6	sentence 45:3	188:10 , 18	significant
3	81:4	30:17 82:22	214:9 227:12	199:3 233:10	30:13,17,18
7	87:12	180:13 221:15 227:15 267:17 283:17 286:17 30:20 31:6,25
i:l 115:19	236:24 261:9	303:8,8	304:2 308:7	260:8 283:23
):19 121:22 262:3 263:2	separate 29:18	355:9 , 10 , 18	295:24
.: 24 122:2	307:20	78:15 129:15	sets 134:18	significantly
!:20 123:14	seek 67:24 68:4	September 13:20	seven 45:17	34 0:23
1:15,21,22	101:4 113:11	13:21,22	shapes 99:4	signing49:9
1:6 178:17	114:4 186:23	14:10 16:23	share86:17	358:14
': 16 199:22 338:23	17:2, 14 93:5	166:13 321:16	signs 240:l
1:4 213:9	seemingly 265 :12 95:18 96:23	Sharing 324:15	similar 11: 21
1:8,25	seen 5:10 10:5	98:1 , 11 ,21	Sharp 164:13, 18	12:4,23 86:17
1:8	10:24 11:7 , 11 99:23 100:3	Shawler 114:12	110:25 111:6
idary 151:18 11:17 , 18 , 19	100:16 120:16 114:18 116:11 122:12 123:12
1:8	11:21 12:2	120:19 ,22	Shawlers 110:14	180:16 223:11
idly 65:1	39:3 53:11	121:2 122:25	shedl65:21	226:13 307:19
':1 160:20	93:10 101:8 , 8 123:18 126:7	316:25	334:10 335:4
Lon 14:13, 18 113:2 136:1	127:19	shedding 166:3	337:12 340:3
15,24	93:7 136:12,25	seriesl25:4	sheet 79:25	340:9 , 16 , 17
::16 214:2	137:2,3, 10 , 12 223:21 249:8	190:9 357:9	345:6
i:21	165:10 , 10	249:25 316:23	sheets 48:12	similarity 44:1
0:3, 15	178:6 , 10 , 13	351:16	79:23 358:9	simply 58:6,17
14,23	14:7 178:14,19	serious84:21	Shook2:16 148:6 62:8 72:11
8.21	23:20 183:15 240:18 160:17 267:9	149:21 192:16 101:12 119:15
2	28:3, 17 249:21 250:5	seriously 220:2 272:19	121:11 , 16
6	43:18	250:8 252:11	220:2	short45:3	125:17 219:14
4.21	60:9	258:19,24	sermon216:19	272:13 281:23 238:4,20
22	70:1	259:10 , 16 , 17	229:21	shorter 319:24	239:6 334:3
21	81:17	266:17,18	sermons 229:20	shorthand 188:7	simultaneously
1:15 122:4	268:10 , 17	servants 351:4	355:7	152:8
1:5, 10 , 16	289:10 294:23	servel6:6 36:10	shotl3:13	Sincerely 358:19
!:22,23	295:3,4,8,8	44:25 52:23	shout 220:8 , 9	singlel34:5
1:21,24	295:10,16	53:5,24 54:24	shouted 220:10	137:13 244:17
::8 , 12	302:17 309:22 55:14 58:6	220:11	sir 4:25 58:22
): 3 , 7 , 19 , 19 337:15	64:10	show 31:22	76:13 126:23
i: 2 132:24	select 234:13	servedl2:10	111:24 121:4	sit 35:1 48:10
:: 18 149:10	selectedl6:6	54:7 63:24	124:22 125:20 54:6 117:17
•: 14 164:12 70:17 175:20	161:17	293:12 294:15 117:20 118:7
::4 174:15	235:7 275:1	servesl67:16	294:16 ,23	118:12 136:12
.: 19 214:21	selection 156 :17	service 17 : 2 , 10	295:11 299:17 137:7 143:12
': 16,21	274:20	17:11 64:3	305:25 317:20 145:13 162:3
.:4 242:11	selections	94:17 101:2	showed317:8	165:14,23
:: 13 244:12 160:22	101:18 102:22	showered 307:6	175:2 199:14
': 7 249:22	selective 17 : 21	103:10,19	showing 125 :17	200:23 238:1
•:24 251:5	36:21	105:4,12,22	shows 123:21,22 295:13 328:23
.: 7 257:8	sellingl78:2	106:18 ,24	181:3 185:5	site 297:5
•:25 260:13 341:18	108:18 ,25	247:17 293:9	sites 296:21 ,22
i:25 262:1	semester 87:22	109:6 125:23	294:4 296:12	296:23 297:4
1:2,5,14,20	send49:2 196:23 126:3,6	342:13	297:7
i:5 270:15	sending 111: 20	147:12 171:22	sic 236:18	sittingll:6
. :4 277:5	231:20	services 51:18	sick 217:17	situation 61: 25
:: 20,22,23	sense36:ll 53:8 56:7 57:2,21	side 335:24	144:1
:: 3 291:17	68:13 70:14	58:8 , 17 59:7	sidebar 133:21	situations
1:16,18,21	70:15 94:11	71:18 74:20	sightl40:23	110:25
;: 13 300:7	107:15 110:24 75:1 ,4,5	sign 239 :18 ,22	sixl0:2 45:17
.:1 , 7	131:19 134:5	230:18	239:23 240:4	342:19
::15 303:6	134:22 143:24	serving 6:6 7:14 353:19 358:9	sizel28:22
):25 312:25 159:2,4, 6	55:1 70:20 ,23	SIGNATURE 189:25 282:18 283:4
1:13 316:1	161:12 168:9	74:4 102:6	356:25	skewed 301:25
;: 19 332:18 169:8 203:18	104:9 109:9	signed49:10	Skiing 345 : 8,13
::5, 14, 17	215:11 243:8	109:13	358:10	skillsl7:17
::18 , 19 ,22	259:11 , 16	session 308:10	significance	skip 331:3
:: 23 335:11 300:8 341:17	set 75:12 125:14 28:9 , 18 ,20	skipping 45:17
4	228:25 229:22 231:18 232:2	254:2,7,12,22 243:8 245:17
5350:11,17	230:1,3	sole294:14	255:9,17,25	245:21,24
sry 350:18	232:10 , 15	solelyl46:14	297:18 ,22,23	253:7 255:20
.: 19 352:7	233:4,5	soliciting	302:11 342:8	260:10 264:22
it 2 7 7:23	235:16 237:2	182:22,22	sources 67:14, 16 281:24 289:22
38:7	237:11 241:11	solid328:22	67:18 70:16	289:24 307:22
Ly 135:9	241:18 242:1	somebody 10:21	70:17 74:6,8	318:19 344:17
L19:4,5	244:14,22	52:14 84:22	114:7,9	specifically
20	181:11	246:2 247:3,6 149:1 213:5	117:11 139:22 24:9 47:5
::11 341:25	247:12 248:3	221:16 233:19 139:23,25	61:17,22
Ler283:17	248:4,11,12	233:20,20	146:24 151:18 67:23 77:25
::8	248:15,20	248:22 255:15 154:14 155:5	78:19 80:13
5241:21	249:9,23	259:4 282:11	169:2,3,9,12	89:3 108:17
:: 9 245:19	250:3, 14,24	284:6 ,24	169:13, 15, 18	109:6 113:11
':25 258:4	251:9 , 13, 15	301:21 306:15 169:21 170:1	129:11 145:10
1:20 259:20	251:20,21	314:9	171:8,8,10,11 173:2,6,23
):13 304:5	252:12 253:10	someone's 261:1	172:21 ,21	176:2, 16
;:1 345:11	256:6,20	263:8	174:19 176:2	179:3 180:5
sd 256:14,21	257:12, 19	sophisticated	176:16 , 18	180:14 203:5
':5,7	258:10 , 14	146:12	185:14 197:25 209:12,20
•: 16 349:2	259:7 , 12	sorry 15:18 17:8 202:11 216:3	214:6 231:13
•:4,7 , 14	260:5, 16 , 19	24:5 31:23	217:16 219:24 232:4, 7 233:8
sr337:2,5	260:21 261:5	38:9 50:25	220:22 253:24 236:5 286:2
1:25 349:19	261:9,10,18	55:22 80:22	254:20 274:9	286:10 291:19
srs 182:19	261:19 ,20 ,21	101:21 106:17 274:10 288:5	299:6 323:17
::19 209:3	262:12,14,15	133:18 152:21 297:25 323:24 343:24 345:25
.: 22 226:18	262:22 263:9	161:3 163:18	340:9 344:24	specificity
■:23 308:1	263:15, 15, 17	169:5 176:6 , 7	southl:18	174:6
1:4 335:24	264:2, 6 , 11	208:16 214:5	191:18 352:6	specify 329:7
i: 11,16,22	265:5,9,14	217:23 223:14	southeastern	speculate 53 :15
i:23	267:4 270:8	224:21 261:14 88:12	53:17,18
ss 334:9,20	270:25 273:10 264:19 267:1	southern 88:12	speculation
Lng 41:15	273:11 279:11 320:1 324:1	space 131:1	53:13 71:2
17,18	65:5	279:17 282:7	329:1 336:20	167:11	spend72:9,12
7	68:7,9	283:25 289:7	sort7:24 16:7	span280:12	135:15 158:4
3,5, 10 , 11	300:1 , 13	16:16 25:21	speak 47:8 59:3	spending 72:2,17
17	93:15	301:5,8,13	35:11,22	203:20 206:9	72:18
24	94:7,14	3 0 3:2,9,11,21 42:18 66:25	235:16 245:15	spent47:4,18
19,23	304:15,23 67:3 70:14 248:22 250:21 49:14 78:17
25	96:4,12	305:3,4,5,16 83:24 85:3 254:10 262:19 79:3,6,16
5,10,17	305:20,24 91:9 101:11 348:3	80:4,18,24
9	117:14	306:5 308:12 104:5 123:3	speaking37:l 158:4
1:14 136:15	308:16 309:9	155:24 218:25 83:2 99:24	spiritual 221:23
i:24 145:9	309:11 313:2	250:10 268:19 129:11 139:6	222:3 255:1
):14,24	313:7 , 9	318:6 337:18	139:8 , 9 143:9	spite 237:8
1:11 174:11	314:10,23	340:9	148:4 167:22	Splittgerber
::16 ,25	317:5 328:3	sorting 124:19	202:23 222:18 2:15 192:15
):19 177:2	328:18 ,20	sorts 274:14	253:4 254:6	272:19,25
1:5 179:4,5	329:3,18	sound42:17 93:9 254:11 255:6	273:3 332:24
•: 9,19	330:11 331:21 138:5 156:21	255:8 274:3	spokel48:7
i:l,18	332:3 333:7	156:23 237:4	284:4 308:7	169:16 323:11
1:2, 10 ,20	333:23 334:6	267:24	348:4	sponsored 293:1
1:13,18	334:15 335:17	sounds49:12	speaks252:16	293:4,23
i:2 197:11	336:12, 13,22	110:15 133:10	special 174:16	294:1 ,5, 13
1:9 199:20	336:24 339:11 133:10 224:18	specialized	295:23
): 1 , 8 , 11 , 12	340:15 341:14 226:12 240:6	346:14	sponsoring 296:8
1:4 211:4, 7	349:7 , 14, 17	241:9 267:25	specific8:17	sponsors 294:14
,:21 212:7	349:20 352:14	source67:19	19:15 26:7,11	sponsorship
::20 215:16	353:8	92:7 , 11 , 14	33:2 35:14	295:6
i:25 217:9	smoking-related 119:2 133:1	36:5 67:24	sponsorships
':16 , 17 ,20	349:24	154:20 155:5	79:18 80:5	294:6
': 22 219:2	social 90:23	163:7 , 8	101:9 116:18	sports 255:3
': 19,21	152:18 258:16 169:22 177:10 123:6 128:8	280:21
::6,11	Society 172:1	200:1 , 10	150:10 ,24	spot 304:10
):7 , 17 ,20	184:21 211:19 201:14 208:24 162:9 179:13	Srll5:22
i:18 227:1	230:6,9,16	220:3 240:17	209:4 232:19	Stl55:17,19
':7,17,21	231:2,3,7,13	244:1 253:25	235:16 238:22 156:11,19
':10 , 10 ,21	43:13 46:7 , 15 160:14 161:7	255:15, 15	317:18
1:14,24	48:2 87:3	165:13 234:4	292:9 296:2	suggested 32:16
1: 2 0 ,2 5	98:13 209:14	266:2 331:3	311:16 347:5	suggesting 58 : 22
i:7 162:6	209:17 211:3	stereo344:5	350:5	175:19 231:6
1:9,11,11	211:14 212:5	sticker 29:4	studies 170:22	233:9
1:13, 17 , 18	241:16 252:3	stifle 216:6	209:9 ,22	suggestion
.:1	282:2 294:12	stipulation	237:8 261:25	345:12
c 26:24	302:10 308:20 273:5	study 84:21 85:3	suggests21:6
25	29:19	312:1 315:22	stood 307:9	181:9 ,23	suit 5:6
18	134:21	318:17 334:15 313:17	182:17 209:2	Suite 1:18 2:10
i:17 157:7	340:1	stop58:3 118:5 209:4 211:20	191:18 192:10
•: 12 161:10	statement 10 8:23 239:18 , 18 ,22	212:4 215:14	358:3
:: 8 199:18	173:13 181:4	239:23,23	225:22,25	summaries 36:4
':22	184:13 200:4	240:4,4 324:1 242:23 254:11 42:12 241:4
cable 129:24 209:12 210:11 324:2	259:20 299:25	summarize 224:16
ced 130:13	212:11,13,15	stopped 278:10	311:15 333:6	summarizes 40:14
5132:19	212:17,21,25	stopping 77:5	333:6 ,22	summarizing
p 342:6	224:1,10,23	storel72:10	334:3	39:23
143:24	225:15 226:14	stories 9:18	studying 314:9	summary 37:15
': 13 245:16 227:13, 19	30:22 147:13	322:22	41:6 80:1 ,2
iard 9 8:23	237:22 250:3	156:1 162:10	stuff 49:2	81:3 204:7 , 12
25	128:23	253:3,4	184:17 252:11 124:20 330:23 204:15,19
•: 7,25	266:20 ,22	271:12 284:11	subcommittee	225:15 242:8
:: 16 313:23 269:25 270:4	284:14 285:2	202:10	242:8 , 17
:: 24 315:20 270:9 271:15	317:4	subgroup 258:6	245:3,3
>: 21	271:21 284:13	story 70:16	subgroups 257:5	Sunday 49:19
lards 27 0:23 284:20 285:12 89:16 107:17	subject 46:14	79:3,4 216:19
ling 267:7	285:23 286:6	156:8 166:5	189:21 207:11	supermarket
::4	299:14 302:19 176:1 181:8 , 8 213:11 214:8	219:25
is 127:6	309:24 314:5	181:10 , 12, 14	223:8 254:16	supervision 18:8
Les 6 9:19	314:6 316:23	181:15 182:11 356:21	supplies 310:4
219:25	317:15 330:20 209:21 212:4	subjects 348:5	support 139:7
. :25	statements 79:7	229:5, 12,24	submit 75:21	204:11 230:16
3	262:5, 14	180:23 181:1	252:16 270:24	submitted 14:25 293:8 358:12
:: 15	181:2 182:5	271:13,25	subpart 249 : 22	supposed 21:16
; 8 :19 26:15 182:14 184:21 272:1 , 9	subpoena 10 : 7 , 9	112:11 142:25
21	82:2	213:24 215:7	284:16,18,20	11:25 12:3,12 168:19 202:2 1:3 131:25 215:8 225:24 284:24 306:24 12:24,25 13:2 202:3 292:24
1:17 232:23 226:1 229:19	straight 308 : 7	13:7 , 12 20:25	Supreme 7:21 8:9
.: 11 267:1	309:6 , 6	strategy 30:9	21:11 23:13	223:2,6,16
:ed 6:4	314:17 316:24	streamline 228:3 24:1,5 35:9	sure7:15,18 8:1
22,23	states 19:21,22	street 2:4,10,23 42:12 45:16	10:22,24 11:5
12	67:4	20:4,5,8	192:4,10,23	60:5,17	14:17 19:3
5	108:16 69:17 , 18 268:12 300:9	subpoenaed 12:4 20:20 22:14 ': 3 275:21 84:10 86:7 301:21 358:3	subscriber	22:15 25:16 .:23 350:25 87:1 , 16 88:12	strike 67:23 273:25 27:12 29:10 .:1 89:12 90:10 232:23 335:10	subscription 3:8 29:19 33:7 ;ing 16:22 107:10 213:14	strikes 302:21 190:1 193:8 41:3 49:11
':2 184:9	214:11 215:5	strip 347:13, 16	357:1 358:8	51:20 52:3
1:21	237:3 242:10	347:19	substance 15:12 54:2,3 55:9
51:1,24 4:2 244:18 314:2	strongl9:10	15:23 18:24	57:7,16 60:1
1	24:7	315:10 351:7	34:6,6 181:25 145:6,8	60:4,25 62:6
6	35:15	351:8 352:2,3 266:4	189:22 356:22 63:1 64:9
6	50:6	state-wide 234:9	strongly 34 0:7	substantial	70:12 72:25
11,17	stating 306:25	student 157:4, 8	252:20	77:11 78:25
.: 23 172:4	318:11 319:9	157:11 , 17	substantially	79:9 93:11
1:2,4,23	statistical	158:1,9	12:23 180:16	102:2 105:2,9
i:2 191:1	183:18 184:23 159:13 160:1	307:19	120:5 121:18
. :24 194:2	statistically	161:12 162:9	substantive	123:10 126:25
::16 235:4	260:8	233:23 234:7	13:25	130:8 132:4
!: 2 ,11	statistics 69 : 21	students 18:7	success 350:11	137:14 140:18
i:16 333:10 92:2,4 244:15 83:18 117:13	sufficient	148:14 149:10
):2,4,23	status 292:10	159:1 , 17 , 17	153:10 , 14	153:1 , 13
': 2	stayed 29:20	159:23 162:22 158:11 315:3	154:12,14
sd 9:20	stenotype 188:6 164:7 219:12	sugar 351:19	155:18 156:4
22	22:24	355:6	259:10	suggest212:6	156:5,18
8	32:16	step 52:2 62:4	studied 255:11	258:20 317:14 159:11 162:11
1:20 164:21	77:6 83:5	192:4 208:3	290:2,5,15,17 67:18 84:24
•:23 175:2	125:2 130:10	229:17 230:7	291:8 , 11 , 14	85:1 104:17
):13 201:10	132:1 135:19	231:14 273:15	291:15,21 ,25	127:10 181:19
):20 210:2	138:11 147:9	273:24 275:20	293:5, 7 ,20	199:25 207:13
i:7,8,16	155:6 167:11	275:24 276:2	294:2,4,19,24 207:13 208:18
1:2 220:8	167:12 179:12 276:3,10,12	295:24 296:9	280:8,13,18
i:14 226:7	187:16 209:7	276:13,21 ,22 tell 11:8 33:1	terms 43:23 47:7
•:7,13	220:2,2	276:24,25	34:16 35:4	65:3,9,19
i:23 239:19	234:20 243:19 277:6,13,21	52:15 81:10	83:17 101:5
i:18 248:24	266:2 269:12	278:1,23	83:18 113:20	102:9 103:15
•:11 251:3	315:5 332:22	280:21,24	128:4 129:23	107:25 114:21
.: 15 ,17	taken 4 :1 83:6	281:17 282:6	143:2,20 ,21	116:25 117:3
::24 265:1	91:15 110:3	282:8 ,23	144:1 , 14,23	118:19 126:16
1:10 268:11	110:17 114:23 283:22 285:4	155:25 162:20 128:20 135:14
.:18 274:5	115:1 147:17	285:15,23	164:21 165:20 139:19 ,20
': 17 279:6	187:17 188:9	286:6 , 7 , 11	173:5 176:5	145:21 150:20
i:9,10,14	194:1 265:19	343:6,15	179:14 181:6	157:20 173:2
i:17 282:19	292:9 337:10	344:13 345:18	186:9 208:23	177:16 205:25
1:3 284:8	352:11 355:9	345:25 346:3	217:14 219:12 210:22 247:19
': 18 289:9	takes 99:4	346:10 , 15, 16	222:2 229:5	251:18 279:19
i:9 292:2	talk43:6 62:8	346:16,19,24	229:14,23,24	284:9,23
::11 299:7	104:14 119:20 347:1 , 14,20	230:11 231:9	306:10 324:20
):7 306:3	139:19 ,20	348:8	231:12, 17	terrible69:l
i: 14 310:8	148:4 161:22	tariffs 69:23	233:14, 19 ,23	territory 64:11
.: 3 312:10	183:17 194:18	taskl58:17	234:1 , 9 235:2	terrorism 202:25
': 7 337:16	240:7 249:17	taste 342:16	235:9,11	test310:21
1: 2 5 346:4	295:12, 14	taught 18 :1 ,20	237:4 238:15	tested36:17
1:18,23	talked 6:15	18:23,24 84:9	240:13 242:6	testified 4:7
sry 7 7:10	60:20 92:8	87:7 , 11 , 12, 14	242:7 , 8	21:3 49:25
rised 353:1	151:10 203:23 87:21,24,24	253:22,24	50:7,20,21
funded	224:25 229:21 88:3,11,13,14	255:22,24	51:2 55:6
•:25	249:7 256:15	88:17 ,20 89:2	257:4 258:5	76:24 78:21
sunding	273:9 297:17	89:6,7,19	259:5,8,10,14 81:22 103:9
.:4 212:7	talking 6:4, 6	99:15	264:9 269:3	110:8 155:11
::19	10:10 12:15	teach 83:17	272:5 277:9	159:22 194:7
sys 91:8 , 12	41:16 42:21	88:23 118:2	289:20 ,22	325:5, 14
12,14,15	45:23 47:9	118:17	294:13 300:19 331:16 338:14
.: 15	54:5 61:25	teachers 255:23	305:24 311:3	341:8
Lving 232:12	62:9 91:13	255:24 256:3	311:13 319:13	testify 33:11
3345:13	104:24 120:6	256:21 257:11	322:19 324:6	53:14 76:17
5307:10,15	125:20 129:5	257:19,25	324:12 325:2	188:5 214:9
1	4:6 42:18	147:22,23	258:7 , 14,20	331:10 , 11	227:5, 15
22	55:6	148:1,1	258:22 259:9	332:17 335:5	232:14 274:6
13	188:5	153:18 158:1	259:25 260:6	339:24 343:17 290:23 355:5
::6 355:5	158:2 162:5	261:4	348:12 353:5	testifying 70:20
ssium 9 6:19	172:9 , 11 , 17	teacher's 171:17 telling22:l	77:1 81:19
ssiums 15:6	177:3 181:13	teaching 17:23	58:5 142:19	82:12 110:20
9,18	95:19	181:16 194:14 87:15,17,20	165:23 175:7	138:2 154:3
24	96:6	194:19 196:21 99:2,6,20,25	179:11 221:16	testimonies
lymous206:2	196:22 199:7	129:13 256:13	237:14 242:24 229:4 232:19
1:17	211:11 212:1	tecuml0:15	306:15 315:24 281:20
sm 10 7:4	212:15,25	11:25 21:12	321:18,24	testimony 3 : 2
1:13,13	217:25 236:6	24:1,5,8	330:2	8:13,21 21:5
:: 8 235:1	252:8 265:17	35:16 37:20 temperature	55:6,23,23
i:l	269:18 276:9	50:5 60:6,8	218:24	56:2,3,8,8
__284:18 287:16	telephone 2:15 ten 47:16 49:13 57:20,20 59:9
T	322:4 323:13	2:22 66:18	73:3,5 99:8	59:14,14
2	188:1,1	332:7 339:23 192:15,22	99:16 241:19	64:13,16 76:7 i:l,l ' '	talks 17 9:17 272:20 332:25	345:15 347:9 76:12 81:23
;. 13 355-1	TAMARA 2: 22	television	tend 149:14	118:6,12,25
>:1 356:1,1	192:22	125:21 181:3 tended352:6	135:21 145:10
6*3 8*24	Tampa 2:4 4:18	183:7 216:18 ten-year-old	151:8 174:17
8"32*12,19	19:11,17	221:7,15	346:9 347:7,8 178:15 183:14
20	33 • 8A	31:16 34:5, 8	286:21 ,22	347:13, 19	184:9 193:2
18	40:10	110:4 126:17	287:2, 8 , 17 ,24 term 5:2,4 6:25	195:20 199:13
10	52:10	149:1 174:7	288:15,24	36:24 43:15	200:23 202:22
22	75:25	174:18 182:21 289:2,7,12	59:20 67:16	203:18 204:6
1:12 214:8	218:20,22	303:10 305:12	51:16 52:8	340:21 342:24
1:8 232:12	221:9,23,25	306:6,11,21	55:5,25 56:4	343:5,23
:: 12 235:24	231:16 234:2	307:11 308:15	59:3 66:3	345:7 348:8
.:12, 13, 18	252:8 259:22	309:6 310:10	68:17 ,21 ,23	349:7 , 10 , 14
1:18,20,22	271:4 274:1	310:14,18	68:24,25 69:2	353:5 355:9
1:23 276:19	285:17,18	311:7 312:4	69:2 70:6,25	times47:17 48:7
i:19,22	300:10 317:2	312:16 315:7	71:6,15 72:2	55:22 56:9,13
):20 307:16	326:11 339:23 316:22 320:16	72:11 , 17 , 18	77:22,24
::8 327:4	think 9:17 10:16 323:6 324:4	73:1 75:11 , 19	81:22 99:8
1:9	10:17 11:4	327:9 331:16	75:23,24,25	135:8 165:11
Lng 36:6 , 6 , 8	13:23 14:14	332:16 , 17	76:19 ,24	276:11 , 11 , 13
9,9,11,14	15:19 21:1,9	333:11 335:7	78:15,20,22	276:18 306:23
16	37:5,6	21:11 24:11	336:16 337:24	7 9:2,4,5,6,16	337:25 349:3
336:22	25:7 34:23	339:6,23	79:23 80:1,2	350:6
aook 235:14	35:18 40:1	342:9 ,20 ,22	80:4, 9 , 18 ,24	timespan 28 0:13
1:17,18,18	43:7 47:15	343:4 345:10	81:10,19 82:8	time-saving
i:25 237:15	48:6 50:8	345:16 347:12	87:22 90:5,6	274:25
1:12	54:23 58:4, 11 348:19 354:5	95:17 96:23	tiny 283:2
aooks 171:15	60:20 68:2	thinking 30:1	98:13,14,18	tipping 240:10
1:17,24	70:6 75:7	63:23 222:15	98:19 99:9	titlel33:2,8
::1 ,5, 6 , 16	79:2, 10 , 10	304:5 323:23	100:5, 16 , 19	171:4 236:25
::24,24	80:20 81:1 , 7	thirdly 161: 2 , 4	104:14 109:13	238:22 266:22
): 25 236:10	82:1 ,2, 7	THIRTEENTH 1 : 1	109:13,24	266:24 293:22
3235:5	83:19 85:2,15 191:1	113:18 117:5	titledl4:13
c 23:24	85:23 86:9	Thorner 345:7 , 13	118:18 119:4	titlesl33:9
24	51:9	88:6 93:6	thorough67:2	120:25 121:15	134:24
':20 186:10	95:23 97:4	228:20	127:7 132:18	tobacco 1:7 2:12
rs 16 0:1	103:7 105:9	thoroughly 32:9	134:10 146:12	2:19 5:8 7:16
ss 341:18	105:24 116:21	thoughtl2:l	146:22 154:9	15:3,14,25
ry 198:5	117:15 119:2	65:18 70:12	160:9 161:20	16:19 19:2,6
':4	120:10 132:22 113:14 135:18	165:5 171:10	19:12, 12, 16
Ls 18:7	133:1 , 16 , 17	156:17 157:3	173:25 182:8	41:15, 18 ,22
1 d 196:11	140:6 ,22	217:25 251:12	183:11 184:3	48:21 51:17
c134:9	142:12,16,20	303:21 331:4	188:9 195:7	51:18 52:15
j12:14	146:11 152:7	334:3 335:25	196:15,17	52:18,24
16	25:21	153:3,10,14	336:1	203:6 211:1	53:25 54:8
14	34:3	168:12 174:23	thousands 205:4	216:23 223:10	55:7,15,24
18	54:25	176:12 180:17	three29:5 35:10	224:1,23	56:4,7 57:2
19	59:12	182:4 184:15 57:18 82:3	226:15 231:6	58:5,9 59:23 ::2 118:1	186:6 196:10 104:21 115:17	232:7 , 7 , 11	61:10 , 11 , 16 1:22 127:25	198:9 199:8 129:10,23	233:22 234:25	61:20 62:2,9 i:18 167:4	206:3 208:12 130:4,16	247:2 250:2,5	62:11,17,19 1:2,3 182:2	209:2 211:11 152:7 153:24	250:8 257:12	63:2,6,16,17 1:9 212:1	211:12 215:10 209:10 234:12	258:4,11,14	63:21 64:3,6 ;:2 0 245:9	218:20 221:8 234:15, 17 , 17	259:5 261:18	65:14 69:15
•: 19 262:25	222:2 230:25	235:7 258:10	265:13 269:13	69:19 ,22,23
i:18 273:6	239:22 246:25 258:13	273:2 274:11	69:24 70:24
1:2 285:3	247:2,11	threshold 207:9	275:12 279:10	71:19 81:20
i:3 303:12	248:12 251:9	threw239:21	279:15,15	82:13 88:18
1:3,5,15	251:19,23	throatl80:10	280:25 282:11	88:21 89:2,8
•:23 334:25	252:2,25	342:16	282:18 284:11	89:11 ,20 90:4
:: 11 346:17	254:19 256:4	throat-ease	286:11 288:3	90:8 , 10 , 13
js 7:17 18:5	256:25 257:18 342:1	288:12 289:7	91:1 , 13 95:5
20	26:6,19	258:6 259:24	throw27:18	294:19,24,25	95:10,25 97:6
22	48:7	260:3,20	time 6:12, 16 , 18	295:7 300:8	102:7 , 13,23
3	69:24	261:1,8 262:7 6:21 7:2,10	304:14 305:1	103:11,20
13	76:15	263:21 264:2	8:9,12 10:20	305:2,4,19	108:12,13
19	91:8	264:22 265:5	11:6,11,15	309:24 315:18	110:9 117:14
i:8 101:10	265:18,20,22	14:16 20:9	317:3,17,20	124:13 130:12
:: 11 112:19	271:17 275:1	22:8 28:23,24	318:3 319:20	143:19 144:4
!:2 0 123:5	278:11 279:4	30:11 , 14 31:6	321:19 ,23	161:18 162:1
::22 148:7	283:1 ,22	31:8 , 9 ,23	323:1 325:18	162:12, 19
:: 7,17	284:2 290:1	32:13 43:23	325:20 326:2	163:1 174:10
1:4,18	290:21,21,23	47:4,9,10,18	329:8,8,8,9	174:16 176:1
.:24 204:11	291:1 ,2, 9	48:12 49:13	329:10 331:24	176:3, 17
i:17 207:1	292:5 295:8	49:14,21	332:8,11	178:6,14
1:14 215:13	300:11 302:23 50:21 51:8,11	339:12 340:13	180:23,24
.:4,4, 15	48:14 49:16	77:15, 19 78:7 285:15,23	29:5 57:18
1:1,5,23	50:3 54:7	81:18 82:8	286:7,11	85:2 104:22
1:2,9	56:18,20,21	243:10 282:5	343:6,15	113:20,22
1:13,16,19	57:9,14 59:15 282:8,22	344:13 345:18 115:14 123:10
': 10, 12	60:5, 10 75:6	283:15 336:16 346:1 ,3, 10 , 16 124:16 ,22
1:2 191:7	76:11 77:19	touch 326:23	347:1,14,21	125:11 126:1
1:12, 19	78:23 86:15	touched 233:25	348:8	129:22 136:20
:: 15 , 18 , 20	105:18 108:23	touches 107 :16	tried 5 : 7 28:16	159:7 160:13
::22,22,24	110:20 117:17	tractional 68 :14 224:16 300:5	205:5,5,23
):2,3,3,9	117:20 118:7	trade 69 :16 , 20	312:20 349:3	206:17 207:1
):14,22,25	135:21 136:12 69:20 ,22,23	349:10	208:14 209:10
': 9,19,19	136:24 143:12 86:21 350:5	trucks 239:20	234:12 235:6
':11,14,19	145:14 151:4	350:11,12,17	true34:19 45:13 241:1 252:8
1:3,11	162:3 165:14	350:19,21	64:4 82:21	260:16,25
1:13,18,22	165:24 167:23 351:6,6,8	84:11 143:9	261:19 264:8
1:23,24	181:7 183:14	traditional	154:2 182:4	276:11 296:17
::10 , 15,23	185:22 186:2	255:22	184:15 188:7	339:23 344:17
): 4, 6 , 8 , 12	199:14 200:23	trained 92:5	189:21 190:7	typel0:23 40:21
):15,22	220:17 235:24	training 108 :13 207:3,5, 7	111:9 , 11 , 11
::2,24	238:1 278:5, 9 263:25	248:9 331:7	112:18 150:23
):1,2,2,3	285:20 295:5	transcribe 28 : 24 355:7 356:21	170:1 172:17
): 16 ,19	321:14 323:11	transcribed	357:7	183:16 216:20
;:16,24	323:17 328:24 39:19	trustl57:2	240:17 , 18
': 9,19	332:8 , 11	transcript 112 : 4 160:22,23	296:3,4 298:1
i:20,24,25	334:4	188:15 353:21 242:25	302:16 332:21
’: 10 29 8:14	token 259:18	355:15 358:8	trustworthy 85 : 9	typed 40:17
1:18,21,22	told 21:8 , 10	358:10	truth 85:24	142:14
!:16 307:7	22:20 23:19	transcription	150:24 151:3	types 117:5
': 15 308:6	24:9 29:22	188:7 355:7	151:5 188:5	131:19 169:20
': 7 310:10	31:24 35:16	transcriptions	355:5	171:8 , 9 , 11
i:23,23,25	37:20 44:6	33:18	tryl04:12	172:21 300:1
.: 21 312:7	60:9 64:20	transcripts 8:15 119:13 129:6	341:17 344:17
1:5,5,12,15	65:10,20	8:16,21,25	150:7 165:13	351:24,25
1:24 314:2	70:16 101:7	116:1,7,10	170:3 175:11	_
::25 315:22	105:20 149:25 233:3	186:1 196:17	_U_
!:21,2 4	150:4,13,15	transformations 244:5 274:19	Uh-huh37*19
1:1 , 1 ,5, 8	161:10 162:8	20:1	320:21 324:25 38:25 83:4
1:17,25	162:20 184:4	transnational	trying 43:7 80:7 109:15 238:6
':2,13, 15	220:13, 15, 16	86:20	88:6 101:22	258:23 301:3
': 17,19, 2 3	242:7 286:5	transpired 44 :13 150:13 152:22	uiterwyk2 • 3
i:7 , 8 , 10 , 15	300:24 306:9	323:12	176:7 207:25	4:18 192': 3
i:16,21,22	323:1,2,18	trial 8 :16 ,21 ,25 208:4 218:18	ultimate 237 :10
.:2,6,19	324:8 325:7	33:12 50:1,3	219:14 222:5	umbrella 194 : 21
!:12 333:7	325:16,20	50:7,20,21	228:3,19	unable 237*10
1:8,13,24	326:9,13,19	51:2 56:3,8	235:22 244:8	245-25
1:23 341:12	337:25	57:20 59:8	245:13 247:14	Unaware 264*5
1:15,15,16	tomorrow 185:21	64:13, 15, 16	247:16 254:19 265:12
1:17,18,21	top 14: 18 27:5,7 76:6,12,25	257:7 274:17	uncertain "^0 6 • 1 0
= 23 350:5	28:4 29:3	77:1 118:6,7	299:15 312:24	163:18
i:5,12,19	55:21 73:24	118:25 143:22 314:19 317:1	302-21
i:21 351:2	77:18 79:25	165:5, 18	322:3,5 324:1	undecided 251 • 11
.:6 , 6 , 8 ,20	81:25 82:11	166:8 , 10	324:2,3,20 ,22 251:18 , 19
1:6,9,13	82:16,22	349:4	324:23 327:4	undergraduate
i:2 358:6	99:18 132:25	tribunell0:4	327:6 332:15	84.4 108*12
=co-related	243:9 245:1	126:18 174:7	340:19	underlying
11,11	245:18 278:12 174:18 182:21	TT29:4	223:23
25	71:18	300:7 303:17	208:3 273:15	TT.OCT.17 27 : 6	understand 13 : 2
5	304:12 308:4	273:24 275:20	turn 119:11	13.5 15.9
f 4:19 7:9	335:6 , 8 , 12,21 275:24 276:2	293:19	19-24 21-8
5	11:6	topic 140:4	276:3, 13,21	TV 127:22 233:20 26:18 33:3,7
4	13:4,7	144:4 168:10	276:24,25	287:19 290:14 46-23 49-11
11,14,16	171:19 329:12 277:6,13,21	291:10 305:25 51:11,15*61:9
12 25:3	topicsl48:8	278:1 ,23	307:21	61*15, 19 62-5
1 31:18	151:20 162:13 280:21,25	TVs287:20	62*16,80*8
1	, 18 ,20	162:14 233:25 281:17 282:6	twice 187:11	83!2 104-17
17,20	235:10	282:8,23	245:1 283:4	104*20 108*6
20	48:10	total 70:19 ,22	283:22 285:4	twol7:9 24:1	115*15 119*21
1:15,18	104:2 161:20	201:22 205:17 172:2 173:13	walk77:10
.: 16 128:15 163:16 219:4	207:12 209:18 175:15 177:8	118:18 219:24
.:13 138:1	279:7 325:11	209:25 210:13 178:25 230:16 235:13
5:6,7,9,15	331:4	213:13 214:10 269:13 298:13	Wall268:12
. :1 146:22	unfortunately	214:15,22	298:21 309:3	want 21:6,24
): 13 160:12 126:6	215:4, 12	333:20	23:1 25:9 , 19
': 15,20	uniformity 235:4 216:10 219:11	varyl7:22	30:3, 19 31:25
>:6 176:11	unilaterally	219:12 228:5	114:20 126:16 32:14 56:17
': 17 198:1	329:24	228:13 235:18 172:18 184:17 77:9 100:10
5:18,19	union 10 7:10	258:9 270:23	vast 278:l	104:14 118:19
i:4 223:21	uniquel26:7	275:9 , 10	venture 184:23	119:11 132:23
5:23 ,24	United 19:21,22	310:25 311:2	verbally 41:5	148:14 152:21
1:4,12	20:4,5,8	322:5 324:18	verification	153:1 160:4
>: 19 246:19 69:17 , 18 84:9 324:19 ,21 ,21	160:15	166:4 169:23
.:4 261:15	86:7 87:1 , 16	324:22,24	verified 115:18	177:5 185:21
):13 271:18 88:12 89:12	327:21	160:6 273:14	185:22 201:9
!: 19 274:18 90:10 213:14	useful 245:23,23	verify 157 : 3, 8	217:13 218:18
i: 14 279:8	214:11 215:5	uses 21:15 67:21 157:12, 17	219:13 224:17
:: 11,13,16	237:2 242:9	201:24	158:2, 9 ,21	247:10 254:18
):20 302:3	244:18 351:7	usual28:21	159:18 212:11 255:13,13
::18 312:7	351:8 352:2,3	usuallyl8:9	244:4	261:15 270:18
>: 19 319:21	universe 6 7: 5	83:22 99:3	verifying 157:5 271:17 275:8
):21 322:6	68:15 83:24	100:11 104:4	version 102:16	278:8 , 10
::24 331:4	147:10 154:23 152:12 160:2	102:17	279:8 286:25
.:14 332:15 155:5 177:3	164:22 167:12	versus 75:5	290:23 300:16
!: 16 334:13 219:18 263:21 242:16 292:6	vicinity 240:15 320:18 ,20 ,21
rstanding	288:4 289:21	311:4	video 104:24	323:16 324:21
:, 5, 9 ,2 0	297:16 309:13	utilized 265 : 3	videos 171:18	324:21 326:4
1	19:25	323:24	U.S19:6,8,25	view67:19	327:2 331:7
2	39:5,9	universities	34:4 87:8,14	202:13	331:10,14
12, 16 40:5 84:9	87:24,24 88:3	views 203:17	333:10 344:10
6	41:1	university 16:12 88:7 , 17 89:20	visceral 145:12 353:17,20
1	45:24	17:25 18:1 ,2	90:22 107:4	visit 68:23	wanted25:12
3	52:6	18:21 74:3	194:21 293:5	visited 10 6 :10	26:21 28:21
23	59:21	76:4 83:12	293:7 308:6	231:19	29:19 30:13
24	62:12	84:6,13 87:17 313:15 322:24	visual67:20	31:7 32:17
17	66:5	88:1 129:13	352:6 358:12	visualize 129:6	34:17 111:8
18	68:5, 12	unlimited 68:6	__visualizing	161:9 174:23
14	84:17	68:15 69:4,6	_V_ 66:15	196:24 197:3
11,13,24	unprecedented	vague 329*7	vitae 13:16 ,20	197:5 264:24
6	99:4	209:6	valid85:9	23:17,17	279:6 314:16
):2 107:20	unreasonable	194:17	voice 30 9:24	327:7
. :18 120:3	260:3	variables 282:19 310:2,5	wants 335:2
1:14 141:21	unspoken 67:1	283:5, 9	voices 139:24	War 87:12
>:5 150:10	unsure 251:14	variance 260:8	203:20 309:25	warning 107:14
. :12 153:3	264:4 265:7	variation 72:11	volume 1:16	Wartonl8:21
1:18 167:22	unsworn 59: 14	variations 98 • 14 115:14,14,17	Washington 2 : 23
1:1,8	upcoming 341:16	282^25	138:17,20,21	192:23
1:12,17	update 127: 9	varied 71 *15	139:21 187:19	wasn't 6:25
i:25 206:5	updated48:12	183*11 184*3	188:7 191:16	26:22 58:19
::5 223:5	49:21	varies 134:25*	243:20 355:7	65:20 70:12
1:11,15	updates 47:4	143:17 148:21	Volumes 358:8	107:24 109:4
■: 6 ,10	updating 49 :17	181*18 182*11	voluminous 26:22 117:23 142:3
:: 11 265:20	upper 335:13	254:16 257:22 300:6	153:5 175:24
1:9,15	USA 2:25 192:25	258*16,16,16	voluntarily	186:22 268:5
':24 273:10 308:3	258:18 ,288:8	329:24	273:25 280:15
::13 27 7:25	usage 139:14	variety 171:19	Voluntary 125 : 23 295:2 317:23
■: 2 4 287:2	use31:ll 32:9	185*13 217*15	volunteer 74 :14 317:24 327:5
':25 291:7	33:9 37:2,7,8 231:22 233:15 171:25	331:23 344:4
.: 14,23	51:21 62:5,25 344*24	Volunteers	wasting 269:3
:: 12 311:21 85:13 104:17	various 42*16	231:15	watch 296:13
1:1 320:23	127:10 135:20 84:9 93/7	__watched 233:20
::4 327:8	137:22 140:4	124:11 125:4	_??__watching 117:13
1:20	149:15 151:23 125:19,21,22	wait38:7 164:23 296:12 306:8
rstands	152:19 153:15 125*23 126*3	344*6	Waxman203:ll
': 23 273:17 165:22 167:6	17 '	waive’^^18	way4:15 31:11
rstood 51:14 167:7 168:3	134':1^ 154:9	waived 358:15	57:14 65:21
19	79:24	22:1 23:19	133:18 138:2	86:22 99:6,18	94:23,25 95:7 .:20 118:14	24:13 114:20	161:18 ,25	103:1 ,3,4, 13	95:8 , 12 221:6 ': 10,24	132:1 137:22	163:11 184:7	118:9 ,24	wrong44:7
i:19 134:15	147:21 171:13	188:5,18	152:12,13	149:18 178:21
):11 137:6	179:21 199:7	241:20 331:6	161:6 164:2	274:7 316:8
::3, 6	202:2,3	338:16 347:12	238:11 239:20	wrote 27 : 7,11,15
):18 150:7	211:11 212:1	355:5, 18	263:25 275:25	90:20 152:1
:: 16 160:19	247:9 258:6	witnesses 74:25	281:23 298:16	_
.: 7 , 11	266:13 276:9	witness's 23:16	299:16 310:24	X
):15,21	323:16 335:20	women 257:24,25	321:15,16	X3*12 193*13
i:24 172:13	339:23 346:5	258:4,9,10,12	322:12 325:23	x-newspaper
1:12,19	we've 23:12 77:6	260:4	337:16 348:14	173*13
': 12 181:20	119:20 152:25	Wood 222:23	348:15, 16 , 17	x-tobacco 173:3
!: 24 194:10	201:2 236:6	WOODS 2:15 8:4	348:18	'
): 19 199:19	272:22 319:1	44:3 55:3	worked34:4	y
.: 24 211:10	331:1 333:4	186:21 187:5	74:22 111:6 ITT"-;rTT-
:: 19 216:16	whatsoever 54:5	187:7 192:15	120:22	3 °° ^ :
i:15 221:4	WHEREOF 188 : 18	222:22,25	workers 19:13	yefr T/
:: 21 227:25	355:18	237:12 266:8	working7:16	; ^
': 9 231:25	White 351:3	272:17 273:1	28:20 32:10
': 17 239:1	Why's 320:9	273:6 343:9	41:12,22 47:5	?69-is
': 10 251:17	wide 267:4	344:2,5	49:18 52:7	1 '
1:5,21	widely 44:17	352:16 353:16	65:21 71:22	' \
': 23 261:24	236:23 316:2	354:1	72:1,7,13,22	44 • 1 * 9
' :5 272:21	316:12	word 6:25 37:6 , 6	73:6 , 12, 16
1:23 312:13	widow 241:16	37:8 44:7	78:14, 17
) () • / h • h
:: 14 322:15	willingl6:8	51:20 ,21 86:8	102:12 103:5	\ '
1:3 327:13	21:23,25	86:9 , 13, 16	109:4 110:6	64*?4 69-in
':15, 15	279:10 , 14	137:22 139:14	116:9 117:25	£ j qq.?n
1:6	315:5	140:13 142:8	184:20 274:22
5115:20	Winell 1 : 9 2:6	149:16 179:21	322:8 325:22	In7*16 108*91
132:17	4:19 114:22	179:23 180:4	327:25 328:8	tn8*93 94
:: 19 259:22	115:14, 15, 17	205:14 206:7	330:15,21	in9*S 11
i:7	191:9 192:6	228:13,15	331:15,18,23
96:21 ,22,23	Winterl5:21	238:16 265:20	works 14:13,15	ts9-l1 176-19
': 4,7	withdraw 247:20	273:17 275:9	14:20 20:3	904*14 90S-3
Lte 297:2	withdrawn 7 3:3	275:9 279:22	33:21 53:3	?n9*10
SSDAY 1:17	withholding	306:6 315:2	93:7 , 7 333:22	'
.'.11	216:11	322:6 324:19	350:16	^ ‘
15:21 47:4	withholds 198:14	324:21,22,23	worksheet 115:19	] '
20	120:8	witness 4:24 6:7	324:24 341:1	273:14	947?? of Ly 124:14	7:149:25	wording 6 2:25	world 45:6 83:24	948*? 9 s 6 • 6 ::9 175:15	10:4 12:19	180:14,15,16	85:9 88:21	?S9*14 97S-1 ': 4	22:23 40:3	228:1 ,21 ,21	89:7	\
sme14 7:19	42:25 45:21	302:2 331:8	worth75:ll	980*16 349*19
77:23	47:25 48:16	words27:7,8	129:8,17	^4S*16 347*9
:: 20 156:16	51:18 52:23	43:18 120:18	wouldn't20:9	itq-t J4/:y
. : 7 167:9	53:5, 16 ,24	130:19 136:19	40:25 45:2	v 1- h 308*6
': 16 176:2	54:8 ,24 55:2	146:7 149:7 , 8	85:13 126:15	» kl^n
i:16 311:15	55:15 56:7	149:11 151:18	132:12 139:19	**
1't 2 7 2:22	57:2 58:6	153:23 158:11	146:17 182:25	, t ,7
n n * M
::6	61:21 62:17	205:23 274:19	200:7 216:10	„ , 00
2:4 19:11	63:24 64:2,11	278:22	221:22,22	pfin-17
17	86:23	70:21 ,23 74:5	workl7:24 18:10	270:16 288:9	youngzibO:!/
::4 350:7	74:19 77:13	18:11 , 13, 14	288:10 303:10 -^-
^Cuba 89:15	81:19 82:13	18:15, 18	310:5 311:24 -^-
L 7:20 9:3	94:18 100:21	19:14 20:13	349:21	$2, 000 74:18
24 26:15	101:2,18,23	21:21 44:9	write27:8 28:4	$22575:2,6,12
14,22,24	102:7,13,23	45:11,20	28:24 82:9	76:19
7	35:8	103:10,20	47:23 48:16	182:23	_
2	45:15	104:10 105:5	48:24 49:2	writing28:6	_9_
:: 23 119:13	105:12,22	60:22 64:21	48:23 94:10	04413163 293:19
1:6 138:11	106:17 ,24	65:12 66:24	94:21 103:7	08-CA-9153 1:4
:: 8 222:21	108:18 ,25	67:2,25 69:8	140:4 152:6	189:3 191:4
': 20 353:19	109:10 , 14	69:10 72:9 , 12	writtenl8:7	356:3
54:18 7:8	114:25 115:2	74:9 85:4,7,8	49:6,8 67:20	_
24	21:1 ,5	115:7 , 9 , 11	85:15 86:18	94:6 , 9 , 13, 18 _1_
3	9:25	1893:7 320:7,13,25 98:21 99:23	3393:6 260:4
12 13:19	19 335:21 337:7 321:25 322:13 100:3,16	333193:19
7	40:3 342:7 322:25 324:9 120:16,19	336062:4 192:4
:5	19th 8 8:10 89:15 325:5 326:1,5 121:2 123:1	34 93:8
7265:2 217:4 218:3	1970334:14 123:19 127:19	341193:20
13,14	29:5	1903:8	1971243:22	20091:17 122:15	345193:21
1:16 293:13	1900275:16	1977349:6 123:1,19	3571:8 342:9
1:14 301:11	1919233:18	1978 335:18,23 124:23 125:11	3500 126:2
1:8 14:17	1929241:6 349:6 125:18 126:4	3510 124:11
3	55:9	1935243:22	1980322:22 126:11 188:18	3514122:4
16	79:9 342:9,19	1980's317:23 190:12 191:17	355193:6 355:7 ): 9 149:10	1937 341:23	1982 333:7,8 355:18 357:12	356 193:7
!:2 230:23 342:8,10,20 334:19 336:11 358:1	357 193:8
.:9 249:11	1939 345:15 336:21 337:1	21 242:12,15	358 193:9
):17 337:16 346:3 337:3,4,12 244:10,21	39241:10 256:8
22:17	194193:3 355:6	1990 83:12,14,15 245:20 246:8	_
!: 14	1940 ' s 236:24 84:8 322:20 246:11 247:13	_4_
3:17 299:18 241:15 273:11	1990' s 203:7 , 8 247:14, 18	4 3:3, 16 14:2,22
i:19 300:14	1945 241:14 312:25 313:7 248:2,4 256:6	2*3-21 27-*7 '
1:17,22,24	1948288:11 317:18 318:11 256:14 257:14	41-23 98*22
):25 301:8	1950274:20 318:18,25 260:5,18	98*22 99*10
5:1,20,21 275:20,21 319:7,10,14 334:5	188*6 273*1
15	73:5 277:8,12 319:15	22 249:22 336:1	4 980*104*22*
!: 18 307:23 278:6,12	1994 307:15	23 3:16 241:8,9	,123*23 *128*2
':24 279:11 , 15 308:25 309:1	24 241:10 247:24	131-23 136*9
: 18 3:18 280:25 282:7 309:2 314:8	240 193:14	136*25 137*3
.: 18 282:8,23 315:18	25 184:10 241:10	4-00 8*2*7 *
:19 283:22 289:13	1996313:3 241:10,10	4-3082*7
3:19 333:1 290:5 291:22	1998 210:12 247:22,24	40 3 * 17 * 95 * 17,18
!: 5 291:25 213:1 336:13,23	25*6*10 * '
3:20 280:15	1950s 287:4	1999 353:2,9	2555 2:16 192:16	40s 28*6*25 287:4
):16 341:20 288:3 295:1	__266193:15	287*5*	*
.: 23	1950 ' s 236:24	_2__27 3:20,20 27:19	40, 00*0 71:8
aar 280:3	1954 241:2,3,7	2 3:14 10:11,12 27:24,25	408 267:24 268:3
!:7 242:2 244:14 11:14 241:3	283:21,21 29:7	268:7 270:17
275:14 244:22 246:1 247:10 248:10 29:11 30:4	271:14,21,24
2:10 192:10 247:4,11,12 264:9,11,13	29244:25 245:2	272:1
’:3 247:24 248:3 264:16 265:4 248:2,4	409 272:6
17	191:17 251:8 256:5	20 1 S0 • 19 2 3 S • 1 3 251:11 256:6	41 9 S1 • 10
>:21 246:12 264:1 265:4 242:18 256:14 358:1	42209:11 334:14
’:2,5 269:16,21	20th 88:10	29thl88:18	43 269:8 270:4,7
122:24 271:8 272:10 197:10 275:16 355:18	271:8,10,11
>: 19,25	1955 293:24	200, 000 283:21	293 193:16	271:22 272:2
:: 2	1957 28:15,18,19 283:24	299 193:17	284:17
25:1 32:22 209:2	200042:23	__4577:7 241:23
3:5 242:18 209:25 210:13 192:23	_?__244:10,13
25:1 281:3 211:16 287:7	200141:13,21,23	33:15 11:25	245:19 246:1
5:24 287:10 51:16,24,25 12:20 24:5	246:4 256:10
23:15	1959300:2 52:22 53:25 45:16 122:15	260:4 293:1,4
8:24 303:10 ,23 54;6 64..20 122:21 124:23	293:10 294:1
's 145:23,23 334:11 337:13 75:16 90:3, 16 125:11 184:10	48 287:1
8:24 129:17	1960274:20 91:25 161:25	3,514123:22	4893125:21
):4'16	1960s 292:25 323:15	30 119:8 150:19	4894 125:22
>: 24 246:7 293:3	2002 6:5,7 55:8 241:2,21	126:5
*: 11 260:18	1961 293:24,25	2003 41:23 247:10 251:11	49 241:10 256:10
t:1° 296:9	200484:12 256:5,8	256:14 257:14
aar-old	196227:6 29:5	2005231:10 358:14	4905125:23
':6 278:12,23	2006230:25	30sl74:l 342:4	4980122:22
84:9 287:13 293:21	20076:8,10,12	300268:1	_
84:10	1964146:8 159:9 6:19 42:2	30309-3053 2:10	5
69:13 279:11,15 79:24 325:9 192:10 358:4	53-17 40-7 a
96 80:18,23 280:25 282:7 325:15 326:1	308 193:18	4*3-14 5*9-16
9 282:8,23	200813:21,22	32258:9 260:4	904-3 913-1?
69:13 283:22 289:13 14:10 16:24 334:24 335:11	278-23
' s 217:7 , 10 290:5 291:22 17:2, 14 81:8 335:13,20	5B27-*6
69:14 292:1 93.5 95:18	328011:18	5 000167-94
:6 188:6	1969319:24 96:23 98:1,11 191:18	'	’
1:20,24	318:7
':1 238:24 900 2 : 4 192 : 4 5:1,2 257:9 98 212:25 i: 10
83:1 287:1 1:9,14,24 :23 192:23 6:11,21 8:3 256:5,9 ': 9 334:19 1:10
:23 97:8 7:9 288:9 ): 25
1:12 264:1 ::5 265:6 ,8 ): 11
6
8	121:4,5
.:11 122:2 1:12,16 1:11,14,21 ::11 126:1 7:16,18 i:15,16 88:3,14,24
0	:11
3-2613 2 :17
!: 17
7:17,18,20
7
9	122:7,8
!: 2 0 123:11 1:15,22 ::13 132:25 ■: 5
1:20 191:20 :: 8 74 :1 1:18 1: 21
8
:14 240:21 i:22 269:18 :10 192:10 ::3
7	: 8
9:3 211:22 58 188:23 ): 23
:18 191:18 9
:15 266:14 :: 15 202:16 /2012 188:24
■: 24 1:20 82:2 .: 20 82:6,6 7:13,14 17:3,15,16
T T ¥ 1 1 l?r A T Ihjl Ij JjvjAL
IPPORT
^ jljf	«il«* Vi/ Jl* «*«.
315 EAST ROBINSON STREET, SUITE 515 ORLANDO, FL 32801
407-649-9193
orltranscript@uslegaIsupport.com
www.uslegalsupportcom
FYTTTRTT^
Mjj yvllA 1l3 X A
ESTATE OF GILBERT
nnnn ir^ 1117 7 KU U Iv I Lj U L/j
vs
L REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY
*0 OF: Luis Martinez-Fernandez, Ph.D.
4/15/09

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE THIRTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA CIVIL DIVISION
N RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES 'OBACCO LITIGATION
CASE NO. 08-CA-9153
^ertains to: Winell Rodriguez, as Personal DIVISION D lepresentative of the Estate of Gilbert lodriguez v. R.J, Reynolds Tobacco Company, et at
)EFENDANT R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY’S EXPERT WITNESS LIST
Defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, individually and as successor to Brown &
Iliamson Tobacco Corporation and successor through merger to The American Tobacco mpany (“Reynolds”), pursuant to the Courfs May 1, 2008 Active Pretrial Discovery and teduling Order, hereby serves its list of experts that Reynolds expects to call at trial, along h expert summaries or reports pursuant to Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.280(b)(4).
Reynolds identifies the following experts, who will testify in accordance with the expert closures attached hereto:
1.	Christopher J. Cook, Ph.D. (Exhibit 1)
2.	James N. Figlar, Ph.D. (Exhibit 2)
3.	Jeffery S. Gentry, Ph.D. (Exhibit 3)
4.	David L. Roberts, Ph.D. (Exhibit 4)
5.	Michael Shahnasarian, Ph.D. (Exhibit 5)
6.	Luis Martinez-Fernandez, Ph.D. (Exhibit 6)
7.	Shoba Sreenivasan, Ph.D. (Exhibit 7)
8.	Mark O. Farber, M.D. (Exhibit 8)
9.	Michael J. Manyak, M.D. (Exhibit 9)
I EXmibit j
10.	R. Garrison Harvey, M.S. (Exhibit 10)
11.	Ronald J. Krone, M.D. (Exhibit 11)
12.	Thomas L. Bennett, M.D. (Exhibit 12)
13.	Steven Richard Smith, M.D,, F.A.C.O.E.M., F.A.C.P.M. (Exhibit 13)
14.	All expert witnesses listed by Plaintiffs.
15.	All non-company expert witnesses listed by other Defendants.
16.	Any and all defense rebuttal witnesses.
Reynolds reserves the right to call any additional expert witnesses necessary for rebuttal d to amend or supplement this Witness List in response to any amendments or supplements to
iintifi^s Witness List-______________________________________________________________ ____ ________________
As discovery is currently on-going, additional expert witnesses may become necessary ^sequent to the filing of this witness list. Consequently, Reynolds reserves the right to amend s list to add any additional expert witnesses that become necessary as a result of additional icovery.
Respectfully submitted,
Benjamin H HiUJOEI	.............
Florida Bar No. 0945B5 Troy A. Fuhrman Florida Bar No. 985211 R. Craig Mayfield, Esq.
Florida Bar No. 429643
HILL, WARD & HENDERSON, P.A.
101 East Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 3700 Post Office Box 2231 Tampa, FL 33601 Telephone: (813)221-3900 Facsimile: (813)221-2900
*H: 813-202-7100 'AX: 813-221-8837
attorney for Defendants Liggett Group, Inc, nd Vector Group Ltd.:
Lelly Anne Luther, Esq.
XARKE SILVERGLATE & CAMPBELL, P.A.
99 Brickell Plaza, 9th Floor 4iami, FL 33131 H: 305-377-0700 'AX: 305-377-3001
AttM^y^or R,J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA IN AND FOR HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY
CIVIL DIVISION
IE ENGLE PROGENY CASES SACCO LITIGATION
CASE NO.: 08-CA-9153 DIVISION: D
ains to: Rodriguez, Winell as Personal resentative for the Estate of Gilbert Rodriguez
_/
NOTICE OF TAKING DEPOSITION DUCES TECUM
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the Plaintiff will take the deposition, by oral
xdnation, of the person or persons named below, at the time, date and
:e indicated herein, before, US Legal Support (Court Reporters), Notaries
lie, who are not of counsel to the parties nor interested in the event of the
. cause; said depositions being taken for the purposes of discovery, for use
rial or for such other purposes as are permitted under the Florida Rules of
1 Procedure and to have with them at the time of deposition the items listed
Dxhibit "A” which is attached,
NAME	I DATE AND TIME j..... %..... ..... PLACE	' .
is Martinez-	April 15, 2009 Boies, Schiller & Flexner
-nandez, MD	at 9:00 A.M. 121 S. Orange Avenue
Suite 840
Subpoena	Orlando, FL 32801
PH: {407)425-7118
z.
A copy of the witness's most current curriculum vitae.
All facts and data upon which you base any opinion.
All documents (as defined in Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.340(a)}1 and all other materials of any sort you referred to or relied upon in order to arrive at any opinions or conclusions concerning the issues involved in these cases generally (being Engle progeny cases anywhere in the State of Florida) and the specific cases identified above.
All reports, summaries, impressions, and evaluations relating to these cases generally and the specific cases identified above, including but not limited to any testing you conducted or that was conducted at your request or under your auspice.
All correspondence or communications, including e-mails and faxes, between you or anyone working on your behalf and any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above (or anyone working on such a lawyer's behalf).
All documents (as defined in Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.350(a)) forwarded or otherwise provided to you by any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above (or by anyone working on such a lawyer’s behalf).
All documents (as defined in Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.350(a)) forwarded or otherwise provided by you to any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above (or to anyone working on such a lawyer’s behalf).
All documents that, alone or together, reflect (1) the scope of your employment in the pending in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above; (2) your general litigation experience, including the percentage of work performed for plaintiffs and defendants; and (3) an approximation of the portion of your involvement as an expert witness, which may be based on the number of hours, percentage of hours, or percentage of earned income derived from serving as an expert witness.
A list identifying all cases in which you have testified deposition or trial (designating which) for the five years preceding the date of this notice.
Copies of all time records reflecting the time you have spent on these cases.
1 The rule encompasses "documents, including writings, drawings, graphs, irts, photographs, phono-records, and other data compilations from which yrmation can be obtained, translated, if necessary, by the party to whom the uest is directed through detection devices into reasonably usable form." It s encompasses electronic data, including email It also extends to publications lentific or otherwise) and all other manner of literature, transcripts, and other 'tings, whether physically or electronically stored.
martfem@isaiLucf.edu
Department of History University of Central Florida Orlando, FL 32816-1350 Tel. (407)823-1169
WORK EXPERIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF CENTRAL FLORIDA, ORLANDO Professor of History (2004-).
Director of Latin American, Caribbean and Latino Studies (2004-2006).
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY, NEW BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY
Professor (2002-2004); Associate Professor (1997-2002); Assistant Professor (1994-
1997)	with joint appointment in the Department of Puerto Rican and Hispanic'
Caribbean Studies and the History Department.
Department Chair (1998-2004); Acting Department Chair (1997-1998).
COLGATE UNIVERSITY, HAMILTON, NEW YORK Assistant Professor (1992-1994).
AUGUSTA STATE UNIVERSITY, AUGUSTA, GEORGIA Assistant Professor (1990-1992).
HIGHER EDUCATION
DUKE UNIVERSITY, DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA Ph.D. in History, May 1990.
UNIVERSIDAD DE PUERTO RICO, RIO PIEDRAS Master of Arts in History, December 1984.
UNIVERSIDAD DE PUERTO RICO, RIO PIEDRAS
Bachelor of Arts in History (High Honors), June 1982.
TEACHING EXPERTISE
Undergraduate and graduate courses on modern and colonial Latin American history; more
specialized courses such as: Caribbean history, the Cuban Revolution, U.S.-Latin American
relations, history and historians, literature meets history in Latin America, and national M *"ArllBIT
history courses on Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic.	■	> ,
SCHOLARLY PUBLICATIONS	I ---^---.
“The Cuban Revolution.” Entry in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modem World. Ed.
N. Steams. 4 vols. New York, 2008.
“The Cuban Revolution,” Chapter in A Companion to Latin American History. Ed. 'Ihomas
g
O
O
H. Holloway. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers, 2007. Pp. 365-385.
"The Forging of Creole Cuba: Race, Gender and Society in the Sixteenth-Century,” Chapter in Caribe/Caribes: criollizacidn y procesos de cambio. Ed. Josef Oparimy. Prague,
Editorial Karolinum, 2006. Pp. 49-63.
“1492: First Encounters, the Invention of America and the Columbian Exchange," Revista Brasil eira do Caribe 6:11 (2005). pp. 13-31.
‘'Geography, Wiil It Absolve Cuba?” History Compass (Blackwell Publishing online journal),
2	(2004) LA 066, pp. 1-20.	'
Encyclopedia of Cuba: People, History, Culture. Co-edited with Louis A. P6rez, Jr.,
D.H. Figueiedo, and Luis Gonz&ez. 2 vols. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2003.
Served as Senior Editor and authored the Introduction and fifty-three entries.
“La frontera y la plantaci6n: reflexiones sobre dos claves para empezar a entender las cultures eubana y caribena.” Cu'ademo no. 9 of the Association of European Historians of Latin America (AHDLA): Visitando la isla: temas de historia de Cuba.
Eds. Josef Opatrn^ and Consuelo Naranjo Orovio. Madrid/Frankfurt: AHILA/Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2002. Pp. 149-159.
Protestantism and Political Conflict in the Nineteen th - Century Hispanic Caribbean. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
“Political Culture in the Hispanic Caribbean and the Building of U.S. Hegemony, 18681945.” Revista Mexicana del Caribe 11 (2001), pp. 7-55.
“Introduction: The Many Lives and Times of Humboldt’s Political Essay on the Island of
Cuba" in Alexander von Humboldt, The Island of Cuba: A Political Essay. Princeton,
NJ: Markus Wiener, 2001. Pp. 1-18.
“Why Study the Past?: A Historian Rcflccts.” Hopscotch 2:2 (Fall 2000), pp. 64-69.
“Puerto Rico en el torbellino del ‘98: conflieto, cambio y continuidad,” in XIII Coloquio
de Historia Canario-Americana-VII Congreso Internacional de Historia de America (1998). Francisco Morales Padr6nf Coordinator. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria:
Cabildo de Gran Canaria, 2000. CJD-Rom. Pp. 567-576.
"Marriage, Protestantism, and Religious Conflict in Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico.”
Journal of Religious History 24:3 (October 2000), pp. 263-278.
“Crypto-Protestants and Pseudo-Catholics in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic
Caribbean.” Journal of Ecclesiastical History 51:2 (April 2000), pp. 347-365.
Fighting Slavery in the Caribbean: The Life and Times of a British Family in Nineteenth-Century Havana. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe Publishers, 1998.
“Puerto Rico in the Whirlwind of 1898: Conflict, Continuity, and Change." Magazine of History 12:3 (Spring 1998), pp. 24-29.
§
O
o
‘The Birth of the American Empire as Seen Through Political Cartoons (1896-1905).”
Magazine of History 12:3 (Spring 1998), pp* 48-54.
“El '98 antes del ‘98: el expansionismo norteamericano en el Caribe Hispano durante la segunda mi tad del siglo XIX.” Article in 1898: enfoques y perspectivas. Ed. Luis GonzSlez Vales. San Juan: Academia Puertorriquena de la Hisioria. 1997. Pp. 381401.
"Dominican Republic'.’1 Rntry in The Encyclopedia of US Foreign
Relations. 4 vols. Hew Yorlc: Oxford University Press, 1997, vo). FI, pp. 27-32.
“Life in a ‘male city’: Native and Foreign Hite Women in Nineteenth-Century Havana.”
Cuban Studies 25 (1995), pp. 27-49. Reprinted in an expanded version as “The ‘Male City’ of Havana: The Coexisting Logics of Colonialism, Slavery, and Patriarchy in Nineteenth-Century Cuba” in Women and the Colonial Gaze. Eds. Tamara L. Hunt and Michelitie R. Lessard. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave, 2002. Pp. 104-116.
‘The Havana Anglo-Spanish Mixed Commission for the Suppression of the Slave Trade and Cuba’s Bmancipados ” Slavery & Abolition 16:2 (August 1995), pp. 205-225.
‘The Sword and the Crucifix: Church-State Relations and Nationality in the Nineteenth-
Century Dominican Republic.” Latin American Research Review 30:1 (Winter 1995), pp. 69-93.
Torn between Empires: Economy, Society, and Patterns of Political Thought in the Hispanic Caribbean, 1840-1878. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1994.
"Political Change in the Spanish Caribbean during the United States Civil War and Its Aftermath.” Caribbean Studies 27:1-2 (January-June 1994), pp. 37-64.
“Caudillos, Annexationism, and the Rivalry between Empires in the Dominican Republic, 1844-1874Diplomatic History 17:4 (Tall 1993), pp. 571-597.
“The Sweet and the Bitter: Cuban and Puerto Rican Responses to the Mid-Nineteenth-
Century Sugar Challenge.” New West Indian Guide 67:1 & 2 (May 1993), pp. 47-67.
Reprinted in Caribbean Slavery in the Atlantic World. Eds. Verene A. Shepherd and Hilary McD. Beckles. Kingston: Ian Randle, 2000. Pp. 506-517.
“La Fortaleza y la Gudadela: la transfonnaciOn del Senado y de la polfUca
puertorriquena durante la administracidn de Luis A. Ferr£f 1969-1972.” Chapter in:
Senado de Puerto Rico, Senado de Puerto Rico, 1917-1992: ensayos de hisioria institutional. San Juan: Senado, 1992. Pp. 239-267.
“‘Don’t Die Here’: The Death and Burial of Protestants in the Hispanic Caribbean, 18401885.” The Americas 49:1 (July 1992), pp. 23-47.
“El anexionismo doininicano y la lucha enire imperios durante la Primera Republic a,
1844-1861.” Jtevista/Re\'iew Interamericana 22:1-2 (Spring-Summer 1992), pp. 168190.	L
San Lorenzo: notas para su hisioria. San Juan: Comit6 Hisioria de los Pueblos, 1987.
I
8
Historia de Puerto Rico: cuademo de ejerciciosy actividades. (4 eds,), San Juan:
Editorial Ubrotex/PuMicactonesPuertomquenas, 1986-1993.
El Pariido Nuevo Progresisia: trayecioria hacia el podery ortgenes sociales de sus fundadores. 1967-1968. Rfo Piedras; Editorial Edil. 1986.
Sociedady ciilntra cmrtcmportinea (gufa del esnidiante). Ilalo Rey. PR: IMvcrsidad Interamerieana, Programs tic Education Superior para Adultos, ] 986.
WORKS ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION OR IN PROGRESS
“Bay of Pigs.” (Entry in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, 2nd ed., by Scribner’s Sons).
A Concise History of the Cuban Revolution (Book-length survey of the Cuban Revolution,
1952-present, under contract with the University of North Carolina Press).
Cuba: An Essayed History from the Pre-Columbian Era to 1800 (A general history of early Cuba; received contract).
The American Mediterranean during the First Half of the American Century:
Political Culture and U.S. Hegemony in the Hispanic Caribbean, 18981945. (Book-length project in progress).
ACADEMIC HONORS, FELLOWSHIPS AND AWARDS
Finalist, Quijote Award for Excellence, Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Orlando (2005).
Best of Reference award by the New York Public Library, Encyclopedia of Cuba (2004).
Best Reference Source awarded to Encyclopedia of Cuba by library Journal (2003).
Booklist Editors’ Choice, Encyclopedia of Cuba among best reference books (2003).
Norman Washbume Award of die Rutgers University Chapter of the AAUP for Distinguished Service (2003).
Universidad dc Puerto Rico, Distinguished Alumnus Residing Abroad (2002).
Featured among most influential US Hispanics in the TV program: “Viva!: Top 20 Powerbrokers.'* WB Network (2002).
Special Mention, Certamen del Centenario de la ReptibJiea de Cuba, San Juan, PR (2002).
Rutgers University Research Council, Book Publication Subvention Grant (2001 -2002).
Rutgers University Research Council Grant (2000-2001).
Lydia Cabrera Award of she Conference on Latin American History (2000).
University of Florida, Center for Latin American Studies, Library Travel Grant (2000).
American Council of Learned Societies and Social Science Research Council, Working Group on Cuba Workshop, Washington, DC (1998).
Rutgers University Board of Trustees Fellowship for Scholarly Excellence (1997-1998).
Rutgers University Research Council Grant (1996-1997).
Rutgers University Minority Faculty Development Grant (1996-1997).
Visiting Fellow, Episcopal Theological Seminaiy of the Southwest (1995).
Pew Evangelical Scholars Program Fellowship (1994-1995).
Rutgers University Competitive Fellowship Leave (1994-1995).
Colgate University Research Council, Major Grant (1993).
National Endowment for the Humanities 'lYavel to Collections Grant (1993).
O
L	q
Dissertation Fellow and Lecturer, Bowdoin College (1989-1990),
Visiting Fellow, The Johns Hopkins University/Tinker Foundation (1988-1989).
LB. Duke Fellow, Duke University (1986-1987,1987-1988).
National Hispanic Scholar, NHSF (1987,1988).
Beveridge Travel Grant, American Historical Association (1988).
Tinker Foundation International Travel Grant (1987).
CONFERENCE AND SYMPOSIUM PRESENTATIONS
“The British in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean," I -atin American Studies Association Internationa] Congress, Montreal, September 2007.
“The British in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean: Hegemony, Informal Empire,
Neocolonialism, or All of the Above?" Informal Empire?: Commerce and Culture outside Britain’s Empire in the Long Nineteenth-Century, Bristol University, UK,
January 2007.
“La formation de la Cuba criolla: raza y sodedad en el siglo diecis6is,” 52nd International Congress of Americanists, Seville, July 2006,
Commentator “Anglo-Hispanic Interactions, Memory, and the U.S. Past,” Organization of American Historians Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., April 2006.
“A Historical Perspective on Prospects for a Post-Castro Cuba," Cuba after Castro Forum,
Daytona Beach Community College, January 2006.
"La geografi'a,absolved a Cuba?," Congreso Intemaciona! B1 Caribe Hispano: proyectos de investigation, publications y aportaeiones recientes,” Madrid, May 2005.
Commentator: “Patrones de sociabilidad en Puerto Rico,” Latin American Studies Association International Congress, Las Vegas, October 2004.
“Orlando as a Frontier,” South Atlantic Humanities Center Advisory Board Inaugural Meeting, Orlando, September 2004.
‘The Emergence of Creole Cuba: Hierarchy, Social Mobility, and Miscegenation," American Studies Faculty Symposium, Rutgers University, April 2004.
“Divergent Patterns of Political Culture in the Twentieth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,”
Symposium, Islands in Transition: The Hispanic Caribbean, Dickinson College,
October 2003.
“Reflections on the Practice, Pathology, and Promise of Cuban Studies,” Historia
de Ellas: Beyond the Revolution," a symposium at Florida International University,
Miami, June, 2002.
, “Contrapunteo anglo-sajdm: Gran Bretana y los Estados TJnidos en el Caribe Hispano decimononico,” Conferences International “los ingleses en Cuba," Institute de Historia, Havana, Cuba, April 2002.
“Learned Instincts: Roots and Evolution of Cuban Political Culture, 1868-1940," 4U)
|
O
O
Conference on Cuban and Cuban-American Studies, Florida International University,
Miami, March 2002.
“to the Plantation’s Own Image: Puerto Rico's First Protestant Congregation, Ponce,
1869-1898," Latin American Studies Association International Congress,
Washington, DC, September 2001.
"Culiura poh'uca y hcgcmonfa norieamericana en el Caribe Ilispano a fines dei siglo
diccinucvc y princjpios dc! vcintc,” Cong rc so International sob re Cultura Poiftica y PrScttcas Socialcs en America Latina, Jaraiz dc la Vera, Spain, May 2001.
“The Frontier and the Plantation: Reflections on Two Competing Keys to Cuban and Caribbean Culture,” Cuban Counterpoints: The Fernando Ortiz Symposium on Cuban History and Culture, The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, March 2000. .
‘Ten Historiographical Keys to the Caribbean,” Annual Meeting of the Conference on Latin American History, Chicago, January 2000.
Panel chair and organizer, “One Hundred Years of Historiography on the Caribbean,"
Annual Meeting of the Conference on Latin American History, Chicago, January 2000.
‘The American Mediterranean during the First Half of the American Century: Political Culture and U.S. Hegemony in the Hispanic Caribbean,” Annual Meeting of the Society for Caribbean Studies, Ijondon, July 1999.
Moderator, panel: “The Military in the Caribbean," The Historical Society Conference,
Boston, May 1999.
“Marriage, Protestantism, and Religious Conflict in Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico,”
Annual Meeting of the Virginia-Carolina-Georgia Seminar on Colonial Latin American History, Durham, NC, April 1999-
Chair and discussant, panel: ‘The Dominican Republic in Its Broader Caribbean and
Latin American Context,” Conference on Latin American History Annual Meeting,
Washington, DC, January 1999.
“Puerto Rico in the Whirlwind of 1898: Conflict, Continuity and Change,” Conference:
Revisiting the Birth of Our Century: The Meaning of 1898, University of New Orleans-Tul an e University, October 1998.
“The American Mediterranean during the First Half of the American Century: Political
Culture and U.S. Hegemony in the Hispanic Caribbean, 1898-1945,” Conference on the Caribbean and the United States since 1898, City University of New York.
October 1998.
"Puerto Rico in the Whirlwind of 1898: Conflict, Continuity, and Change,” Conference on Latin American History Annual Meeting, Seattle, January 1998.
“Crypto-Protestants and Pseudo-Catholics in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic
§
O
Q
Caribbean: A Comparative Approximation to Early Protestant Activities in Ponce,
Havana, and Vieques,” Latin American Studies Association International Congress,
Guadalajara, April 1997.
“La historiografia norteamericana sobre el ‘98: una critica caribena aunque desde las
entrafias,” A 98 del 98, Espaiia. Estados Unidos, Cuba. Pilipinas y Bueno Rico: Los Grandes Temas del Centenario, Universidad de Puerto Rico. Rio Piedras, October 1996.
“El novcnta y ocho antes del ;98,” Simposio Intcmacional dc Hi si ori adores cn Tomo al 1898, Universidad de Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, April-May, 1996.
“Cuba y los Estados Unidos, 1840*1878,” Encuentro sobre Cuba en la Encrucijada del 98, Universidad de la Laguna, Canary Islands, November 1995.
“Politics and Religion in the Hispanic Caribbean and in Cuban Exile Communities, 18681898,” Latin American Studies Association International Congress, Washington, DC,
September 1995.
“Religion and Politics in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,” Conference of the Pew Evangelical Scholars Program, Glen Arbor, Ml, June 1995,
“Notas para una historia social del protestantisrao en Puerto Rico durante la epoca del exclusivismo calolico, 1815-1869,” Primer Encuentro Nacional de Historia y Sociologia del Protestantismo en Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, PR, May 1995.
‘The Havana Anglo-Spanish Mixed Commission for the Suppression of the Slave Trade and Cuba’s Emanojpados,” Caribbean Studies Association Meeting, Merida,
Yucatan, May 1994.
“Anexiomsmo, lucha entre imperios, y manipulacidn de asuntos raciales durante la Primera Republic a Dominicana,” Congreso de Historiadores, 150 Aslos de la Independence, Santo Domingo, February 1994.
“Life in a Male City: Women in Nineteenth-Century Havana,” Society for Caribbean Studies Conference, Oxford, UKt July 1993.
“Twicc Removed: To be a Foreigner and a Woman in Nineteenth -Century Havana,”
Association of Caribbean Historians Meeting, Mona, Jamaica, March 1993.
‘The Sword and the Crucifix: Church-State Relations and the Definition of Nationality in the Nineteenth-Century Dominican Republic,” Caribbean Studies Association Meeting, St. George’s, Grenada, May 1992.
“Caudillos, Annexalionism, and the Rivalry between Empires in the Dominican
Republic, 1844-1878,” Association of Caribbean Historians Meeting, Nassau,
Bahamas, April 1992.
“Annexalionism and the Issues of Race and Slavery: Cuba and the Dominican Republic,"
Internationa! Congress of Americanists, New Orleans, July ! 991.
§
O
!->
‘“Don't Die Here’: The Death and Burial of Protestants in the Hispanic Caribbean,”
Association of Caribbean Historians Meeting, Santo Domingo, March 1991.
INVITED PRESENTATIONS
Ten Keys to the Mysteries of Cuban Culture ” Daytona Museum of Arts and Sciences (January 2008).
Q 8c A session following Hie screening of Lejos de la Isla, Official Selection of the Orlando Film Festival (November 2007).
“Puerto Rico’s Status in Historical Perspective,” Puerto Rico Educational Forum:
Exploring Status Options, Valencia Community College, Orlando (April 2007).
Four lectures on Central America and the Caribbean on board the Regal Princess of the Princess Line (March 2007).
“La Habana: ciudad que se mega a dejar de rodar...” Tertulia Cultural Hispana, Orlando,
(February 2007).
‘The Formation of Creole Cuba, 1525-1607,” Center for Latin American Studies, University of Florida, Gainesville (November 2006).
“Oar ‘Weaknesses* Are Our Strengths: Taking a Closer Look at Hispanic/Latino Culture,”
Keynote speech Hispanic American Celebration Luncheon, Patrick Air Force Base,
Cocoa Beach; and Orange County Hispanic Heritage Celebration, Orlando {October 2006). " ’
“On Translating Hispanic/Latino Culture,” Orlando 5«n//ne//National Organization of Hispanic Journalists, Orlando Florida (May 2006).
“El tramp or te como veil tana a ia sociedad cubana,” Ilerencia Cultural Cubana and Institute of Cuban and Cuban-American Studies of the University of Miami (February 2006).
Four lectures on the Caribbean on board the Jewel of the Seas of the Royal Caribbean Line (November 2005).	’
“Don Quijote in the Boardroom,” International Round Table, Orlando (October 2005).
“Geography, Will It Absolve Cuba?” Celebration of Cuban History and Culture, Orange County Regional History Center, Orlando (May 2005).
“Geography, Will It Absolve Cuba?” Sahin Lecture Series, MIT (October 2003).
‘‘Hispanics/Launos in the United Stales: Challenges for the Twenty-First Century.” Office of the New Jersey Division of the Ratepayer Advocate, Newark, NJ {Octobcr 2003).
“Cuba between Covers: A Multimedia Presentation of Encyclopedia of Cuba: People,
History, Culture, Jersey City Museum (October 2003).
Keynote Speaker, Annual Banquet of the Latin American Student Organization of Cook
£
o
3
College, Rutgers University (April 2003).
“Cuba between Covers: A Multimedia Presentation of Encyclopedia of Cuba: People,
History, Culture” Rutgers University (March 2003),
“Geography, Will It Absolve Cuba?” Cullum Lecture Series. Augusta State University (February 2003).	'	’
"'Farworse than slaves’: Emancipation in Nincicemh-Century Cuba.” The Amistad Research Centcr-Tulanc University (November 2002).
“Congregations, Missions, and Chaplaincies: Early Protestant Communities in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,” Latin American Studies Program,
Graduate Center of the City University of New York (March 2002).
“Relexiones para la presentacidn del libro Protestantism and Political Conflict in the
Nineteenth-Century Hispanic CaribbeanJ” Universidad de Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras (February 2002).	'	.
“Prolestantisra and Political Struggle in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,”
Columbia University (February 2002).
“The American Mediterranean during the First Half of the American Century: U-S.
Hegemony and Political Culture in the Hispanic Caribbean,” Princeton University (December 2001).
“So S'imilar, So Different: The Contrasting Political Cultures of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic,” University of Virginia (March 2001).
“Elite Women in Nineteenth-Century Havana,” Sweet Briar College (March 200!).
“In Search of the Cuban Nation,” Glaxo Wellcome Seminar on Cuban Culture, New York City (September 2000).
“Crypto-Protestants and Pseudo-Catholics in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,** University of Pennsylvania (March 2000).
‘Ten Keys to the Caribbean,” Drew University (October 1999).
“Ten Keys to the Caribbean,” Barnes and Noble, Princeton, NJ (October 1998).
“Protestantism in Ninctcenth-Ccntury Cuba and Puerto Rico,” Roundtable discussion:
‘The World of 1898,” Library of Congress Hispanic Division (July 1998).
“History Meets Literature in Latin America and ihe Caribbean,” Rutgers University,
Program in American Language Studies (July 1998).
“Fighting Slavery in the Caribbean,” Mercer County Library, Hightstown, NJ (April ' 1998).	' ’ “
“Why Did I Become a Historian?” Rutgers University, Faculty of Arts and Sciences
O
n
Continuing Education Speakers Series (April 1998).
“Reflections on Race, Culture, and Identity in Cuba,” Columbia University Cuban Cultural Society (March 1998).
“Puerto Rico in the Whirlwind of 1898,” Colgate University (March 1998).
“Reflections on Racc. Culture, anti Identity in Cuba." Montclair State University (.March
1998).
“El noventa y ocho antes del L98 " Rutgers University Conference on 1898 (March 1998).
“Puerto Rico in the Twentieth Century,” Centenary College (February 1998)-
“Keys to Understanding Cuban Culture,” Rutgers University Ouban-American Student Organization (February 1998).
“Disease and Death in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,” University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (November 1997).
“Crypto-Protestants and Pseudo-Catholics in the Nineteenth-Century Hispanic Caribbean,” University of Connecticut (February 1997),
“Primeras comunidades protestantes en el Puerto Rico del siglo XIX," Sociedad Puertorricjuena de Genealogfa, San Juan (July 1995).
Four lectures on Latin America and the Caribbean, VistaJjiord of the Cunard Line (March 1995).
“Desgarrados cntrc imperios: atrapados cntre historiografias,” Universidad Interamericana de Puerto Rico, Bayamdn (February 1995).
“El anexionismo en el Caribe del stglo XIX,” Universidad de Puerto Rico, Rj'o Piedras (September 1994).	"
Three lectures on the Caribbean, VistaJjiord of the Cunard Line (January 1994).
“Politics and Socicty in Latin America, 1930s-1990s,” Hobbart and William Smith Colleges (May 1993).
“The First Dominican Republic, 1844-1861,” Latin American Student Association,
Colgate University (February 1993).	'
‘1‘om between Empires: A Comparative View of Cuba and Puerto Rico,” La Casa Panamericana, Colgate University (February 1993).
“The Hispanic Caribbean between Empires," Foreign language Alliancc for International Rapport, Augusta, GA (April 1991).
Four lectures on the Caribbean, VistaJjiord of the Cunard Line (March 1992).
§
O
2
“U.S.“Latin American Relations,” Richmond County Journal Club, Augusta, GA (October 1990).
“Contemporary Politics in Puerto Rico,” University of Southern Maine (March 1990).
“Regional Politics in Contemporary Puerto Rico." (’enter for Latin American Studies Brown Bag Lunch Speaker Series, Duke University (January 19S8).
'Filosoffa dc la cnscfianza dc la historia.” Univcrsidad liucramericana de Puerto Rico,
Hato Rcy (August 1987).
EDITORIAL BOARDS
Letras de Cuba (book series) (2006-).
Cuban Studies (2004- 2012).
Revista Herencia (2006- ).
The Latin Americanist (2004-2007).
' H-LATAM (1998-02),
BOARD MEMBERSHIPS
Chair-elect of the Academic Assembly and Academic Assembly Council of the College Board (2007-2009).	,
Member, Community Advisory Board of WMFE (NPR and PBS), Orlando (2008-2010).
Member, Advisory Board of Puerto Ricans in Central Florida from the 1940s to the 1980s: A History (2008-).
Member. College Board History Academic Advisory Committee (2006-2009).
Member, Advisory Board of Virginia Foundation of the Humanities* project “This Common Feast.” (2006-).
Vice Chair, Board of Directors of Nuestro Futuro (2006-2008).
Member, Board of Directors, Hispanic Business Initiative Fund of Greater Orlando (20052009).
Member, Academic Assembly Council, the College Board (2004-); Program Planning
Committee member, 2008 Forum (2008); Partnership Committee member (2006-).
Member, Board of Cuban Cultural Heritage (2006-).
Member, Advisory Board, South Atlantic Humanities Center (2004- ).
Member, Advisory Board, Puerto Rican Orlando Project, Hunter College Center for Puerto Rican Studies (2004-2007).
Member, Orlando Regional Chamber of Commerce, Planning Committee, 2005 Hispanic Summit (2004-2005).	‘
Member, Advisory Committee of Hispanic Student Programs, Middlesex College (19962005).
Member, New Jersey Governor’s Hispanic Advisory Council (2002-2004).
Member, ConimUNlTY Culture Committee, The State '{beater. New Brunswick, NJ (20022004).
OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICE	.
Student work supervisor for the Vocational Rehabilitation Program of the Division of Blind Services, Florida Department of Education (2007-2008).
Book series proposal evaluator, Blackwell publishing (2007).
%
O
Member, Planning Committee, Puerto Rico Educational Forum: Exploring Status Options,
Valencia College, Orlando (2007).
Manuscript evaluator, Lemer Publications Company (2007).
Manuscript evaluator, Louisiana State University Press (2006,2007).
Manuscript evaluator, Edinburgh University Press (2005).
Referee, The Latin Americanist (2005),
Referee, Cuban Studies (2005,2006,2007, 2008).
Referee, Caribbean Studies (2004. 2005. 2006).
Cuba Collection Exhibit, Orange County Regional History Center (2005-2006).
Manuscript evaluator, Oxford University Press (2004).
Manuscript evaluator, University Press of Florida (1998,1999,2000,2004).
Referee, Hispanic American Historical Review (2003,2004).
Manuscript evaluator, Alpha Boolts (2002).
Manuscript evaluator, Rutgers University Press (1999,2000,2002).
Journal series evaluator, Cuban Studies for Pittsburgh University Press (2002).
-	Referee, Centro Journal (2000,2002).
Referee, Comparative Studies in Society and History (2001).
Member, Contit^ Cienttfico, Congreso Internacional sobreCultura Politics y Prlcticas Soci ales en America Latina, Jaraiz de la Vera, Spain (2001).
Referee, Revista Mexicana del Caribe (1999, 2000,2008).
Referee, Contours (1999).
Referee, American Historical Review (1998).
Proposal evaluator. National Endowment for the Humanities (1997,1998).
Award evaluator, Best Foreign Language Article, Journal of American Histoiy (1996-1998).
Manuscript evaluator, University of North Carolina Press (1997,1999).
North Carolina delegate to the Southeastern Columbus Quincentenary Planning Committee (1987).
PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS AND OFFICES HELD
United Faculty of Florida (2006").
American Association of University Professors (1994-2004); Chair of Affirmative Action and Discrimination Committee, Rutgers Chapter (2003-2004).
American Historical Association (1987-).
Association of Caribbean Historians (1990-2000); Nominating Committee (1993-1994).
Caribbean Studies Association (1992-1997).
Comite Hisioria de los Puebios; Executive Director (1983-1984).
Conference on Latin American History (1992-); Chair of Caribbean Studies Committee (1998-00); Member of Lydia Cabrera Prize Committee (1998-2000).
Equipo de Hisioria y Sociologia de la Religion, UPR (1994-1998).
Latin American Studies Association (1989-).
Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations; Program Committee (2000-2001).
LANGUAGE SKILLS
Spanish (first language; native proficiency); English (native proficiency); French (reading ability); Portuguese (reading ability).
■	§
O
Q
IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA IN AND FOR HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY
CIVIL DIVISION
RE ENGLE PROGENY CASES BACCO LITIGATION
CASE NO.: 08-CA-9153 DIVISION: D
tains to: Rodriguez, Winell as Personal resentative for the Estate of Gilbert Rodriguez
_/
SUBPOENA PUCES TECUM FOR DEPOSITION
: Luis Martmez-Fernandez, MD	■	1
University of Central Florida	1 ^	1
Orlando, FL 32816-1350
YOU ARE HEREBY COMMANDED to appear before a person authorized by law to : depositions at Boies, Schiller & Flexner, 121 S. Orange Avenue, Suite 840, Orlando, FL 01, PH: 407-425-7118, on April 15, 2009 at 9:00 A.M., for the taking of your deposition in above-styled cause and to have with you at that time and place the following:
A copy of your most current curriculum vitae.
All facts and data upon which you base any opinion.
All documents (as defined in Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.340(a))1 and all other materials of any sort you referred to or relied upon in order to arrive at any opinions or conclusions concerning the issues involved in these cases generally (being Engle progeny cases anywhere in the State of Florida) and the specific cases identified above.
All reports, summaries, impressions, and evaluations relating to these cases generally and the specific cases identified above, including but not limited to any testing you conducted or that was conducted at your request or under your auspice.
All correspondence or communications, including e-mails and faxes, between you or anyone working on your behalf and any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above (or anyone working on such a lawyer’s behalf).
All documents (as defined in Fla. R, Civ, P. 1.350(a)) forwarded or otherwise provided to you by any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the
All documents (as defined in Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.350(a)) forwarded or otherwise provided by you to any lawyer representing any party in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above (or to anyone working on such a lawyer’s behalf).
All documents that, alone or together, reflect (I) the scope of your employment in the pending in these cases generally and in the specific cases identified above; (2) your general litigation experience, including the percentage of work performed for plaintiffs and defendants; and (3) an approximation of the portion of your involvement as an expert witness, which may be based on the number of hours, percentage of hours, or percentage of earned income derived from serving as an expert witness.
A list identifying all cases in which you have testified deposition or trial (designating which) for the five years preceding the date of this notice.
Copies of all time records reflecting the time you have spent on these cases.
If you fail to appear, you may be in contempt of Court. You are subpoenaed to appear by the following attorneys and, unless excused from this subpoena by these attorneys of the Court, you shall respond to this subpoena as directed.
;ed on this_day of April, 2009.
ABRAHAMSON, UITERWYK & BARNES 900 W. Platt Street Tampa, FL 33606 Telephone: (813)222-0500 Facsimile: (813)221-4738
STEPHEN aTbaRNES, ESQUIRE Florida Bar No.: 005177
minor subpoenaed for testimony shall have the right to be accompanied by a parent or guardian at all time during the taking istimony notwithstanding the invocation of the rule of sequestration of section 90.616, Florida Statutes, except upon a ring that the presence of a parent or guardian is likely to have a material, negative impact on the credibility or accuracy of the >r’s testimony, or that the interests of the parent or guardian are in actual or potential conflict with the interests of the minor,
iu are a person with a disability who needs any accommodation in order to participate in this deposition, you may request assistance by contacting STEPHEN A, BARNESSTEPHEN A, BARNES at the telephone number listed above within 2 :ing days of your receipt of this subpoena; if you are hearing or voice impaired, call 711,
\ Litis Maktfaez-Fernandez jpartment of History liversity of Central Florida lando, Florida
-	Area of Expertise
Dr. Martinez-Fernandez is a Professor of History at the University of Central Florida in lando, Florida. A copy of Dr. Martinez-Fernandez’s current curriculum vitae is attached.
Subject Matter of Expert Testimony Dr. Martinez-Fernandez is expected to testify about the history of the use of tobacco and ;arettes in Florida and the United States. He will also testify about the information seminated to the public concerning the health risks associated with smoking cigarettes and the blic’s knowledge of those risks. In addition, Dr, Martinez-Femandez will testify about the ormation disseminated to the public concerning the fact that some people, once they start oking, find it very difficult to quit. Dr. Martinez-Femandez may also comment on the
r
nions expressed by other witnesses in the case to the extent that they are related to his area of >ertise.
Substance of Facts and Opinions	■
Dr. Martinez-Femandez is expected to testify that as early as the last decades of the 19th itury, a variety of sources have disseminated information to the public about the health risks ociated with smoking and the use of tobacco. Since then, these themes have received ever reasing coverage on the national, regional and local levels.
Dr. Martinez-Femandez is also expected to testify that during the life of Gilbert iriguez, before and after he began to smoke, information that cigarette smoking could be ardous to health, that it could cause serious diseases, including deadly illnesses, and that le smokers could find it very difficult to quit was widely disseminated and available to the
tubliCj including Gilbert Rodriguez. Such information came to the public in a variety of means nd sources, including articles and illustrations in newspapers and magazines, radio and Revision, campaigns and publications of the Florida government and the federal government, sxtbooks and curriculum used in schools, the activities, educational campaigns and publications f the private health, civic and religious groups and a variety of other sources.
Dr. Martinez-Femandez is further expected to testify that, by the time Mr. Rodriguez >egan to smoke, there was a growing public concern developing over the possible relationship etween cigarette smoking and potentially fatal illnesses like lung cancer and heart disease. >ebate within the scientific, medical, and public health communities regarding this issue xeived widespread coverage in the press and other media. Extensive coverage of the smoking nd health issue continued throughout the 1950s, and was particularly intense in 1954. Media overage accelerated during the 1960s culminating in the intensive coverage of the 1964 Report f the Surgeon General’s Advisory Committee. Since 1964, the issue of smoking and health has Dntinued to receive extensive coverage in a variety of public forums. For example, the debate ver whether there was a need for warning labels received attention by local, state and federal ovemment officials and agencies, among others, and the debate was covered in the press and ther media. All levels of government have engaged in increasing efforts to regulate the larketing, sale and use of tobacco products. In addition, government and private organizations dntinued and intensified their educational and regulatory efforts.
Dr. Martinez-Femandez is expected to testify, based on the nature and extent of the ^formation disseminated about the health risks of smoking, that during the period of Gilbert odriguez’s life there was widespread public awareness that smoking could be hazardous to salth, that it could lead to serious injury, including premature death, and that, for some smokers,
could be difficult to quit. Dr. Martinez-Femandez is also expected to testify that high levels of tblic awareness existed despite the presence of cigarette advertising and tobacco company itements in the public media.
Summary of Grounds for Opinions Dr. Martmez-Femandez’s opinions will be based on his education and training as well as s more than two decades of experience as an historian. It will also be based on his analysis and view of historical sources commonly used by professional historians, such as state educational vs, curriculum guides, and school textbooks and films; national, regional and local newspapers ch as the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Miami Herald, the Sun-Sentinel and lers; popular magazines including Reader's Digest Life. Look. Newsweek. Time and others; rious television programs, news broadcasts, and public health announcements; various book, tnphlets, articles, and secondary literature relating to tobacco use and its possible health ^sequences; polling and survey data; U.S. government documents and records relating to the sale and possible health consequences of tobacco; state laws, statutes, and executive and pslative materials relating to the regulation and prohibition of the manufacture and sale of lacco products; publications of various anti-smoking organizations; and various court visions relating to the regulation and prohibition of the manufacture and sale of tobacco ►ducts. Dr. Martmez-Femandez’s research is ongoing and he may review various pleadings 1 discovery materials related to this case as well as additional historical documents.
Dr. Martmez-Femandez’s rate of compensation for time spent researching and providing opinions is $225 per hour. Thus far, all of Dr. Martmez-Femandez’s litigation experience has ;n for defendants. Dr. Martinez-Fem&ndez has not testified during the last three years. Dr.
^artinez-Femandez’s involvement as an expert witness has averaged approximately 10% of his ime devoted to professional activities.
Rodriguez - Martinez-Fernandez Materials (9/26/08)
487	00/00/0000 ''' Exceipts From Selected Movies (Video)	^ ^	•"
488	00/00/0000	Excerpts Of Selected Educations! Films (Video)
489	00/00/0000	Mather AH, ’Cigar, Cigarette Or Pipe?1
490	, 00/00/0000	Horse Drawn Cart
491	00/00/0000	Various Voluntary Health Organization Materials
492	00/00/0000	'S cl coed Public Service Announcements (PSA) - The Dart C Oiled ton,' University of Kansas (Video) i93 OOAJO/OOOO 'Selected Public Service Announcements - American I.une Association,1 (Video)
394 00/00/0000	'Selected Public Service,Announcements - American Heart Association' (Video)
495 00/00/0000	Television Programs,’ (Video)	j
196	00/00/0000	’American Cancer Society Public Service Announcements; 1960's-1980's,1 (Video)
197	00/00/0000	Map Of States With Cigarette Prohibition Laws
198	00/00/0000	Various Articles From The Anti-Tobacco Journal (1859-1872)
199	00/00/0000 ■ Various Television News Archive Clips (Video)
;00 00/00/0000	Various Federal Government Public Service Announcements
>01 00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, Vacuum Cleaner	j
;02 ;00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Publ/c Service Announcement, A few moments of silence for smokers	]
;03 00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, Lights Testimonial
>04 00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, Skull and Crossbones
05	i00/00/0000	!Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, The Bad and the Worse
06	|00/00/0000	jLight Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, The Bad and the Worse It	;
07	jo0/00/0000	ILight Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, We have a little wisdom for smokers	;
08	‘00/00/0000	Various Government Publications
09	pO/OO/OOOO	Various Popular Magazines
10	[00/00/0000	(Various Religious Materials	■
11	(OO/OO/OOOO	(various Baptist Materials	;
12	{00/00/0000	Various New York Times Newspaper Articles	i
13	joO/OO/OOOD	Various Polls, Surveys And Related Materials
14	loO/OO/OOOO	Various Military Publications	:
! 1
I	i	i
:	\ . . .. ..... .
|exh!b5^^
3487	00/00/0000	ExcctplsFrom Selected Movies (Video) *' v''•
3488	00/00/0000	Excerpts Of Selected Educational Filins (Video)
348? 00/00/0000	Mather AH, ’Cigar, Cigarette Or Pipe?’
3490	00/00/0000	Horse Drawn Cart
3491	00/00/0000	Various Voluntary Health Organization Materials
3492	00/00/0000	’Selected Public Scrvice Announcements (PSA) - The Dan Collection,1 University of Kansas (Video)
3493	00/00/0000	’Selected Public Seivice Announcements - American Lung Association,’ (Video)
3494	00/00/0000	'Selected Public Service Announcements - American Heart Association' (Video)
3495	00/00/0000	Television Programs,’(Video)
3496	00/00/0000	'American Cancer Socicty Public Service Announcements; 1960's-1980’s,' (Video)
3497	00/00/0000	Map Of States With Cigarette Prohibition Laws
3498	00/00/0000	Various Articles From The Anti-Tobacco Journal (1859-1872)
3499	00/00/0000 ■ Various Television News Archive Clips (Video)	_j
3500	00/00/0000	(Various Federal Government Public Service Announcements ' J50 i 00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, Vacuum Cleaner
1502 00/00/0000	iLight Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, A few moments of silence for smokers
J503 00/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Scrvice Announcement, Lights Testimonial j
5504	|o0/00/0000	Light Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, Skull and Crossbones ;
5505	i00/00/0000	ILight Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, The Bad and the Worse
5506	jOO/OO/GOOO	j Light Cigarettes Public Servicc Announcement, The Bad and the Worse It
1507	lOO/OO/OOOO	iLight Cigarettes Public Service Announcement, We have a little wisdom for smokers
1508	’00/00/0000	Various Government Publications
1509	;00/00/0000	;Vartous Popular Magazines :
1510	j00/00/0000	Various Religious Materials ;
1511	bo/00/0000	Various Baptist Materials i
1512	j00/00/0000 , j’Various New York Times Newspaper Articles	■.
1513	io0/00/0000	Various Polls, Surveys And Related Materials j
:514 *00/00/0000	Various Military Publications I
j	i
i	I 1
:	! , .. ..... .
11/0 6/1492 ‘Dsario De A Bordo U Primeras Cans Sombre E! Descubrirniento Cristobal Colon’	AIW-003523
: 00/00/1604 ’A Counterblaste To Tobacco (Excerpt),' King James I	AFW-000006
i 00/00/1616 Deacon J, 'Tobacco Tortured,’ The English Expeience, 42 (Theatrura Ozbis Tcrraram, Ltd., 1968} ANR-000083
i 00/00/1806 Rush B, 'Observations Upon The Influence Of The Habitual Use Of Tobacco Upon Health,	AIW-003S22 Morals, And Property,* Essays, Literary, Mora! & Philosophical
' 08/19/1245 Letter From John Quincy Adams To Rev. Cox	AIW-000009
► 01/06/! 847 Manual or Digest of the Statute Law of the State of Florida of a Genera! and Public Character in ALV-001635 Force at the End of the Second Session of the General Assembly of the State
' 07/09/1859 “Tobacco and I," Harper's Weekly	AtV.002968
I 04/26/1862 "Craving for Tobacco Cured," Harper's Weekly	ALV-002964
f 11/00/1862 'Reasons Why We Publish The Anti-Tobacco JouidbI,' Anti-Tobacco Journal	AIW-OOOD27
D 02/02/1867 “Tobacco," Harper's Weekly	ALV-002969
1	08/03/1867 "Capacity of the Human Lungs/’ Harper's Weekly	ALV-002962
2	09/14/1867 "Consumption of Tobacco,” Harper's Weekly	ALV-002963
3	01/11/1868 "The Pleasures of Tobacco," Harper's Weekly	ALV-002982
4	08/06/1868 Digest of the Statute Law of Florida of a Genera! and Public Character in Force up to he First	ALV-001636
Day of January 1&72
5	06/05/1875 "Dr. Krauss...," Harper’s Weekly	ALV-002966 5 01/00/1880 'Slavery To Tobacco,' Good Health	AIW-000036
7	02/00/1880 Tobacco Using A Cause Of Disease,' Good Health pp 40-41	AIW-000037
8	03/25/1880 ‘Reformation By System,’ New York Times	AIW-000038 ? 07/00/1880 “Little Robert Reed “ Harper's New Monthly Magazine No, CCCLXIL, Vd. LXf	ALV-003057
0	02/25/1852 "A Bill to Make Idiots," Harped Weekly	ALV-002983
1	04/08/1882 'Astounding Effects Of Tobacco,'New York Times	AIW-000039
2	07/24/1882 ’The Poison In Tobacco Smoke,’ New York Times	AIW-000040
3	10/14/1882 "Swell Struggling with the Cigarette Poisoner," Harpei's Weekly	ALV-002984
4	10/29/1882 'Progress Of The Hubbardian Reform,1 New York Times	AIW-000042
5	00/00/1883 The Acts and Resolutions Adopted by the Legislature of Florida at Us Twelfth Session	ALV-00163?
6	07/07/1883 'French Scientist.Harper's Weekly	ALV-002980
7	00/00/1885 ’Primer Of Physiology And Hygiene,’ Smith W	ATB-00000!
8	00/00/1885 School Law of the State of Florida with the Regulations, Forms, and Instructions of the	ALV-001638
Department
? 04/01/1885 Let The Advertising Agents Take Charge Of The Bartholdi Business, And The Money Will Be	AIW-000044 Raised Without Delay,’ Puck Magazine
3 02/06/18S6 The Coffin Nails Of Our Youth,'Evening Capita! Newspaper; Annapolis, Maryland	AIW-000046
I 7
i>74 00/00/0000 American Ltmg Association of Florida, Fad Sheet, Health Effects of Passive Smoking	ALV-002344
375 00/00/0000 PcJls 5960-2007, Gallup Brain & Roper Center	ALV-002150
976	00/00/0000 "City Receives $18,218 Iota) From Cigarets,"	AtV-003001
977	00/00/0000 'Cured Cancer Needs Checking,'Fori Lauderdale Hews	ALV-0030I6
978	00/00/0000 'By Experts: Tobacco, Cancer Link Eyed,* Fort Lauderdale News	ALV-003037
979	00/00/0000 'If you smoke, here's what your doctor may see, A pathologist’s view of the effects of smoking	AFL-002697
on the human body’
980	00/00/0000 'The Risk to Health of Tobacco on the 'Non-Smoking Smoker’,4 World Health	A LV-002317
The Gallup Poll I
PUBLIC OPINION 1935-1971'JL	,j ■
t H
' 11
I
. J ■
Dr. George II. Gallup,	:j I
Founder and Chairman»	|| I
American Institute of Public Opinion	J I
I
‘ VOLUME : I TWO .1 ■ 1949-1958
i
il
«H
r-ssisir^j Jfl
yx
RANDOM HOUSE fid NEW YORK	■
AIW-000214 *
JUNE 27	jnterviewini Date 6/12-17/54
Survty 1532-K	Question 118b
ARMY-MCCARTHY HEARINGS	. . , ,. , , _„ ... .
Asked of those who followed the hearings:
Interviewing Date ft/l 2-17/54	Whkh one ^pressed you tern favorably?
Survey 1532-K	Question #18
tn general, would you say you have a favor-	McCarthy.............♦'............ 31%
able or unfavorable opinion of Senator	~^° .............................. *2
Joseph McCarthy?	............................. 7
Welch.'............................. 6
Favorable........................... 34%	Jenkins............................. j
Unfavorable........................ 45	Others, no opinion...................43
|	No opinion......................... 21
; Interne win* Date 6/12-17/J4	JUNE 30
t survey #53f-K QmUon #I7b	CIGARETTE SMOKING ; Do you think that Senator McCarthy and
Roy Cohn used improper means In trying to	Interviewing Date 6/12-17/54
r . r . , n. _	Survty #J32-K Question # 10b
■	'get preferred treatment for Private G.	y *
; David Schine?	Do y°u happen to smoke cigarettes now?
Yes................................ 52%	Yes................................45%
' No................................24	No................................ 55
}	No opinion......................... 24
! ;	By Sex
| Interviewing Date 6/I2-I7/S4	^ N°
’ Survey 1532-JC Question f17c	Men.................,... , 57% 43%
. Do you think that Secretary Stevens and	Women • *...........* * *...... 32 68
his legal counsel John Adams used Improper
' means in trying to stop Senator McCarthy	* ®e
from investigating the army?	21-29 Years..................53% 47%
30-39 Years.................. 53 47
y«................................ 38% 40-49 Year*.................. 45 55
No................................ 32	50-59 Years..................41 59
No opinion......................... 30	50 Years and over............. 23 77
i
j	Interviewing Dale 6/12-17/54
1 Survey 1532-K Question flSa	JULY 2
Asked of those who followed the hearings:	CIGARETTE SMOKING Now* of all the people who took part In the
hearings, which one impressed you most	Interviewing Date 6/I2-I7/J4
favorably?	Survey #W2"K Question #12b
What Is your own opinion — do you think
Joseph McCarthy.................... 16%	cigarette smoking Is one of the causes of
Joseph Welch....................... 15	lung cancer, or not?
Robert Stevens...................... 12
Roy Cohn.......................... 7 Yes.........,......,..............*. 41%
Ray Jenkins......................... 7	No............................29
Others, no Opinion................... 43	Undecided.......................... 30	.
NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOUR	1247
I	Smokers Only	- Outside South Only
I	Unde- Republican.........................
I .	Yes No elded	Democratic.................. * 4R ^
I ,	Less than a pack a (Jay,. 32% 39% 29%	............
I Pack a day............. 29 42 29	South Only
I	More than a pack a day.. 29 44 27	Republican.......................2W
I	Democratic..................!.,**** 70
I '	Noo-Smokcrs Only	.......
I	Never smoked..........43% 20% 32%	' ’
I	formerly smoked....... 54 19 27	JULY 7
I	CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATIONS
I *	JULY»	SujrveyC#5J*-K*tC 6/l2~17^	^
I	HEART RESEARCH	c , .	Quwtlon tlx
I	Some people say that Congress is abusing	\
I	IttterWewfof Date 6/12-17/54	P°wers 10 Investigate. Do you agree or
■	Survey #J32-K	Quwticm #1*	disagree? ’
I	Would you approve or disapprove of having	Agree *	■
I	the Government spend S/00 million for re- Disagree...........
................ 40%
I	search to find the causes and cure of dls-	UnrWirt^............................
I	eases of the hart?	Undecided.......................... 18
■	Approve............................ 79%	Jntervtewfnt D»te 6/12-i 7/34
I	Disapprove......................... jg	Survey #J32-K Question #?b
I	No opinion......................... 5	Dt> you thbtk Committees of Congress
■	should continue to Investigate Communists,
■	interview*, 0.,* S/J2-17/54	t0 the B	Survey Hn-K Quwtioo fib	FB* at*° department of Justice?
I	Asked of those approving of spending $100	FBI, Justice Department..............57cr
■	million for heart research: Would you be	Congress continue..	*’.....
■	willing to pay more taxes to provide this	No opinion..... ................... f
■	money?	" ...................... 8
■	By Political Affiliation
I KT^......V.......*............ 56%	/tepub/fcort#
■	No, no opinion......................23	erm * .• ^
■	---FBI, Justice Department.............. 55W
I	• 79%	Congress continue.........35 °
H	No opinion,.................7
I	JULY 4	Democrats
I	PARTY STRENGTH	FBI, Justice Department.............. 52%
■	Congress continue.......,...,	31
I	^,i?f-r'6,,2-,w <*»*.,».	..................7
I	V *he elections for Congress were being	Independent*
■	. held today, which party would you like to	FBI, Justice Department.............. kw
■	see win in this state— the Republican party	Congress continue.......... ....... 37 0
■	or the Democratic party?	No opinion...........10
I	1248 THE GALLUP POLL
A Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers
:ENT REPORTS on experiments with mice have given	For more than 300 year? tobacco has given solace, relaxa-
c publicity to a theory that cigarette smoking is io some way	lion,ami enjoyment to mankind. At one time or another during
:ed with lung cancer in human beings.	.	those years critics have held it responsible for practically every
Although conducted by doctors of professional standing,	disease of the human body. One by one these charges ha ve been
se experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the field of	abandoned for lack of evidence.
ter research. However, we do not believe that any serious	Regardless of the record or the past, the Tact that cigarette
Jieal research, even though its results are inconclusive should	smoking todtyr should even be suspected as a cause of a serious
lisregarded or lightly dismissed,	disease is a matter of deep concern to us.
At the same time, we Teel it is in the public interest to call.	Many people have asked us what we are doing to meet the
miontothefact that eminent doctors and research scientists	public’s concern aroused by the recent report*. Here is the
e publicly questioned the claimed significance of these ex-	answer: men Is.
Distinguished authorities point out:	J, w« are paging aid and tsslsUnce to the research effort into
I. That medical research of recent years Indicates many	,!J of iobacco “* ,1>d hf*,tb- ■» ible causes of Itmg cancer,	of course be tetddltkm lo whit Is already being con’ ,, ;... ,	tribe ted by individual companies.
3L lhat Ibere Is no agreement among the authorities regard-	'
what (he cause Is.	2, For *** P°fPose we are establishing a >lnt industry group
3.	that there Is no proor that cigarette smoking b one of	’ consisting Initially of the undersigned. This' group will be ______known as TOBACCO INDUSTRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE.
4.	That statistics purporting to link cigarette smoking with	3. ** c*,”^e °r rtsc«rch activities of the Committee will be a disease coold apply with equal Tore* to any one of many	scientist of unimpeachable integrity and national repute. In r aspects or modem lire. Indeed the validity or the statistics	addition there will be an Advisory Hoard of scientists rflsintcr-welres Is questioned by numerous scientists,	tiU* in 0,5 dgaretle industry. A group of distinguished men
' '	.. t. i. • ».v ; . __from medicine, science, and education will be Invited to serve
We accept an interest tn peoples health a# a basic rtspon-	• . *
.. . ■ .. __. ,, .. .___. ■ .• .•	on this Hoard. Tbest scientists will advise the Commlllee on
!ty. paramount to every other consideration in our business.	.	.
"r	■	'	lls research activities.
We believe the products we make are not injurious to
(b.	This statement is being issued bccau« we believe the people
We always have and always will cooperate closely with	are entitled lo know where we stand on this matter and whal
e whose task it is to safeguard the public health.	we intend lo do about it.
(EXHIBIT
* .....—■
K AMERICAN TOBACCO COM TAN V, EMC.	BURtJCV TOBACCO KROHTRS COOPERATIVE	N1IUP MORRIS * CO, LTD, INC.
fmil M, FrttidtM	ASSOCIATION	q. parkir HtCcmu.■, friridtnl
■	John J»\ lonr). rntUtnl
BENSON a. HEDGES :	*- J. aEVNOtOS TOBACCO COMPANY
Jcuph F, Ctilmm, Jr.. Pr.iiiva	,.™rro r.........	E’ A' Darr-
l.ABUS a BROTKCH COMPANY, INC
Jcirr BFJ/r warehouse associate	,v' r. k„j. m.	jtwiiano bkotmers, inc.
F. X KeftUr, PrfiHtnt	■	C. S.	*/»«„«*
.	.	P. LORlUARn COMPANV	TOBACCO ASSOCIATES, INC
*» wiujamwn tobacco corporation	in'b.r,A.X'*,.CM"~*
Tlmolht V. ncrtxrlK rt.M,*!	y	/, fl. Hmum, r,'rij,n,
.ey auction warehouse association Maryland tobacco growers association	united states tobacco company
p. lorxliabd: comm
NETWORK TELEVISION REVIEW 1962
EXHIBIT	•?
__/£_ &
•a
.......................-......................................M
DIMEMSIOHS. OF TEE MEDIUM
O' .
u.
w
GKQTO OF TV' SET OKKEBSHEF 1957' -■ 1962 ESffOMTO: 5^,200-53,200.	-
. ' -1-1:
otal Homes (000:) 50:,OOP	.........fflsSQQ:--■
-	49*000
^-6 ,,9.00
' 88# ■
Sgjjgo. :	:	;
wjr .	'
V Romes; (000):	40,100:	. .
>: Penetration
i	J
i i -i j „
—- k--—Ji I___________ _______
1957	1958	■ 1961	1962
H
ource* AsC.. Hielsen.
TV SET' OWNERSHIP BY COPTO SIZE!
1^62' essomed ►
_ A __Bi__G'_D:
% U.S. ' kz i 2?	19 • 12
$ Penetration i	93	__
! 91
• i i ,	‘ §5
I
i _
i	■	75
I	I i
i
!	i ,
i	I
I	!	1
j
- I "	i	I	:
Source::	KfHelsen.
TV SET1 OWNERSHIP BY MIEL5EH TERRITORY 1962 ESTXMATBB.1
East	West.
Northeast_ Central	Central	Southern-_ Paclfi
. U.S.	27 ' “ 17 j W	22	15
Eenetrafclon-	93'	_1	|
91	■ --11	_
;	89 • !	T 89
I	' .	81
■ i i
’	!	I
i
■	i
J	> .
j
i '
I	I
I 1 I —_____JLs^_IL__-..............
. •' £*
P.. imiUJm' OGMBflHff T.V H0MES BT MARKET- CMRMERISTXCS:
£ UlS*
CDPMT-Y. SIZE	100
As	i*2
B	27
C.	19
D:	12
TERKITORff ■■	log
Worth- East	2?:
East- Central	17'
West. Central.	l'J?-
South.	22:	.
Pacific-	15
A OB QF HEAD; OF' H0U5S	100
Under 1*0:	3^
liO - 5ii	33:
■ 55 and. Over	32
mmikT iicqhb	iqo-
_	Lower	3&
Middle	hh\
Upper	22.
GRQWJIH OF MgLTOIg TV SET. OWNERSHIP'
1957 - 1962 T&TJMkTW
6,400
■	5»200.	'	■
, | ... k ,.500.	I
• | . j
I
|
Homes With. 2 or'	2,I0Q:	! ■	^
■	more TV' sets- CDOOj	1	■ |
I	I	.	.
$ 0$ U.S. TV Homes	5$	.	10#	Tl# ^	13#
1	1 '	I	1
1952	1959-	1961	1962
''	C:
-	tSi
Source:: L. &- H estimates.
■■ GROWTH: OF' COLOR, tv. SET OTOBSBXT 1957 - 1962- BSTlflATEB'
■	9QQ
, |
!
'	650:
r ~i 1
. i
, a	1 i	’
450. (
! ^ 1 ! .. 1 1 * 1 Collior TV' Homes;	200:	t
(000> t ( .
■	.	J I
$ of, n.Si TO Hones .556 , l.Ojt •	1.1$	1..8J?'
1 I 1 I' j
1957 -> 1959-	1961’	1962
.	C.
H
Sources L- & Nl estimates^	®'
TV- STATION GROWTH.
•	1952-3)962 ESTIMATED-
505, | ....................514
“ 486,	1'
'	1--;
:	I I
t»3fr '
' i
1 I I
. i ^ ' !
' ‘ i
I
■	'	■ I	|
Total. Stations1 I09	^
i 1 : j
" VHF	109'	■; 336	‘ ^0-1	429;	435
UHF	O' ‘	98	85-	I 76	79:
■ * : . _s ,_ S ■. |
.....*...........-.................h — .	............i ■ 1 -	j t	t ►« _	________*
*1952	1956 " 1958 ■' 1961	1962
'' '	■	o
,
* Before: end of FCC freeze:..
■	■	CO1
AVERAGE’, VIEWING- HOPES- PER' BQHE PER' DAY.
JANUARY EACH YEAR'
19-51 - 3)961 ____________	6:04
■	6iOO	5*59	- -
j j , i ;
5:3g'	!	j	‘	,	|
j i '
1	■	1	I
' i ’ } j '
: ! !
i ; ■ ! i . 1
i
. : : j ■
; i	i I
i	|	!	I
I	. •
J	■ i
; ‘	:	i I
j ! | i
I	|	|	!
i ,
i	: ! :
'	' !	I	i
j
!95l	1959	I960:	1961
o
Source: A.C. Nielsen
f» lorhllakd; company.
TO?'	100- TT- HABKET5:
RANKED	Eg MHBEB <M STATIONS:
Sfefc	Number of: Percent of Count	Television national TV’ Rank'	Market	Stations:	TV' Sfet Count Homes -------~j$m-----—
I	New- York	7	i*,96l	10.58$
2:	Los; Angeles	7'	2,358:	5-03
20'	Seattle- Tacoma	5,	$$$■	1.1&
3 3	Lan ca s ter-Ha r rlsbur g ■	5	k®7'	*87'
Lebanon-York.
3	Chicago	E	2,lH
6	Detroit	k	l:,li70:	3.13
7	San- Francisco-Oakland	h ■	1,1 55’	2.U6*
10	St.: Louis	k	758-	1-62'.
II	Washington	it	72U,	l*5li.
12'	Ballas-Ft- Worth'	It	61j.8;	1.38
13	Hartford^-Nev Haven	ii	636:	1.36
Hi	Hinneapoli s-St». Paul	li	&ph.	1.35
17	Indianapoli s-Bloomington.	k	607'	1*29
21	Milwaukee	h.	538	1*15 h3	Sacramento-Stock ton	^	33if	*-71 k$	Denver	k	32li •	• 69 56	Champaign-Da ll'as-Decatur	if.-	27-01	.58 58	San Antonio	li.	263	*56 67	Skit Lake.: City	&	232’	.i!9'
78*	Phoenix-Mesa	k	205
U-	Philadelphia.	3	1*91^	ifi.08
5	Boston-Manchester	3	1,557	3.. 31.
8;	Cleveland	3	1*13 7	2 ,.112
9	Pittsburgh	3	1,062	2»2o
■	15	Baltimore	3	628	l»3u
18	Cincinnati	3	596:	1.27 I?	Buffalo	3	562	1.20
22	Kansas: City:	3	5H	1.09
23	Atlanta'	3	ii82	1*03
25	Johns town- A11o ona	3	it52	*96
26	Portland, Oregon	3	W*9	*96 28	Hous ton	3:	* 95
30	Miami	3	1*32	-92; „
31	Columbus,: Ohio	3	h29	*91,
3h	Memphis;	3	iiCD2	»86
36-	Charles tonr-Euntington	3:	38-lt	.82
37	Albany-Schenectady-Troy	3-	381	*81 ■£»
►*
■	cr.
|»4
Set Humber of	Percent' of
Count Television	National TV.
Hank1	Iferlfeftt - Stations TV- Set Count	Homes .
------- -
39	Louisville	3;	3.63	.77
I*!!.	LansingrElint, '	3'	3:i*5'	. 7ii
h2	New Orleans	3:	33:6:	.7.2'
bk	Tampa-Sfc. Petersburg	3:	327'	e.7©.
U6.	Nashville	3-,	322	.69
U;7	A3hville-Greenvi;lle-Spartenburg 3	302	,6li
h9-	Omaha	3	285	,61
52	Oklahoma City-Enid	3	261	.60
53	Portsmouth-Norf oik	3	27-6	.59 Newport News
5il?	San Uiegp' ’ 3:	2 Tty	.58.
57	Cisdar Rapidb-Waterloo:	3;	263	,55.
59-	Green Bay	3:	262.	.55
6b:	Tulsa	3.	257	.55T
61	Roanoke-Lynchburg:	3,	2I48	,5.3,
62,	Des Koines-Ames	3	21*7	.53
63	Wilkes Barre-Scranten	3	21*3;	,52
66:	Richmond-Petersburg	3	233:	,t^n,
68:	Spokane	3	226	rl]8-
69-	Shreveport	3.	225; •	.US-
73:	Wii chi ta-iu tchinson ,	3	211
7h\	Fresno	3	2101
75:..	Daytona Beach-Orlandb:	3.	209'
?6	Portland-Poland Spring	3'	209'	^5'
79:	Pensacola-Mobile	3	20lt	^^3,
80:	Madison	3	200	,^3
81	Evansville:	3;	199	e|i.2;
82	Little Rock	3;	19683:	Knoxville^	3:	196	^,2 86	Peoria	3	170	^36 89;	Paducah-Cape: Girardeau.	3	160	,3^
Harrisburg
90	Chattanooga,	3	159.	,3^
92	Ft, Wayne	3 .	l$k	.33
9ii!	Columbia, South Carolina	3	153	.33'
95	Bakersfield	3	Ht&	,32
16	Providence^ ■ 2'	623;	l. 33
27	Charlotte	2	1^8;	. 96
29;	Steubenville-Wheel!ing;	2	1*31*	o'*
32	Dayton	2	1*26	*91
35	Syracuse	2	385'	*32
38!	Toledo	2'	381	*01
liO:	Birmingham	2'	356:	c 76;
k&	Greensboro-Winston-Salem	2’	292-	*62
50:	Rochester	2	285	‘gfc c:
51	Saginaw-Bay City-	2	282	60 **
0
Set:	Number	of	*	Percent;, of •
fount	Television-	National TV;
tank'	Jferkefr	Stations	TV Set- Count. Homes
- ------ -
5£	Davenport-Rock; Island	2:	273.1	*58'
6ij,	Jacksonville	2-	21|0	,51
65	Rale! gh- Durham	2:	2l*0	,51
70	Baton. Rouge'	2:	222'.
11,	Binghamton	2.	_ 222'	.£7
77	Jackson, Mississippi	2:	* 2Q%>	,1^
6fc	Sioux. Falls	2’	19?	,k2
8$.	Springfiifeld-Holijroke	2'	182	,39
6.?	Augusta	2	163	,y$
88	Qceen.vililer-Was hington	2	161,	,3)4
91	Rockford	2 '	15?'	,33;
93:	Sioux City	2	1 $ix	.33.
99 "	Duluth-Superior	2	li|2	,30
.00	Beaumont-Pt» Arthur .	2	139	.,30
96	Lincoln	li	lit!?	.31
91	Salinas-Monterey	1	1kfr	.31
98	Terre. Hawte* r	1.	1U5	.,31
Source i	ARB' I960* Coverage; Study
.	C
-	CT!t
H
£5	-
ss;
' ^ •
Q
g
W	V
Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/hy
NETWORK SMS® QF PHM' EMINS- TIME DECEMBER. EACH IM'
‘ 31955 - I960' - 19611
■■' 3S# 36$
1 !	33% ,	. 33^:
:	.3^ ■ I 30^	.-?1?....! >
i	j	—'-"I	. 28$ 1
| ; i ;
i i I i !	.
M	|	|
| . ■ : ;
» ! t ’ *
■	! i • i •
•	•	| ?	I
: i	I
i	. i . !
1	!	i	* i	j	l’
ABC' CBS NBC 1	[aBC ; CBS I NBC	ABC' CBS. NBC ,
1955:	I960:	1961	■
Source: A.C. Hlelsen.
EVEMG NETWORK PRQGRAHS BY Tm CQHPARXSOB-DECEBBBH 19.59, I960 AND 1961
Dec^ »59- I__IX.
. _ Dec.: ei60; I ' ' 101 General Drama	j :	1-- —“1:
Dec.. *6U. L_12
Dec., »59 •_19_
Dec. *'60 ! . 20: Suspense-Mys t e ry Drama".	T 'r.....r	rr.vn.-r..	..... ' '	Dec. _iZJ: Dec- *59 1 -	..................................... .....~........ I6~l _
Situation Comedy	Dec.. 60. ........................... .........-...............................—...........................................—...........................................-
Dec.v *61 ___
Bee. *59- ,	21!
Dec. *60: 1	11
Vaariety.	......rr"' ............ .......r 1 ---— *
Dec®. *61	,	18 ;
Dec. ’ 59 { ........... ...............' ...............II ' |
Dec.,	1160' I	8
Quia' & And. Part .,	ou I-
Dec.-	»6li 1	6 j;
Dec.;	'59 [.........'......................•	......‘
Western Dram	De°*	’6° |....... - —	- —" .........." ■ 1".......... Z1^
Dec. *61. \____115
M
EflSNIKG- NEWQEK- TV. PROGRAM! HOURS BY TIES'.
1959 - I960: - I9-&L
Deff. '^9	.....~.................. 8.....1/2I
1AL BRAHA-	Dec. * SO | ~~......~~.....~	.....7.....1................
Dec. *6l[_9- 1/2 '
Pecv'gsf	lM/g.l
CNS5T-HSSTESI! DRAM Dec. »6C'	_}$
D'eci* T6l............. ............. ~	...........................................................................I6|
Dec ..*5$ 1	81_
ITIQN: COMEDY	11 ec-!i6C_.. ............13: '
Peg.,1#!	.....-______ _____________—~.ll
Dec:. !.................. ..................... ................................................15 [I
fT.Y	D ec. ,;60;	8: l/2. __
Dec. f6l|___2|J.
Dec:. * $9	g 1/2
&	AUD. PART.	Dec. r6C r............ ...... h \
Dec.,16l j J Dec . '591........................................ DTI/?
IRN DRAM.	Dec* *6C____111. l/2 I
D ec . »6l ~ ~......................................................................12 1	c
c
:e: A.C;. Nielsen
AVERAGE NUMBER’ OF PRIME; EVENING:- HP UR AMP- HALF ROW. PROGRAMS.
DURING TYPICAL DECEMBER1 WEEK 1959 - I960: - W&l
81 73' |
I
| t_
49: ■	49; ■
i	■ l	_ I
! i :
, I 1 | ■ 33: !	'
I * I	-	■1 ■
I	I
! 195-9 I960: 19631	1959 I960 1961
#■ Hklf. Hour- Programs	#' Hour Programs-
C
’ *
Soiree:! A..C., Nielsen
AVERAGE MMBER OF PIOMS.	HOURS
OF' OWNED. AMD PARTICIPATING PROGRAMS DURING TYPICAL. WEEK:
'	W59: - I960: - 1961'.
. —
i i
42.0	I
:(	j	37-5.
!	;	3^.5-	j
i * 28.0'
'	i	I	!	. i
*	*	I
i	1	*	‘
►	1	J	I
. * 1 ' '' f	i I ^
j i i.......6;-51 i ;
I 19 55 i 19-60= V 1961 ; ; *955_196:0 1 1961
#	Owned Program Hours	# Participating- Program Hours
Sources' A„Gi. Nielses, and LNA— BAR-
about. HALF OF AXX. J3EW‘ BVBHRG METWOHK Tff PROGRAMS ARE' ffXKSff M CASUALTIES;
1955 - 196to
i 56 :i
■	: ' ' ........W1
f New- Programs-. 43.	j i	j	|—
1 ' 1 1 I I '
.	!	1 j : ' 1 ■
i
. i	I -rr- ! ’	:
" 1__, ! j i : :
P Remaining 2nd	ZJ	s	__!
Year	■	1	1 20 I ' ,-
'	; 19; I
1 I 1	i 1 : ; 1
>
!
; t » j ;
1 1 '	M 1 1
1955 19.56 !	1%57-j. 19581 11195,9’ I9601	lggqj 196X |
. .	c
<
Source* A.C* Nielsen
CIGARETTE USAGE OF THE MEDIUM
o.
H
Q
H
<75
P. EOEILMHD. COMMT KETWOKK: TV' EXPSTfl3JTtJR£5 OP: MAJOR CIGARETTE CCHPANIES 195? ~ I960: - 1961
(00:0,000): #!
........JMl........ft? II
BOHILIARD	I960- ' (36%). ifelQ. I_
I963j (gQgg)_$l&
W&	(36%)-._|11L:
I
MERICAK	i960.	(W_$13?
196&	_$11 i
1959	_Ml_.
BROWN &	- —--
vsUkUassm i960: (%$)•_, $ia ;
L96I Est. (67%)-_$18 ^
1959	(61%}	$22i
LIGGETT'	;--q'
&	KXERS:	3.960 {66%)	$16
*"	I	\
19.61 Brt, ($m_$15
1959	CgM ‘_$15
PHILEF HDRHIS- |.9.6q: (k9%)_ $1'3
I96l	Est. <&#):'_$.11
i-959: (h2%J__$21 1
..... 11 ................'r'" .......”...... .................... [I	<*
R.J. REYNOLDS: I960: ($3%)	$22'	§
I--1	^
1961 Bst. {S2%).	$.23	£
«	—I	H
ts;
Sources SKA,' BAR,, and L&N estimates	(%) ■ % of total corporate expenditures*
NUMBER OF' EVEKIBG- PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY CIGARETTE' COMPABiOSS MEMBER - DECEMBER1 EACH! YEAR 1955 - 1961
----j# Frograt
’	i 5^j Spora so ret
(:4'5^) Clgaretl .	| Somparaif
|	' H> Tot;
“ nja
: (33#)'	.
i !
r 3l"	;
(26$) i	'
t 4
__I
Zh	.	'	■ |
Cl8$)	,	j '	'
.!	! i ; s' :
■	5	1
j	'	1
I	■	•
:	,	v
t	:
j	■ 118 , } 120 ! | 120- 1 Sponsors
--——.—	t1 .......—J	i:,. ----------- —	-«. Progran
1^55	1957	I960'	1961
TOHEMT CIGARSTTE CTOT NETWORK TV' PATTERNS h WESES m)im DECEMBER 22;. 1961
ABC	CBS	HBC
Lorillard	Lorlillard	Lorillard
. American	American
Brovin & Williamson	Brown' &■ Williamson	Browns &. Williamson
■	Liggett & Myers	Liggett & Myers	Liggett: & Myers
Philip- Morris
E.,Ji. Reynolds	R.JT. Reynolds	R.J. Reynolds
ipanies: $•	$	S'
" i
8 -..............
/	P. IQftlLiARP COMPAM
TYPES of SVlijlNd NETWORK Tglg/iSIOi'i PROGRAMMIM!?
BY GIGARE ITS COKFAM
I960	V5 1961*
P. Lorillard American Sro*m 81 Willi am Son Iiiaget t_-&. J’teye r s
190 lg£l Igj.0' 1961 V3&Q W 196Q	“ 19^1
ijf Heif-floui* Programs (or shorter) 43222 1,3	2
#	Hour Programs (or longer) l 5 2 5 5 S3	5
Program ^Tygee 1 § £ I I I £	i
if General Braiaaa - - - i - 3 -	1
#■ Saipehse-^atery Drams - 3 1 1 3 31	3
$ Situation Comedies 3 2 12 1 - -	-
#	Western Dramas 1-223 -2	1 if Adventures i - - 1 - 13	1
^ $ Varieties - 2 » - - - -	-
$ Quiz arid Audience Participation Shows - 1 - _ _ s -	-
#	Informational - , _ _ _ - -	i
#	Kaws _ _	.. if Movies - - - - =	-
*	1966: 4 weeks ending l/13/61 196l; 4 weeks ending 12/22/61
/6 2
il .......... .....-
— —- ■ ...........................
✓
P. LORILIAKD COME4M JffiTWOBK TRIiSg'IglOH.PRQSRflMS
i960 VS 1961*
g. Lor 11 jard, American Brown 4 Williejason	Mggett & Hyers |
I960
Groucho Show Bbnajiza Naked City	Adv« in Paradise F
Hertneaey Thriller Stagecoach West	Islanders_ I
Tab Hunter Tales of Wells Syrf&Me 6	Untouchables I
Zane Grey Fargo Checfttsate	GunSffioke C
Aquaaauts Bachelor Father Wanted	Hr-; Garland i
. ■ Happy	Behai I
Outlaws
J 3:961	_
Hennesey Sheyenne Surf's ide 6	Follow The San J
Ed Sullivan Dick Powell Naked City	Checkmate E
Price Is Bight Tales of Wells Defenders	Twilight Zone I
Hawaiian Bye Fargo New Breed	Gunaisoke I
Fairer Knows Best Bactielor Father Bus Stop	Dr, Kildare ^ P
(Jain's 1QO Thriller Bob Cutsminga	87 th Precinct
Target Corruptors JoSy Bishop Detectives	S^ewitness Jack Paar Adv. In Paradise
*	1966 = k weeks ending .l/13/Sl
1961	* k weeks ending 12/22/61
P. MILLARD, CQMPAHff KET WORK TELEVISION GOST' EFFICIENCIES.
11961* ■
A.A.	.
HOMES REACHED:
COMPANY: PROGRAM PER T/C (.000)	€B!E
P.. Loriaiard. Hermesey	9,259.	$4.73*
, Ed Sullivan.	10:,84?	If-09
Price Is: Rig&t.	II,2l6	3v6a
Hawaiian Eye	8;,,255	31
Father Knows Best.	6,224	4.55-
Cain's 100. '	71*04?	4.23
Target Corrupt or s.	■ 8'*l84'	4.62
Jack Paar	-3,5^1	2.56
American. Cheyenne	10,224	3»95
Dick PoveXX ''	9,872	3.64
Tales. Of’ Wells- F6rgo:	8>.407	4..42
Bachelor- Father	8,290	4..64
Thriller	6iOHi5.	5.73:
Joey Bishop;	10,.8821	3.55.
’Adv;. In Paradise-	7,535; .	3^3;
Brown & Williamson; Surf side 6-	8, .360-	3.72;
Naked! City	9,407	3-51-.
Defenders	10,436	3*01.
New Breed.	7,375	4.00
Bus Stop: ‘	6,297	5-08:
Bob. Cummings	%5&1	6.l4
Detectives	6,039	5'^5
Liggett & Myers Follow- The Sun	7*6l0	4.51
Checkmate	8y770.	4.42
Twilight. Zone;	. 8,692	4.77
Gunsmoke-	I3*^25	3‘.23;
Dr* Kildare	12,030	2,49:
87th Precinct	8,7^7	3>7^-
. Eye; Witness-	5yl^:	8.24
Phillip Morris- Route- 66-	12,147	3-64
' Dobie GilXIs	11,057'	3-5^
Doug Edwards	8^15^	2.7k
Perry Mason	12:, 648:	2.-34
Rawhide	IX, 508:	3*33'
S..	J,. Reynolds Lawman	8>33^:	4;.1X.
■■ To: Tell The Truth	9,521	2.84
S&t. Right At-The. Movies; 8,442	3*95
Flintstones	7,574	5.03.
Garry-Moore	11,385'	2.89
Tali, Haa	8,595:	4:.47
■	Sing. Along; With: Hitch	XI,8X9	2.79
EuntXey & Brinkley	9,017	2.-78
77 Sunset Strip '	9.556	3*12
Wagon. Train	14,820	2.23 -	O-
^
*	1961 - 4 weeks ending-12/22/61	■ J**
U
P. LCRILIARD COMPANY COMPARISQHi OF EVENING NETWORK TELEVISION PHRFQRMNCB
I960	V<3», I96I*
Expenditure: Impressions	Reach'
‘ (OOO)	(‘000*000)..............CPMi	JT Frequency
>mpany	I960- 1961. i960 1961 I960 1961 19&3' lg&L I960 lg6l!
irillard $1,001	$1,432	235	36?.	$4.26	$3.88:	85'	90	5,9'	8.7'
ierican 1,182’	1,30?	339'	311	3,49	4.21	88.	90:	8.3.	T.U
rownSWil’Iiamson 1,383:	1,297:	362	316	3.82:	4.10:	90	90:	8,7'	7S
Lggett & Myers 1,894	1,338:	552	364	3.43	3.68'	90	90	13.0	8.6
nillip Morris l,26l	891	404	287'	3.12:	3-10:	90	90	9,6-	6.8
.. J. Reynolds! 2,057	1,.786'- 629	, 542	3.27	3.30=	90	90	15.0	12;9
I960- 4i Weeks, ending, 1/13/61 196lt 4, Weeks ending. 12/22/61.
O.
H'
w:
<Ti:
05:
P.. LORILLAffl)1 COMPANY
rework: televisioni status;
4th: QUARTER U961
o:
yit
■	Uf
t*
<n
CD*
n	rs	/
. ■ p* ^QR^llard gohpant
NSTWOKK TELEVISION PERFORMANCE
-	■ t.-mo—:: (Kielsen) ~
■	'	QUARTER 1961
Fat he:
Ed Price Is	Target: The Hawaiian Cain * s Knows
ogratn	Sulli?an Right Hennesey Corrupt or	gye 100 Begt
10,802
r	........... '* ‘ ■j
mes Reached	jtha
go)-JM22-
9,196
8-iI7?.. 8,Q2? .
6 >73°;
at/Min,	$J&,40C	■ .	r?
§40,509 ' .	'
&3,?oo	-
' '	£37,800
£35,600
'	£29,?Q0
’ .$28,3!
;«vfco
£	$U.10 $3,87 $5.75 f^.63 f4,44 $4.^2 IC9I
r '
’	P« LPRXlxLAHB COHPANI
KIEL3EN SHARE OF AUPXSNCfi TPM)
BB SULLIVAN
LIVAN	2?
26 26
2k
OCT. I	OCT-. 21	NOV* I	NOV. II-
*	AVERAGSS
Share	36
AA Eating	23
AA Home s	10,802,QQQ
CfM	$u.io
C&ICTfcfeO
"n—*-""w^-ffl".....'.......................................................................................
El M3LURD COMPART NETWORK television,
AUD1EHCE CHARACTERISTICS- AMD- COMPOSITION ED SULLIVAN Total fl.S' A& Rating - 22.2'
County Size
A	B	C	&
1?~9 2CjS 25^8 2572:
(343’ (30) (22) CI4)
Territory	■
Northi	East West'
1 East.	Central	Central.	South	Paciiflc
25..0,	22^7 ' 2^.0	21.2	16.8'
(30)	(18): (20):	(21)	(11)
•	Age' Of-Hfead Of' Hbuse
Under	40-5^	55 ■ snd
40	Years	&Ver
16'. 7	19>5	29v3:
(27>	(30):	(43)-
Family Income'
Lower	Middle:	Upper
2-3.4	20,8!	23.5
(•36)'	(41)	(23)
Audience Composition.
Viewers; Per Home;	K	W'	T_	C
2*5	32	45-	§	15
SOURCES^ NTI (Sept .“Oc-t. I96I.) »J9TI Audience Composition Report (Nov. 1961)
NOTEr Characteristics' are on: AA- basis. ~ total NTT homes in* each market ^ section..
f	r *
•	P« LQRILIARD COMPANY NIELSEN SHARE OF ATOSNCE TREND
■	hennesex
k it-——______
__ ^ rff ^ ^ r~~r*^= -
SET**	•*
'"“ 22
OCT, I	OCT. XE	NOV.. J.	NOV* II
AVERAGES
Share	37	*
AA Rating	26	**
AA Homes'	9*196,000
.	cpm	ik',?5	j:
UXV.XVVO
rrrss^sasr------y_i_!=^_»i5iuL»q-yj.	......................... ..............—■——»
■	P. mDLLABD COMPANY
KEUWQRK TELEVISION ABDIEBGE CHARACTERISTICS: AND: COHPOSITI0H HEMSEX Total U.S-. AA Rating - 20'. 1
County Size
A-	B.	C	D:
19.1 2T..3: 18.6. 22,3;
(40): (29:): (17): (14)
.	Territory-
North	East	West:
East	Cent ral	Centra 1	Sent h -' Paci fic
19-5	19*2- ‘	26*9 '	18,4' 16.5:
(26)	(17)	(25)	(20) (.112)
Age1 Of Hea# Of- House
Under	40-54	55 and,
40:	Years:	Q^er-
19-9	20.8.	19.5
(35)	(34).	(31)
Family Income;
Lower	MMdle	TOpper
17.0: 21.2 ' 22.3- '
(29)	('46):	(25):
Audience Composition!
Viewers: Per Home'	M	W	T	C.
1.9'	35	51	8'	6 '
SOURCES: NT I (Sept.-Oct.., 19611). r NT I' Andience- Composition. Report	O
(Nov. 1961)	'	'	^.
#£»
|hK
NOTE: Characteristics are on. AA basis — % total fi'Bl homes in each
market section.	If*’
<!
.
■	P« LORILLARD COMPANY .	NIEl^EN SHARE OF AUDIENCE TREND
■	PRICB 15 SIGHT
I IS RIGHT	^ , ■ ’ '
—"V ’ ......33	33'	.
mm	" '	,	■
""	28	^	30
—~w'""	"'"*•»
iW ON MAIN ST.**r"'
OCT. I	OCT, II	NOV. I	NOV. II	;
AVERAGES
Share	31
AA Eating	22
AA Homes	10,490
' CPM	$3.87 ’
TWO
P!. LQRHHARD: CDMEMT
network: television
,	&WEKSCE CMA'gTERISTIies; AHD COMPOSITION
PRICE is: right Total U.S.. MM. Rating; - 22u8:
County Size;
A	JB^	’ J)_
16..5 23.9 26* 33 28!.l ©ft* (28): (22j (16):
Territory-Morth:	East.	West
East	Central	Central	Staut-h	Pacific.
22.8	22:. 8	22.6-	29.9-	130-
(2?)	(17)' . (19).	(29)'	(8)
Age Of Head. Of House
Whder'	40--54	55- and
40*	Tears	Over
18..	7	18.k.	30'. 5-(29) (2?) CW
Pa-mily Income;
Lp-wer^	Middle;	Upper
22.1,	23.2 : 23.1 (335 cwj	(23)
Audience, Composition Viewers Per Home	Mi	~W	T	C
2.2	29 hr a	16
SOURCES': HTI (Sept.-Oct. 1961):, Audience Composition. Report	^
('JIb.v. 1961)
K
HOTE':: Characteristics are- on HA "basis - total. NTT homes in each
market section	^
05
! '
' \	P. LORILLARD COMPANX
NIELSEN SHARE OF- AUDIENCE TREND TARGET: CQRRUPTORS
l	CORRUPTORS +■-, .............."37	—', _
36	35
if zone/-	—
’HESS	3°	30
!/BBW4** 'jr—<— ,.w——!
23	'-v.
**** “ “
18
.	OCT. I	QCT. II	NOV* I	NQV, II
AVERAGES
Share	3?
AA Rating	18
AA Homes	8,177,000
CPM	$4.63
tCXVVO
n—1-1-n’ ...........................................~" '
P. LORILLARD. company MEffltfOKK TELmSIQK:
AUDJEHCS CHARACTERISTICS AI@> G0HP05IYI0M '	TARGET r COmPPTORS.
Total UeSv,; AA, Rating - 1$*?'
County Slae
.....A	B	C	B>
'	21.0' I?*. 5 12.0 9.8
(52> (28) (13); (7>
Territory
Hbrth	Eaet:	West.
' East	Central	Central	Sbut.h.	P&eifi c:
.. I5w8: ’	18.9 l?.l. '	" 14.1 18v8:
(.26):	(20) (19)	(19); (16)
Age. Of Head Of House.	•
Under-	40 <-,54	55 and
40.	Years	Over1
21.7	18% 9:	10...7 (^4):	(36)	(20):
'	Fatally- Income
Lower	Middle:	Upper
11.8	19.2	18.7: '
' ' (24)	(.51)'	(25)
Audience Composition-Viewers,: Per1 HoTnei	H.	VT	T	C
2.0:	35 47 110- ' 8
SOURCES: KfHI £iSept.~©ct* 1961))* NTI Audience Composition- Report .	CJWov. 1961)	.	<
H
HOTEj' Characteristics are on AA. basis. — % total. M1PI homes; in each-	J
market: section	£
fr-
P‘ LORILLARD COMPANY NIELSEN SHARE QF AtHHBNGB TREND ‘ " CAINES 100
^ ^ ^XSs :	^6?
MQORJE* £\
.....
; i°°
,'26 25
■v™. .	/ .
■'■ “"■ 20'** / ' 2
"■v	*	> w
V	/	Ns
. Nh	^	N
11	.
OCT. I	OCT. II	NOV, I	NOV. II	DEC,
AVERAGES
Share	29
AA Hating	ljj
.TPTI , AA Hornes'	6,?3Q,00Q
^fUTVVC) CPM	$**,**2
"i-ii............—■ ...........’ n '"^—--' '.....■"——.........................- -------:_.. '- ........... '
P. LORDLLAHD compact MEDWORK' TELEVISION AUDIENCE CHARACTERISTICS AMD: COMPOSITION CAIKPS ioo:
Total! U.S. AA. Hating- — 13«5
County Slae
A	-B'	C
15.8; 12.9 10.9 11.-6-(49): C 26): (i5). CIO)
Territory Hoita	Ekst	West
East	Central	Central South.	Pacific
13.5	13:.5; ’ 13.0:	13?. Q:	12.6
(2?)	(17>	(21)	(22)	(13)
Age- Of Head Of' House
Under'	40-54	55 and
40	Years	Over' 15.6	*	13.1	12.3	..
(40):	(32>	(28).
Eamily Income
Lower	Middle ■	Upper-
11.7	14.31	14.9
(30)	(45I	C25*
Audience Composition
Viewers Per Home	H.	W	T'	C 1.9'	47	42	7	4 '
SOURCES:- HT1 (Sept.-Oct. 1961), KTJ Audience: Composition Report ■	Uov. 1961)	0
MOTE:: Characteristics are on- AA- basis; - $ total NT.I homes in each	»3*
market section.	Jr*
. ^
(' ). - $ or total program audience accounted for1 by- each' sub-category (*>;
©:
... \ ’	P. LOKXLLARD COMPANY
SHARE OF AQD3KNCE TREND HAWAIIAN EYE
_ ... _ .. _ _ _ :
^ ‘ ‘ 38	3?’^^*
COMO*	31^^	35
mtb/mrs. g.*	29	■,. - -	----
EAS ms	____
- ■	-	£= ■	25
OCT. I QCT- XI NO?,	I NOV. II
AVERAGES
Share	29 *Sei
AA Rating	18 Dec
AA Homes"	8,027,000 **Se|
CPM	$4.44' Sef
siemo
,'lLH.|.,-„ —I 1	................ 1............... <j	.......................—	- ' I............'
P. LQRILXARD COMPAM NETWORK TELEVISION, jmoHEHCE CHMCSERISTIGS: AM' COMPOSITION'
HAVTAIIAJfl EYE 'Dotal U0Si. AA Rating - 16*3’
Coirot.Y Siae
A	B.	G	D:
18.7	17 08 ' 11.7’ 13 a
C48): (29-): £13) (10)'	•
Territory North,	East.	West1
East Central Central	South Pacific
16.? 18-. 5 15o2	14.6 17. O' '
(27)	(20)- (18):	(20) (135)
Age1 Of Head' Of House
Under.-	40^54’	55 and
40	Years-	Oyer*.:*
22.5	17; 9:	10. D (46): (35> (19)
Family Income.
-	Lower	Middle-.	Upper
13.5	' ±9A
(28)	(5i)	(21)
-	Atxdience- Composition
Viewers Per- Home	K	W	T’	C
2.0	33	42	14	11 !
SOURCES:: NT1 (Septo-0ct.B 1961)' y NTi: Audience- Composition Report-
(Nov* 1961)	'	_
C
NOTE I Characteristics are- on. AA basis — % total NTI homes: in each:	^
market section
CO
P.. LQRlLL/ffiD- COMPANY KETOORK TELEVISION BEAM) REQUIREMENTS. FOR THE 31962-1963 SEASON ASP
SUGGESTED COURSES' OF ACTION FOR IMPLEMENTATION'
O:
M
CJ-
m
05:
P., LQKXLLftHD’ COKPANY suggested: network tsi^tisioh REQUIRSHSMIS1
1962	- 1963
Current'	Changes in
tequiirements	Budget Provisions	Dollar Mechanics*
Qtr,.......1962	4th......Qtr;.....19&2
■Iternate: Wee;k; l/g Horn*’ Programs
dumber of. Programs «■ 3;	31	~
KENT	- 2	2'	-
' NEWPORT'	- I	1!,	-
YORK	- -	-	-	■
Participations
Humber- of Participations- »	3/Wkv	2/^k*	-^It^OOQ1
KEW -	l/Wk,	-	+$149^000-
YORK -	2/fc	2/fflc; -
*■ Estimated Costs - Participations: - 13, @! $38>000 Pe:r MLnute
■	O:
H
'	CJ
Before- reviewing; the specific; means, available: new for implementing- this activity, two points* should be kept in mindly
1* As- of’ late: January* much, of the- 196263; programming; and' scheduling; of the* three networks is hazy and subject, to: change *, Since every single^ network buy can only be: properly evaluated against the alternatives- available, we. should! consider- every show, recommendation! as tentativei until a: commitment' must be; givens - if a better- opportunity comes along, of course we would want to* be; in a position, to* take advantage of it,.
To: accomplish this* our; programming; department; is; maintaining1 constant, contact with all program sources - networks,; packagers* and other advertisers — screening,. evaluating and negotiating;,,
If further- improvements: appear possible in the next: several weeks,; these will be; brought- to your attention immediately.,
2<, Brand requirements, may also- be altered! a© we get. closer to; the start of. the new: television season*. Further growth, and' development: on the: part of Kent,: Newport and York' may require! additional purchases in network TV,. A'gainst this possibility,, our programming people, will continue to: shop:- for1 interesting worthwhile; and exciting: availabilities,,
P. LOHIIXARD COMPANY KETbTOHE TILSWSIOfl 196% - 1963
5DG®S3IEtt RSQUCHEaffiKPS	.	2ffiM®HTATI0N
Alternate: Week, 1/2 hour Programs:	J. Gbntfnae sponsorship of, Ed Sttllivsni
Show..
2« Carefully evaluate the; performance of Hennesey in order that a proper' Judgment can be made on the continuance: or cancellation of the program on. or before our re-newaX date - April 2j£,. 1962’,
Participation Per Week'	3* Be prepared, to: seek: a. minnte: parti-
cipation, in the; event, out* current, properties (Cainrs 100 j Targets The Corrupt ora:): are not. re-newedi by US' or; are: not; programmed by the: networks..
MSHFOBT
Alternate Week' l/2 Hour Program	1* Carefully1 evaluate: the performance:
of Price Is1 Right in. order that a proper judgment, can. be made on Newport's future; sponsorship-, of this program: on’ or before our renewal. date; — March: 15,, 1962.
YORIC
Participations; Per Week.	1. Be prepared tot seek minute: parti-
cipations' in. the: event our- current properties (C&in ’a 1005, Target-:
The Corruptors) are not. re -mewed by us- o-r are not' programmed by the networks.
jjjj
is;
Jr.. a. ser.se; every or/e: is a: ganib le r - -ever':.' tir.e ve- cress "ire strengths re: is; a: okgr.ee. that ve villi get hit. by a car. Ass^^ir.g a person, dees all, of the follcvir.'g tlhilrgs, vhi.ch. era of these activ.ities.de y.z-u tr.irJfc is r.osf dangerous; ts> life;? (.Card, shcvn rescenjer.t.))
JLC[^.
----
" e	..........fi\:M
C:
<1.
o
^ _	SMOKERS AND NON-SMOKERS:
FACTS YOU SHOULD KNOW
Both smokers and non-smokers deserve to know facts, not innuendo, about cigarettes. Yesterday, Philip Morris and other U.S. tobacco manufacturers helped to set the record straight by speaking before a Congressional committee.
For your consideration, here are the highlights of the information presented by Philip Morris in that session:
Fact:
Philip Mom* doe* not add nicotine to it* cigarettes.
The nicotine delivery of *11 commercial cigarettes it meatured and disclosed to one tenth of a milligram, both in public releases by the Federal Trade Commission, and in every advertisement tor the hit 25 yean. In the end, Philip Mom* lower* the amount of nicotine naturally occurring
in tobacco by between 50% in the ewe of a Marlboro, and 90% in an ultra-low brand.
Fact:
Philip Mom* doe* not 'mumpuUlt' nkorine level*.
We voluntarily opened our manufacturing operation* to the Food and Drug Admirtiitration, in a good faith effort to ttsolvt the allegation* that we add nicotine or control it* level in our cigarette*.
Our manufacturing process tneludc* over 400 quality control checkpoint* and only two of them measure nicotine. In every cite, aod with every brand we manufacture, the nicotine level in the finished cigarette it lower than the nicotine level of the original, natural tobacco leaf.
"	Fact:
Philip Mom* ha* not used patented processes to mrtnue or maintain nicotine level*.
Philip MorrU, like every other corporation, apptic* for. and obtains patent* on virtually every innovation we pioneer. Philip Worrit currently hold* over 500 patents. They ire publicly disclosed upon issuance through the U.S. Parent Office. Philip Morn* ha* never used any of these patent* to increase, or even maintain, nicotine level* in arty of it* product*. In feet, the only nicotine retaed patent* Philip Morris has ever used are for the reduction of nicotine.
p . ract:
PfuBp Morris doe* not believe cigarette smoking ii addictive.	i
People can and do quit smoidng all the time. According to the 1988 Surgeon General* Report, there we mote than 40 million former smoker* in	I
the United States and 90% quit on their own, without any outside help.	I
ract:
None of the ingredient* used in the manufacture of cigarettes is harjnful a* used.
Cigarette ingredient* have been scrutinised by the Department of Health and Human Scrvice*
1 since 1986. Jn addition, an independent safety awnsment was conducted by *U renowned sdcntiMs, Their report concluded: 'The ingredients added to tobacco in the manufacture of cigarettes by the si* major U.S. manufacturers are not hazardous under conditions of use."
j
<	........................... :
■	In closing, wed like to offer one more fart about how the majority of Americans	i
feel about smoking bans. According to i recent CNN/USA Today poll, the majority of non-smokers, as well as smokers, ate opposed to outright smoking bans.
In fact, almost 7 out of 10 Americans favor designated smoking areas.
Obviously, non-smokers feel that smokers have rights, too.
For » fufl frtnicrtpt of the information prttttttcd bt Philip Morris* the ingretfonrs or ftjnhcf *nfoTYn*rio«, pfeaw: tul) 1^800*852-8749.
Philip Morn’s USA	CO
ON
r-ssisrn &
ft STUDY OF
PUBLIC ATTITUDES TOWARD	*
CIGAKETOE SMOKXM3 AND THE TOBACCO’ INDUSTRY IN 1982
Prepared for THE TOBACCO*INSTITUTE July 1982
O'
The ROPER ORGANIZATION Inc.	g
&
EXHIBIT	S'
*
Smoking As A Health Problem
Previous studies have shown' that the belief that smoking: is hazardous :o health is widely accepted by Americans. This study shows an even* greater ;rendi in that direction.
Opinions on the effect of smoking on> longevity show a negative shift.
Ihile smoking a pack of cigarettes a day is still in second place among selected tea1th hazards, it is three points higher than in the peak reading in 1978. he percentages naming all other hazards—except tension and stress—are evel with or down from 1978.
Makes- a great deal of difference in longevity
■	(Question 10)
1982 1980 1978 1976 1974 1972 1970 %.%%%%%% f a person lives- under- a lot	'
f tension and stress	77 75 7.4 76 74’ 72’ 69
f a person smokes a: pack of
igarefetes a day	53’ 45 50 45 44 42 42
f a person regularly eats; a lot
f food: with high cholesterol	4,3 41 43' 39 38 34 31
f a person drinks 3 or 4
ighballs a day	'	38 35 39 37' 35 34 29
f a person doesn't get regular
xercise	32 28 34 33 38 38
B a person is 20 pounds	■
verweight	18 22 24 24 25 26 23
■	.■■jgy
In a later question, respondents were asked if they had read or heard
. . ©
ray thing during the past year that made them- either more worried or less worried fsj Dout smoking:. Answers to this question have been identical since 1972'. As
C/l
i past studies, what, people are reading or hearing is continuing to make them CjJ >re worried, not less worried. Only lfc said they were less worried.
Read or heard anything that makes you	.
more or less worried about smoking
(Questions 36*3?)	*
Total
1982 1978. 1976 1974 1972 1970 1968 %%%%%%%
Yes, have read or
heard something	30 31 30 30; 30 42 40
And feel
More worried	28 29 27 27 27 38 35
Less worried	1112 12 3
Don’t know or
no answer	112 12 2 3
Answers to what had been read or heard that had made them* more worried have always been varied, but in the main have dealt with health aspects of smoking and show little change from< the last study. One answer has been steadily increasing since 1972—that "smoking hurts non-smokers or children in the same room with smokers,” up from 2% in 1972 to 11% in the current study. 'This answer is mainly given' by non-smokers.
Major answers—what read or heard that made you more (or less) worried (Question 38)
1982_
__Total_Non“
1982 1978 1976 1974 1972 1970 Smokers smokers %%%%%% % %
Cancer caused through
smoking	22 24‘ 9 9 10 11	29:	19
Smoking causes, may
cause lung cancer	19 20 20' 19 24 26	17	20
Smoking is hazardous/
dangerous to health*	13 11 11 10 6 5	12	13
Hurts non-smokers/	0;
children in the same	O
room; with smokers	11 6 7 3	2 -	4	13 N
a
Smoking: causes ,, may	<n
cause heart trouble	10‘ 13 5 7 8 8	13	9
CO
O- .
V
Another question repeated in this study was whether respondents feel ir know enough about this whole matter of smoking and health, or whether they ' 1 they need to know more. Since 197^, the percentage who said they "know ugh" has been' rising, with a five point rise to 75% since 1978. As we have sd in past reports, the rise in the percentage saying they "know enough" ns to indicate that the anti-smoking reports are continuing to gain in' sptance.
Know enough about smoking and health or need to know more {Question 39)
1982: 1978 1976 1974' 1972 1970 %. % % % % %
Know enough	75 70 63 64 61 62
Need to know more	22 26. 32 32 34 34
Don*' t know/no answer 2 4 4 4 4 4
In the general area of cigarettes and health, we have asked: a ques-i in all eight studies on opinions as to whether the government has: unfairly tsed on cigarettes in the smoking and health controversy.
Since 1968, the majority opinion has been that the government has focused unfairly on cigarettes and this opinion is now at a record high.
Is government criticism proper (Question; 4-1)
Total
1982 1980 1978 1976 1974 1972 1970 1968 %%% %%%%%
Government has focused
unfairly on cigarettes 16 21 21 19 19 22 25 18
■
Government has not
focused unfairly on	q
cigarettes	75 71 66 70 71 66 65 68
Don't know/no answer	9 8 13 12 10 11 9 15
<7?
CO
o-
OS'
Finally, we have always felt that it is important to Ibok at the prob-,em of smoking and health in context with other things- that might be harmful to wealth.
In all eight studies, attitudes towards cigarette smoking and health lave been explored from two viewpoints—-in perspective with other problems that an affect health and safety and as an- issue that is directly focused on. As >e noted in past reports, when' focused on, smoking as a health hazard is and has een widely accepted by the public. But looked at in context with other prob-ems, it has always loomed less: large.
Early in the interview, before it was apparent that there was particular interest in cigarettes and smoking, respondents were shown a list of fourteen tems and asked which two or three they were personally most concerned about in erms1 of the possible effects on- the health, safety and welfare of themselves nd^their families. The list includted "cigarette smoking" and "being around so pie who are smoking, '*
As a matter of personal concern, both smoking items- have always ranked 3W. Cigarette smoking is tied with marijuana use and drinking, alcoholic averages for tenth place in the list of fourteen items asked about. And, being; round: people who are smoking; continues to rank last. More significantly, there is been* no increase in personal concern over either of these smoking items Lnce they were first asked: about.
c
o
CTi 9i-Crt Co O * ca
Health and safety concerns	\
(Question 6)
Things people are	personally concerned	about
1882 1980:	1978	1976	1974	19?2;	1970 %%%%%%%
me in the streets 49	57	60	55	58	55	57
r pollution 30	36	39:	41	41	39	45
•cotics addiction 30	34	38	31	39	49	51
slear radiation 28	28	XX	XX	XX	XX	XX
mical waste disposal 28	XX	XX	XX	XX	XX	XX
:er pollution 25	23	24	26	27	30	31 s safety of prescription
gs and medicine 17	23	25	28	22	24	XX
omobile safety 16	17	17	18	22	22	23
d additives 14	21	23	24	18	17	11
of marijuana 12	16	13	14	15	17	21
arette smoking 12	13	13	18	14	13	21
of alcoholic beverages 12	10	10*	13	12	11	XX ng exposed to dust and
es on the job 6	8	10	9	6	XX	XX
ng around people who smoking:	4	6	5	7	3 XX XX
XX Mot asked in that year
'	c
o
u\
CO
©
Smoking And Quitting The percentage of people in this year’s study who say they smoke is • ow at the lowest level since the studies were begun in 1968: 32%, This is four point decline in two years. Over a twelve year period, the downward rend is clear—from 39% to 32%.
Numerically, there are fewer smokers today than shown by any study ince 1970*. In some previous years, even* though the percentage who smoked eclined, the number of smokers increased because of the rise in population, sing the latest Census Bureau estimates for the approximate time periods in uestion which include the part of the population in our study, the percentres in< our studies project as follows:
54.159.000	smokers in 1982
59.195.000	smokers in 1980
*	57,633,000 smokers in 1978
56.923.000	smokers in 1976 59,882,000: smokers in 1974 55,700,000'smokers in 1972
54.012.000	smokers in 1970
54.038.000	smokers in 1968
Incidence of smoking is higher among younger people than older people— 5% of those under age 35 smoke, 31% of those 35 years of age and older smoke, his is a decline of only two points among younger people since 1980; but a deline of five points among older people.
Viewed over a fourteen year period, the pattern of smoking by sex and ©
N
3u cat ion is- generally down, with one exception. A higher percentage of the &-
yi
east well educated smoke today than in> any study in the^ series. And the
___________.	H
Some of these estimates are slightly different than those reported previously because they are based on later U.S. Census estimates for the periods in question. But these minor variations do not alter our previous analyses.
ncidence of smoking has declined much more among men than- among women—especial-y in the last two years,	-
Percent who smoke (Question 22)
1982	1980	1978	197§	1974'	1972	1970	1968 %%%%%%%%
Level of education
College 24	31	28	33	37	34	31	37
High school graduate 36	40!	43	41	43	43	44	45 Non-high school
graduate 40	38	33	33.	39	33	34	31
Sex	'
Male	34 40 39 41 36 43 44 4‘7
Female	32 33 35> 34 36 35 34 35
There has- been no- increase in the median number of cigarettes smoked sr day since 198Qv This appears true whether the Surgeon General’s Method of Lassification (Method A) is used' to estimate daily cigarette- consumption, or ie two other methods of estimation which better reflect respondents’ answers, lethods B and Cj.*
In Method "A", the number of cigarettes smoked per day is coded into categories that begin with a half or full pack (e.g., 10 - 19; 20 - 29; 30 - 39, etc.).
This results in a "value-” for a range that is half way through the range (e.gT^jjJ* 14.5} when a disproportionate number of the answers- given are probably at the ® bottom! of the range (e.g., "a half pack” or 10)’. Interpolating medians througtjj"? these ranges, therefore, probably overstates: the answers respondents gave.
In Method ,rB" and. Method "C”, answers' are coded into ranges which tend to ^ bracket the most likely answers, and hence not- inflate- what respondents said’ r* (Method "B”i 7 - 12; 13 - 17; 18 - 25; 26 - 35, etc. Method "C": 5 - 14; Q 15 - 24; 25 - 34, etc.)* However, it may be that Method "A", though less re- ^4 flective of what respondents- say, may be more accurate in that it compensates. for any tendency respondents may have to understate their consumption.
Smoking and amount smoked (Questions. 22, 24)
Percent of total popu-	.
lation who jsmoke
1982	32.4%*
1980	36.4
Humber of cigarettes smoked per day as •	estimated by
Method A
1982	25.71 Cigs.
1980	25.49
Method 5
1982	21.16 Cigs.
I960	21.18
Method C
1982	20.00 Cigs.
1980	20.43
As we noted in the last study, contrary to the popular notion* that people who smoke low, tar brands smoke more than those who smoke higher tar brands, this study shows the median number of cigarettes smoked per day by low tar brand smokers is. 21.2 compared with 21.4 per day by higher tar .brand smokers. (This is. using Method 3 for calculations, where the median for total smokers is 21.2 per day.)
The percentage who describe their brands as low tar brands is up only one point in two years—from 45% to 46%—with low tars continuing to dominate with most types of smokers, men being an exception. It is interesting: to note that the percentage of those who "don11 know" the tar content of the brand they ®
smoke has been steadily decreasing since 1978; indicating smokers are much more§*
. ^
tuned in to the tar content factor. Low tar brands dominate among most sub- Cl
CO
groups of smokers except men and those under 35,	J»*
_;___CO
*	It should be noted that two other surveys we have conducted—just before
Tar content of cigarettes (Question 30)
1982 ,	1980	1978	'
Wo- regular	No regular	No regular
Reg- brand or	Reg- brand or	Reg- brand or
Low ular don't know	low- ular don't know	Low ular don't know ‘
% % %	% % %	% % %
tal 46 41 12	45 38 17	36 4-1 24-
le 42 47 11	38 44 18	29 47 24
male 50 35- 14	52 33 15	43 35 22
ack 41 39 21	38 35- 27	30 43 27
ite 48 40 12	45 39 16	37 40 23
der 35 43 48; 9	42 42 16	XX XX XX
and older 49 35 16	46 36 18'.	XX XX XX
XX These groups not tabulated in 1978'
As In the past two studies, we asked smokers whether they wanted to nfcinue smoking, would "sort of like to give it up" or would very much like to It. Now only 26%' say they want to continue, down five points in two years, t: thermo re, the degree of desiring to quit has shifted^ back to "very much like quit" or ’'would like; to but can't." 4 in 10 smokers feel that way, with' 3 in taking: the position they would "sort of like fco^ quit."
How much do you want to quit (Question 23)-
1982	1980	1978
%	%	%
Want to continue 26	31	31
Sort of like to quit 30	39	32
Very much like to quit	33]	23|	29j
•.	40%	J29%	>34%
lake to quit but can't	j	j
(vol.),	7 J	6J	5/
Don't know/ho- answer	3	2	3	O
O
. .	N
Moderate- smokers express-more desire to quit- than either light or	^5
vy smokers, younger people want to quit more than older people-, and women
00
b*
■e than men'.
■	^	■ Like to
Sort of	Very much	quit but
Want to	like to	like to	can't
continue	quit	quit	(vol.).
Light smokers	(less than 10) 29%	37%	28	5
Moderate smokers (10-19)	21%	29	38	7
Heavy smokers	(total) 28%	30	32'	8
20 - 39	26%	31	33	8
40 or more	36%	26	31	8
Under 35	22%	32	36	6
35 and older	30%	29:	31	8
Men	29%	29	32	7
Women	24%	32	35	7
There is. evidence that more people are actually trying to quit smoking;. 66% in this study said: they had tried at some time to quit (up 4 points to the same percentages as in' 1972) , whereas 61% reported this in 1978, 1976 and; 1974. A much higher percentage of low tar smokers^ said they had tried to quit (70%): than higher tar smokers (60%).
As in all studies since 1972, we asked, smokers to choose from a list of reasons why they are still' smoking despite the warnings. Some interesting trends appear in. the answers—especially when looked at over the ten year period. Three reasons are^ down versus ten years ago: "I enjoy smoking and; I don't want to give it up," "I don’t think smoking is the only cause of the diseases they warn you about" (the most dramatic change of all)., and "33 just don't believe —O'
0
smoking is all that dangerous." Three: reasons are ups "B’d like to quit but ©
CV
I don't have the willpower," "These days they say everything is bad for you so^t I might as well smoke,"' and "If I quit I'd gain a lot of weight." The overall^
01
lclusion from the answers would' seem to be that smokers are more negative >ut smoking.
Reasons that come closest to explaining why smokers	.
are siiill smoking (card; shown respondent)
{Question 27)	_
1982 1980 1978 1976 1974 1972 %%%%%%
mjoy smoking and don't want to
re it up	39 38 40 53 46 43
I like to quit but don’t have the
.lpower	36 37 36 32 29 29
on*t think smoking is the only cause
the diseases they warn you about	19 30 30 33 25 25
se days^ they say everything is bad
■	you so I might as well smoke	18 22 20 14 13 8
I quit smoking I'd gain a lot of ght and that would be worse for my
1th than smoking	22 19 17 16 14 13
ust don't believe smoking is all that
gerous	11 15 12 20- 14 13
y heavy- smoking is dangerous and I	■
't smoke that much	10 14 12 12 12 10
e, don't know	4‘ 5 3 4 7 11
As in 1978> smokers consider'smoking to be only a habit (52%) rather	,
an addiction (44% when those who answered "addiction" and those who answered h" are added). Non-smokers are much' more inclined to call smoking an ad~ ion (41% only a "habit,*’ 56% "addiction” or "both"),
o o
*0
cn
■
w
CO
Habit or addiction {Question 19)
_1982_%_1980_ _1978;_
Won-	Non-	Non-
Total Smokers smokers Total Smokers smokers Total Smokers smokers %.%%%«%%% % Habit	45 52	41	48 56	44	50 57	45
Addiction	33 25	37 29 24	31	29 22	33
Neither	2	4	2	3	5	2 "2 4	1
Both, (vol.) 19 19*	19	19 14	21	17 15	18
Don’t know/
no answer	1*	1	1*	2	213
*	Less than .5 percent Nearly one in four people are now, ex~smokers, This is the largest group of ex-smokers we've seen.
X*n all past studies, one in five people were ex-smokers. 24% in the current study say they are now non-smokers- but smoked in the past, 21% reported this in 1970 and most subsequent studies. By far, the large majority of exsmokers quit smoking over two years ago. Recent quitters are at the same; level as two years ago—lp2%. in both studies said they quit smoking within the past year. This is a lower level of recent quitters than shown in earlier studies.
When ex-smokers quit smoking:
(Question 32)
'	1982- 1980 1978 1976 197-4 1972 1970 1968
%%%%%%%% Within the last year	12 12 15 13 14 13 21 23
Over 1 year, less than* 2	9 10 14 13 10 11 12 10:
Over 2 years	79 78* 71, 73 75 73 65 65
Don’t know/no answer	111112 1 ^ —O-
©■'
.	r>
We have consistently reported that ex-smokers claim to have been ^ heavier smokers at the time they quit1 than current smokers say they are now.
cn
We continue to see two possible reasons for this. Xt may be that ex-smokers
H
i in fact heavier smokers. But we are more inclined to- believe that ex-:ers tend to exaggerate the amount they previously smoked, and that current :ers under-report the amount they now smoke. Partial trend is. shown below.
1982__1980__1978__1972
Ex- Current Ex- Current Ex- Current Ex- Current smokers smokers smokers smokers smokers smokers smokers smokers
er of	%%•	%%	%%	%	%
rettes ed (or es) per
9	15	11	16	10	14	12'	17.	12
19	19	25.	16. 25	17	25	17	22
39	42	49	42	51	48	51	41	53
r more 23	15	23	12	20	11	19	10
t know/
nswer	21	32	11	5	3
In order to see if there had' been any change in the reasons why- people up smoking, we repeated a question asked inmost studies. There was ually no change from' 1980. Health problems continue to be the leading Dn for quitting, and at about the same level as in the past. Doctors advis-against smoking is tied for second place with government reports on the sts of smoking, on health.
Reasons- for quitting (Question 34)
1982	1980	1978	1974	1972	1970
%%%%%% .
ih problems 39:	39	37	38	40	39
advising against smoking 20	21	19	23	19.	19 mment reports on the effects of
ilng on health 20'	20	17	14	14	13
ids or relatives urging quitting smoking: 16	15	16	13	12	12 —©-
ixpense of smoking 15	15	12	13	15	13 ^
Iren objecting to parents smoking 5	9	5	6	4	8 JNrf
)king clinic 1	1	1	XX	XX	XX
17	18	21	20	21	21 q
: know/no answer	1 2 2 3 1 1
■ 00
XX Indicates that auestion. was not	"in	in rnia<>t-{An
We repeated in this; study a question first asked; in 1980 that explored what people think are the major effect of cigarette advertising:—	, whether it causes youngsters and' noif-smoking adults to become smokers., or it causes smokers to switch brands, or it hasn’t much effect of any kind. Nonsmokers are more inclined to think it causes youngsters and: non-smoking adults to become smokers than anything else. Smokers, on the other hand, are largely inclined* to think it has no effect. But many more smokers now than two years ago say it causes non-smokers to become smokers, and many fewer think it causes smokers to switch brands*
What are the major effects of cigarette, brand advertising (Question 14).
_1982_ _1980_
Non-	NonTotal Smokers smokers	Total Smokers smokers % % %	% % %
Causes youngsters and nonsmoking adults to become
smokers 33' 24 37	28 16	35
Causes smoke rs: to switch
brands 15 18 14	20 24	18
Both (vol.) 13 8 15	12 12	12
Doesn’t have much effect
of any kind 35 47 29	34- 45	29
Don*t know 4 3 5	5 3	5
o
o
N
cn
0‘S
w
CO C£
We repeated in this study a question first asked in 1980 that explored; what people think are the major effect of cigarette advertising—	. whether it causes youngsters and nosmoking adults to become smokers, or it causes smokers to switch brands, or it hasn't much effect of any kind. Nonsmokers are more inclined to think it causes youngsters and non-smoking adults to become smokers than anything else* Smokers, on the other hand, are largely inclined to think it has no effect. But many more smokers now than two years ago say it causes non-smokers to become smokers, and many fewer think it causes smokers to- switch brands.
What are .the major effects of cigarette brand advertising (Question 14)
1982_ _1980_
Non-	NonTotal Smokers smokers	Total Smokers smokers % % %	% % %
Causes youngsters and nonsmoking adults to become
smokers 33 24 37	28 16	35
Causes smokers to switch
brands 15 18 14	20 24	18
Both (vol.) 13 8 15	12 12	12
Doesn't have much effect
of any kind 35 47 29	34’ 45	29
Don’t know 4 3 5	5 3	5
"o’ o
<75
ca
CO
N
©

^ I'Bhjjnyg^g^ I
XicA-i- f^rK rf^X!-
KSP^fea^sSl W^mm ■s€KHK^® ”ii *:s^ xssaXHH
iMHnnHP Is; f *^*^«»?.-ia»».	fJiliii kJE^v*-. ;
j tea»"W« •■ w w?r«w> «r- ? I	' :; !
I ^-«*-Ma.« #* «*>*w h^- ; ■ ».»w iftyuggfes.. : ' , I
| — /■'*• >^	*, .v- , > v-**	. t. i. > ‘.~, »y-^> <t*-«J* ^ ,»	«*«^t««l
■	*.,&»#**** .<vj&r '■!&BHB8lwWli |	m$***■	»
HHHpr:' ■;■ .i,'5?tr. .. M&Sgs&P^ r! ■»&&■*&)*&	Ctitf.i&<!ir *11 a »#si:fr?f'‘ *f >,&Mi% *W“* *$&■ ^sJ*e <**#.■> m
■•:.j?3?'tfe *'~«»SW'	i i Ljfia.i:*.t£-.':.&K•?	MSl %%i.X ^ t^Sbf...« fy iplh.'rftoa $W ^WH<«i*i. jlV.ftfiBKH; ^fcsptft ■;]&
::~.> '• ■■ •.jBMPa> tBl	1 ;;31^ ;>w'^i^^^^sw*fe!« ^S«ji irfft A )q&<8$-:vi '	£&£BnB/Km&	.
;ll^riW'n^l' ^ ' ■ f^f-'*' ^^ipStaTT.*S*?W
cosntsu :
WPMyf^BIk .'*£ IJ&1„ % Jr tobacms
IBMKyP^^	jmjHk #
W'-if^fi? ;rr::v» •Nr:>v-a ■>.-.•■ ^^.-tv' ■■	!*?*?• ^.- K?.us	?>I^^V. NNvi(;ft,.M^^.
•	>':;^.;'r:i^K^'	'^M^v-4;^''^..I'.? V¥~x:**ltt Vt A :'h&*'*^'	I%^>f Tgjjgg^
■. - ;•■ : • ' '• :■ ; SXs3^l: •'.^A*af>ff^hS':rr'r^JS^'^
.s.^	;......• .... ■.	■*■.	• : . ' :■: .,. -.-.	■ . &ayuL8^... ,.
W-j^fmW'.*-'f	jr $W /./ ^ „^r Wgjffir J f. . f *y;ff jffl
.(sq ........ ................^^ExSr l
(ngQ -j jjntvjrr i w rvi^r,r rrj^.iu-— - . . ■ .w* taxta rxn»u wzTw»fa«*ll*y. Ottiwn, 1 ^g;
i	. (He Freed Himjielf From Smdftwg?6ey?0eiha^^^^^
ClCl L^y PK. T. *- VAN,&KXJ'E.V 1 '!ti*iy~n]!cd p*ck b^cljEireU '	to i«p ybotvjr medt&U/‘:tod‘
•	^Tim iTltJimfr ■ ctt*MT’ .*!» WT pocket,*111 be eowtjb'-	pbyrie*Hy. He Write*: V < th« fndJvtdttal lift***
d,moker/; write, K.O.K.^nd J® «* *™ nhroueh »*	"I »m toUHy detf. pr.cticiV '
, , *urcs with your r*cc&t itite- , ,	* mi«* *« *h» Hirfe* *v* u»i- wltOT* »»4 thw.» U>
* mtnt Ihil the * - * _ L*C*ch P***01* muit wo** &«t	M™ to Ine right tye^ir r whfln fc, hU dJtily
w»y to *top it f1^ own n^»thod of (rwloj	* lnj“ bec*uw of » ^L™ ; piper without cott to th« p**-
ONS. N.Y., M*) i0 .too T h e Mm,d{ fn>m u,e h*Mt- Thu	^*vl occ*'l°?*t ,»tucte*, °* • UcnU lo a Urge Cfafdfco f»*>
tr* »ftd BriUin menu! prooc.* ,*'vycr *ound the rl“ht *»»	Um1^l!0‘ (r°m •ln«' plUt, . . V;’ .. :.■/
i*f-flr« »rrtc- 0( ,!opptnE ws, I (ur ulfT>. The Uit tentence in	trouble, *nd hive » i;!rcji!*- pf Vm I)«Urt
erdty between Import *nt	the *b?!vc !el!cr .m?ke*' *n	Jiut.'m in	on	Ur to* if
njoicM «rmed tn my o#sf To	wMH «peciai!y sood point.	leS- * *l*o «m in irreited low.rd Imple- - wm*0 myielf T A, 11-ye.^Sd BrtK.Uynit*
Injt SecreUry. intvtn/iln	iVliMIIH re*d< tour n*w»p«p«r* ind	* attend Lb*, fieiitn ciinlc	.../ . _ -........
■* Con*o unity iS . m „ w	mi)nt*ln» thu U the belt wiy	<?*rx twff ■ month*. DnpitB.	‘OTrnmffi TT
««. ■ iki	V'<s9R —----utfw lilroenu, my mind It	'ZZ-^—ipr-;-r"
■1o*t to Thin! butlS»iy djjSEA Q	, _	. ILof^W	^WOp & bl OlSalC
SiTt«t"-	i,wVuidilo<!t SKfli	Senator.	woHd’ *]? ,im*„10
pfOTl^r.	,;0\,J0°r‘ Detlen	A*l* ' '■ ■ ■' '	^ <b<XJt-my *ilmeaU ~ WA,IH>B	'' -
^?T * 11'^	bf^iVUat. L«Ur( I cfeclrfcd ta	/XllltKy '	* ■
*tr<!lch th* llme 10 10 *-m-	'	...	. ■
of,	,n<J th(n untli nWJCJ'	CHEYZNNK. Wyo. M%-Seo.	" „ \ " *
movrfflrnu by "After tndlng ono wlth^	Joe Hickey, D-Wyo.. hu iuf-	Get tH© jUFHp	, ' '.	'
w Armv *nd	out tmoking. !t witj ju*t *	f(r?d a mild coroniry throm-	, ■'■ / m	, •,
ndirmrrifi nf ***|er the >«ottd d*y,	bo»|j, but I> recovering well, hi*	fln Carita’	/ '
r*hoiX wnd'	In 1 week the de*lnt w». con-’	doctor* Mid yeitfrd.y.	Ult Odlfld
lor Ihcir Into-	ttdenbiy mlnlmtued. After,	"HI* .rtlvlty will be limited	With iht<; DDT / #'
»lmo«t two years without	(or the next two to thre-e WlUt lillo	j	t/Jfi[Qf m
recmcnl both	iniokln^, I /eel sorry for peo~	wc-eki,'' * »Utement by hli pby-	LJ~5Sefe&!Z,ZZLffl	M
medtcul *u&-	P!c wJ,[) irf *ddfcted to thy	slclan.i nld. The doctor* i»!d	AI|ni(%TUAO tM\
food iyppllos	hibtu Jncldenully. ont of the	“thit. wlih the good ImmedUte	(iHnlM mnO /mI m,.
mice. H calls	thing* I enjoy mojl about	recovery ilretdy *een he will	* v * wPL -	*■ m'
ngr ol prUon-	f*01 *mokUij( H Iht- (rcedttm	soon be kble to return to full	FIAHtr'O 1	M
;r-old uporxdlc	Irom vtondorlntt U the par-	activity,-’._DUnUv	iff
pS P^mE HEAVILY?
M.°^id.^t,,e	^ containing valuable coupons worth ‘
§||	i'll GREEN STAMPS O^ji
I !(arm*v my'	Mii!e<J to you with the comp!im«nti of	1 GREEN |
„ ,’J- V« *-	yoof furtklpXInj SiM Gr««n St*mp	® SfTAMP® ff
*	H	MMWWffyT'I.....I M ■■■■yw'JMMWiyjllMM	MirchlnU.	iliTlff^^l
rt Firr m	^EGXIII*y Y/«i ■ f1-! >133^ ILmISH'i
KX3 rr»Ahn* li	~	m it n m 1 ~.......... ■—1	^_
170FN. DALE MABRY —877-6161 OPEN DAILY 10 A.M. TILL 9 RM EXCEPT SUNDAY
MOST ITEMS AYAllABU THRU ST. rETEIlSIUItG^^^JJSJIF1-AND IXADENTON STO« CAHIdI 1
ATBBgjlfgll luxurious com! -
y. . oeeK^idi^
hjk / } -. ^W^X°i?ft„> . •Ill‘?5 Meet; HillibbrougH	«Wfe»^W
: j Ml ■ To Offer Proix>.»l=
7	/	By vernon Bradford-':
.3 ' *yg^l-£t.v_> Tribune Stiff Writer,..„,	^B&bI^H^^SmBsSbbBm
TALLAHASSEE — Urban aT'fev county legislators 1<rft the or-
-	,	n I A	k sanitations!, meeting of- yeiter-
'"" - ---- A! t f~\ t/\ / *> r< f ~ rf ^ day’* special apportionment ae*-	M&a^5^588^a|^^aKaB?^
I I f*Ov ' v li hr	t s'on apparently resolved to of-
r	■	/ i vr _ / ^ _	, fer »n »cceptable poJitlve plan.
" LOt. <*- O —< ..Many 0( the blg-eounly law__■_'- ____ maker* aubsequentiy met with
. ■ ’ Gov. Farris Bryant it a Juoch*	, ., ■ '; ' :•"
»«»-.<-. ^ ’, ,, i ♦ eon 5iehind <rle*e<l .doors and	’A U.S.' Nivy1; BeltCOp
___ REFUSES DAMAGES-* heard the sovernor appeal to	area of Cubin*qu«r«ntin
zes —---—. ■	j««!!..tl>l» Uriur. 1- w
_ 7 L* C”___■ r * bte to the voter* in their coun-	• .
itunda •'ary. bays omoktng g«fh;£y££.£;.|	Writer'Says
1 /*t T /"T • f) . election.. . .	-. . 7 t
J)01*I1 LaUSea ^sCLT\C@y*y tjXXt and scheduled another ^meeting	Guantanamo
llc-h, t/n—The T T» , • , y> J , Delegations or Individual lex-	• .
ie of Ihe n*- \/1 f* T1 'tYt I /~\ / fy tTl /) Islators from several of the. big	¥’ J
Idled tourl>t V Lv^Llt/l tl/ jL/lU//iC> counties Including Hiiljbor-	-I C-. H p Q >*CATTI A
,cd like an ■ ough—which voted against the	M.O L tul OUUlt
yesterday, __- _ plan this week said they will	' ■ ■>
f,... r^rrTTTli Manufacturer ts'xxxs?'°' "!,!l-	"rt.'.;s,s?y.r;
h.„„ I 3 Officials 1 Qf Cigarettes jw.niit. s*.* . ^	«;*«« SSJ'VSS
bulldlrJC, built 5 # . And Coy. Bryant asked and	bfUm u>Si b„e ,(nce (bc
car. collapsed S p 11 J gj Held Not Liable «»«‘cd permission to ad-	vj. ,u,rtDllW be**n
I*ht fire from f V^ClllGU F Ol E drew the leslsiature In joint	X ]• n H * n, u r session n 2 p.m. Monday. ;
rmanrnt atat; B _ 1 B riTTSBUflGH ^—A frderat Bryant1* key people say he	By BEM PRICE
In* were away {; \JL)HZ«ClIL/ £ eourt Jury ruled yesterday clgs- ^oejnH yet have a specific plan.	GUANTANAMO BAY.
her* escaped. " *	■	, • rttte »moinng w»s ^thc cause or j|e ^as indicated If he did pre- Cuba i/pj_The U.S. Navy kepi
HO were in- flVMDHS'm one ol tt>e c*usrJ o! * p)lts* sent one as is anticipated. It	(.loj,. wi(ich last night on the re started, A S&jpMMvl burgh carpenter s iung cancer probsbSy would be close to the .windward Passage for a mis-luvol children eJT,'. hut (hat I he manufacturer of onc the lawmakers rejecled In sj|c.laden Soviet ship, due to ind., had Juii '' iyrJS tl,e ^iwrcttcs cannot be held re- (he Aujjust special session.	pass base early today on r^^nFer/di spunsible- . The luncheon session also was [he. way-home, or Fair fe^VkT?i[^Vj '#PK^vT* )ury f'Cht women and an attempt by Bryant to find Rear Adm. Edward J-originally dc- ^••'Lj^l'I ■ four men clfcific'<l the contro- out why the voters of urban	O'Donnell told a news confer* licago World's le v<rsial issue aftrr snme 12 hours areas rejected Hie plan which	(>nce yesterday that the Navy laier moved 1 of deliberation spread over two he had embraced as a com* had checked other Soviet s used as a “i'-i; ■; days. promise. ,	-ships and three of jhem cary arena for ♦ *, • M jlie panel said Olto Prili-ii- At least three coimlics which	r|cd missiles beln# taken out <’ "1/h -i A (,!v's Mrnykline voted acalnNt Ihe measure were	of Cuba. None Of the ships ved Ford ar- ■ ,i ^ .J seclion, asiumpd "the risk of in- not invited. JMpMfands and	was boarded, he said.
; of Ihe build- , ’• 1 nt.ri.bura iury llis »«**»k»nij of Chester- Okeechobee County lawmaker*	About 29 news me it arrived
of the slnir- Iit-lr) vicjiretles." were not there because it was	here rarlier in ihe day, the
Ihealer win*:. sheriff Ed Blackburn, Li Knelt k Myers Tobacco Co.. fell voters there rejected the	Itrst allowed at this brlsilinc
., ■ o.’., Allv f>kll| irthn'jon and Prdduii-i' ot Chesieri lelds. was plan simply because of the sen-	nava! base since President
world famous ■ • ■ jioi rte(;!ti:eni, the juo' ruled. aii)r»al district alieomv-nts for	Kennedy announced Ihe arms
t, largest In- Constable Malcolm Beard No Warranties ihem,	quarantine or Cuba Oct. 22.
'rom'^Vu yt3lcrtlB>' Wt,rr Sf, Vrt) 3Ub‘ Hs.id the firm did not "make n ™k,	M*nr Ch,tI1"
Scitacfer Road P001’85 lo appear m wunesscs Bnv CXi}, rs^ warranties upon ’p- 'il" 11 1 es	To one wlto had not aeon
'adquwrterj oi ,or ,fl<1 defense in ihe exlor- ultii-h Hie plaintiff relied and (Continued on'Pare 3. Col. 3)	Guantanamo for several
try division ol lion trial of Tony Conzalo. by which he wis induccd to pur- __monlbs. ihe changes wrouphl
ig once scrvou scheduled to slart Tuesdav, t’hasc" the ciEarctles^ There-	by Ihe Cuban crisis are star-
tor Ford Mo- > ‘ u fore, the verdict said. Ligccll Si I uiminc	t!inc. In three weeks ft has
Tile aubpoenns were oh- Myers is nol liable for any! JL i iL/LlIlC	hern transformed from a
bl-rfi k sriinke lained by Trunk R*Rano. Cun- d)t»»:iRi's, t	lokcn Installailon inio a Jear-
niof (-oilId lx- tain’s atlorncc, l’riti)l»rd ntnlended lie con- r Pfl	some sironghold. .
of live miio, in annoiimi’ile be tJfWfcl-- lu,)<- cancer from smnk- V-O	All alonjz a j>reai Imrsenlinc
nifOTed * K ,V^i. hin flirstei fictjlf. iejtuUrty trnm RuninA, s.f	of hills are (imposts. lto«ds
he iile were sl"' Sithpoenn*. j^Ssioio nl(, until 1953 when liis cias^ifred...........8-17-C	leading to Ihe base arc
itf the !Hti:i said that "m all probtthllity rljjlii hn)K was removed, He „ ' ............ ’ , J	K u a r ft e d by sandbagped
«cie in JUtt- there "111 be some other pub- wanted $213,000 in damage*. tom>c* ...............>-.*	t|)CVi(poinis. manned by
plus scvetal -meUls ...booenaed " ' Cntehanl's ailorney. .lamer, t.ro^w-orrf ............. B-B	Marines in combat carb. car-
dream carv1 suopoenaea., r ,.;,t}rfj lhl. v,-r(ti( t Death Notices ......... J-A	,-yinfl the newest SIH rifles
I upwards i'f Although Raganu tlio nut s "pnj^d victory" and a "sociaI Editorials ........... 6-A	ant! liftht maclilnc guns.
nut*nijon >l. there Is some ivirnny/*	Financltl N>wi........Tents dot the c*clus-cov-
is just prepaf- diculion Mayor .lulisn Lane ^ \v<»uM assume in Ihr broad CJorrn..................9»A	hillsides and the lu.Oi
a season. The wlI1 b(, ,mon, .hn,f fj,nM) sense tlu.i m M*n ‘ McArdle ,,,n<J(.r, ............. s.a	Rr^n fairways of the golf
i show which smonK tnnse c . We have cstab- M , Ad^r 1 r	course.
as preview the OoiwbIo, a bar nperainr, Is ]uh),rt t,lul u „ enusal J „ , ^ ........, IE	Cuhun Prime Minister FI-
kt.gfvltij(. not- charged wlili threiilrnlnj; (V meiliriil ronnwlion h e t w e e n - j’ r * ................ " ‘	del Citalrn has demanded the
ui.imn (ft 7()d.- ,1 t\Vh|||.vl VVelxn cniti'i'sulims "imoVIiib and Imii« i iinri-r, Jv ''V,> Vi........... . i	U,*,1l‘l1 Hrl "tit—”f
(id II,nil,Ml ' , ,1 , . , -"If tii<- rt*k III Mimkliii: KCIm'. T> and IIa*ll«* ......... 1 il	((itsitlmiatnn, AppafeU11/, If
1	ti.M.nlCrr of H"V),t Anierl. aii |i( |(ip j>f ............... ,M ] V... Drllrn ........... R »	lie waul* tl badly enough,
.as opened In -^hown, with ii-lltnK |ntlhr )ti^Ib M-hottl, Il Die li'isou U'eathrr ............('til)a must light for it. Some
, 11 was cioseil ^"-re «a< gambling at the hrou^ln home lhal they aiet W'ishlni IVrll ........, 8-B	here believe the newsmen
llire’ and”ci'- sV^r^irrn^flni^M.E'f,"- Continued on P.re 7, I'd. O 1 .Women-* News ........S-3-A	trontlnued on P^e 7. Col. ?)
nil t! was re- I»'»<l«ced S.I.WO.	.
• Yesterday, afler In' \\ax i-,i ;r-\/ t-'	* oulfl «-»St SIS served. JohhSOn announeed FOR BUoY PEOPLL™
c the building tle ^intseli would try the ————-
:.....?“•= Quick Look at NeiA	EXH,B,T