UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT NORTHERN DISTRICT OF OHIO EASTERN DIVISION
.......-..................... CERTIFIE
IRON WORKERS LOCAL UNION No.	)
17 INSURANCE FUND and its	)	WWe %
Trustees, et al.,	) No. 1:97CV1422
Plaintiffs,	) VOLUME I
vs.	)
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al. ,	)
Defendants.	)
Deposition of JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, at 18700 JFK Boulevard, Houston, Texas, commencing at 9:05 A.M., Friday,
January 15, 1999, before
Karen L. D. Schoeve, Texas CSR No. 3354.
Int^ir
PAGES l- 269	Court Report
FOR THE PLAINTIFFS:
LAW OFFICES OF CHARLES STEVENS CRANDALL BY: CHARLES STEVENS CRANDALL, ESQ.
110 West C Street Suite 711
San Diego, California 92101 (619) 233-4787
FOR DEFENDANT R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY:
JONES, DAY, REAVIS & POGUE BY: PAUL D. KOETHE, ESQ.
901 Lakeside Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44114 (216) 586-3939 -AND-
JONES, DAY, REAVIS & POGUE BY: J. TODD KENNARD, ESQ. 1900 Huntington Center Columbus, Ohio 43215 (614) 469-3939
ALSO PRESENT:
JOE MIECZKOWSKI, VIDEOGRAPHER
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Today's date is Friday, January 15th, 1999. The time is approximately 9:05 A.M.
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
MR. CRANDALL: Do you want us to give our appearances for the record?
My name is Steve Crandall, and I'm appearing on behalf of the plaintiffs in this case.
MR. KOETHE: My name is Paul Koethe, appearing on behalf of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
MR. KENNARD; Todd Kennard also on behalf of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, my name is Steve
Crandall, as you fond out a moment ago, and I represent the plaintiffs in this matter.
We're here to take your deposition today and I
understand that in the past you have had your deposition taken at least one time; is that right?
A.	Yes, that is correct.
Q.	That was about two years ago, so
I want to go over with you juBt a couple of the ground rules that I'd like you to follow. Some are obvious and some I hope are also -- I hope they're all obvious. But anyway, the most important one is that you've just taken an oath to tell the truth. And although we are in a conference room at a hotel, the oath you've taken is just as important as though you took it before a Court or a jury. Do you understand that?
A.	Yes, I do. I understand.
Q.	And also, in the nature of the
questioning that I'm doing, there is a court reporter taking down what you say and this is being videotaped as well, but nevertheless it's very important that you only answer a question that you understand, okay?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And if you have -- if you don't
understand it, by all means let me know and
I'll try to rephrase it and accommodate your concerns, okay?
A.	That's fine, yes.
Q.	And is there any -- do you have
any health or other reasons why this deposition can't go forward today?
A.	Not that I'm aware of, no.
Q.	I noticed, for instance, I have
something to support my back and if there are any types of accommodations you need during the deposition, if you're uncomfortable or whatever, just let me know and we can accommodate you, okay.
A.	That's fine. Occasionally my
lower back will bother you but it's been a good week so far, so I think I'm probably okay.
Q.	Okay. Dr. Martin, when did you
become retained in connection with this litigation?
A.	I believe it was sometime in June
of 1998. Let me estimate approximately seven months ago.
Q.	And what were the circumstances
under which you became retained?
A.	I received a telephone call from
Mr. Koethe, on my left, and he asked me whether I might be interested in reviewing certain questions having to do with historical awareness in regard to this particular case.
Q.	What is your understanding of
this particular case? In other words, what do you understand the allegations to be?
A.	My understanding of the
allegations is that the plaintiffs are stating that tobacco companies held back information that would have otherwise been available to the public and to the trustees of the various health funds that, in turn, might have affected decision-making with the way of handling claims and perhaps advising subscribers as to how they should care for themselves in terms of maintaining good health.
Q.	Okay. Now, when you were
contacted by Mr. Koethe, what did you do thereafter? Let me rephrase it. Was that just a brief conversation back seven months ago or was it something more extensive?
A.	Well, we talked about a program
of research. And at that point, I made a trip to Ohio to consider the various dimensions of what would be an appropriate research program to look into the questions that I was being aBked to consider.
Q.	What was the nature of the
program of research you discussed with Mr. Koethe?
A.	How we would go about finding,
locating, researching documents that would pertain to the central questions that I was being asked to consider. That would involve trying to determine where documents were located, in what archives, in what repositories and then, in turn, going about the business of researching and finding, locating, and reviewing those documents.
Q.	And in this first conversation
you had with Mr. Koethe about the case, did you come up with a list of specific things that you were to look at or that he wanted you to look at?
A.	Not at that particular moment, as
I recall. We - - the list of documents becomes really a matter of availability, and lists
more or less evolved over time in relation to what documents might, indeed, be available.
Q.	Can you explain that a little bit
more. I don't understand.
A.	Yes. For instance, one of the
areas that is very, very important in terms of public awareness has to do with education, formal schooling, formal education. it then, in turn, is problematic as to what materials will actually be available and where they might be available.
One might, for instance, find a long run of annual reports on the part of the Ohio state department of education. Then again one might find that those annual reports have been dispersed to the wind and they're not available. So that is really - - I guess what I'm trying to get at here is that we intended and we talked about being as comprehensive as possible and finding materials for evaluation. And that, of course, would be a function of what, indeed, has been saved, I guess if I could put it that way,
Q.	Okay, now -- but at that time in
terms of trying to identify the universe of things that you would look for, you didn't get into specifics with him; is that right?
A.	I'm not quite sure what you mean.
Do you mean in terms of specific documents?
Q.	No, specific areas that you would
look at.
A.	Areas. Hell, yes, and again that
evolved over time.
Q.	Okay.
A.	And I hopefully have reflected
those areas in my statement or report.
Q.	Okay. Generally can you tell me
how that those areas evolved over time?
A.	Yes. We went about the business
of doing newspaper research, of going to the Ohio historical society and to the State library of Ohio to look for documents that would relate to actions on the part of the State and -- so that would be a major category. We look for a variety of documents that would relate to within that -- say, the category of the State, documents that relate to education, what was being taught in the schools over a long period of time, what the
state department of health was doing over a long period of time. That's the sort of thing that we did.
Q.	Okay. And what is it that you
were looking for? In other words, what was your mission?
A.	It goes back to the two
fundamental questions that I begin my report with. First of all, the question of over time what has been -- what would have been levels of public awareness with respect to questions having to do with health issues as related to tobacco and tobacco use and consumption, and then public understanding or awareness with respect to matters having to do with the alleged addictive qualities or habit - forming qualities of tobacco use. That would be the second question.
Q.	Okay. And were those questions
clear in your mind right off the bat? In other words, were they -- were those the two questions that you and Mr. Koethe focused on, back seven months ago?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Were there any other questions or
issues that you discussed possibly doing research on or giving opinions on that you discarded or decided not to pursue?
A.	No, those were the primary -- as
reflected in my statement, those are the primary -* two primary questions.
Q.	Okay. Following your initial
contact with Mr. Koethe, what was the next thing that happened in connection with your work in this case?
A.	I made a trip to Columbus, Ohio,
and began the process of visiting various archives and making an assessment as to what kinds of materials would be available.
Q.	And can you be more specific now
about your trip to Columbus, Ohio, in terms of how much time it took and whether you went alone or with someone, things of that nature?
A.	I traveled to Columbus with my
research assistant. We were there approximately two full working days, and we visited the Ohio historical society to determine what newspapers might well be available and we found that the historical society had very good runs of the major daily
papers in the state.
We, in turn, visited the State library looking for materials that would have to do with actions on the part of the State government because the State library is the -I guess, the best way to put it is the unofficial official repository of state documents. In other words, they have the power to encourage other agencies to file but other agencies don't necessarily file, as we learned. So those were the two primary thrusts of that trip.
Q.	All right. And who was the
research assistant?
A.	Her name is Katie Harrison.
Q.	And during your time in Columbus,
did you write down anything?
A.	Honestly, at this point, I don't
recall. I may well have when we were at the various archives taking notes that such and such and so-and-so documents were there and available, because that’s just necessary to any overall research plan, that you find out where the material is and then you try to recall because you're going to have to do a
lot of work in mining through that information.
q.	Do you remember approximately
your trip to Columbus took place?
A.	Yes, it was some time, I'm going
to say around the 20th of June.
Q.	Why does the 20th of June come to
mind specifically?
A.	I knew it was before the end of
June. I don't remember the exact dates, but it was sometime around that.
Q.	Okay, All right. Following your
trip to Columbus, what did you do next?
A.	We came to the conclusion that
there was an absolutely immense amount of material and that given what we needed -- what we needed to recover -- that is, get out of the documents -- that it would be appropriate to ask for additional research assistance and that would then -- that would be provided.
And then we, in turn, made a number of additional trips to Columbus to conduct that research.
Q.	And what was the nature of the
help that you requested?
A.	For individuals who could help
get the material out of the archives.
Q.	And was that request granted?
A.	Yes, it was.
Q.	By whom?
A.	By Mr. Koethe.
Q.	All right. And what was the
result of that assistance? In other words, what further help did you get?
A.	He received assistance from a
woman by the name of Terry Fife, F-i-f-e. And she, in turn - - she has a research firm.
She's what we would call a public historian; that is, that she does research for - -contract research. And she has some assistants who work for her and those assistants, as well as Miss Fife, would come to Columbus occasionally, and they would also look for and work on finding documents relative to the questions at hand.
Q.	Okay. Did you have any
discussions, yourself, with Ms. Fife over what her -- what she should do?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	All right. Tell me what those
A.	In particular, I wanted to know
what was going on or what kinds of local programs or local issues were out there, had been at some time, had been addressed. And so she was able to work out a program of traveling whereby she went out and visited other archives in the state, she or her assistants.
And they visited archives -- I'm trying to remember all the locations: the archive at Ohio University in Athens in the southeastern portion of the state; Bowling Green State University archives which contain a lot of material about what was going on in the Toledo area; the Western Reserve Historical Society which is in Cleveland. And I believe they may have visited, very briefly,■ a labor museum in the Youngstown area. So those were some of the places they went in looking for material.
Q.	Did you give her any written
instructions?
A.	No, I did not.
Q.	All right. Approximately how
many people, to your knowledge, did she put into the field to accomplish the tasks you gave her?
A.	At various times, if - - I think
I'm giving you the right number. Three. Not that any one of them would have been out -- or that all three would have been out there at one time, but I think that she worked with three individuals.
Q.	So that would be Terry Fife plus
three?
A.	That's right.
Q.	What is the name of her firm?
A.	The name of the firm is History
Works, two words.
Q.	And can you tell me where that is
located?
A.	Yes, it's in a suburb of Chicago,
Oak Park, Illinois.
Q.	And how was it that the fruits of
History Works's research was passed on to ysu?
A.	The material was gathered in bulk
form, copied, and then, in turn, was sent to me, and my research assistant and I went through the material trying to determine what
was most related to the questions that we were being asked to investigate.
q.	is it accurate to say that you
got more material than you wound up actually using?	.
A.	Yes.
Q.	How did you go about culling out
what you received from History Works?
A.	Well, basically reading through
the material. This is very standard these days with the power of the xerox machine. And I certainly do this in any kind of research that I conduct. You go to an archive and rather than spending an enormous amount of time than, say the old days, when I first started, three by five cards and taking elaborate notes, now you can go in and just xerox and you kind of bulk xerox. And then you will go about the business of cutting down the material, culling to get to the material which ie most directly related to the topic.
Q.	Do you remember -- withdrawn --
the approximate -- withdrawn.
what was the approximate volume of documents gathered by History Works and
sent on to you and Ms. Harrison?
A.	I would say in the thousands.
But I at no time attempted to count them, but I can tell you there is a great deal of material.
Q.	With the material that you did
not wind up using, did you retain it?
A.	Yes, yes.
Q.	So that's something that's
available -- in other words, it's in what I'll call a discard pile?
A.	Well, for me, yes, it's in a
discard pile but I don't -- I'm not aware of what has been sent to you, so I can't quite answer that. I can't answer that question.
Q.	I understand the issue. Okay.
MR. KOETHE: Just for the record, Steve, I think that, as far as my understanding, we've basically sent you everything, so everything that was collected.
MR. CRANDALL: Counsel, was there any notation in the material that was sent in terms of what was in the discard pile versus what the expert is intending to rely upon at trial?
MR. KENNARD: Would you ask that question again, please.
MR. CRANDALL: Sure. Was there any notation made in terms of what was in the discard pile versus what is the material upon which the expert intends to rely at trial?
MR. KOETHE: It's my understanding, Steve, that all that material was shipped to you, without any specific demarcation on our part.
MR. CRANDALL: Okay.
BY MR. CRANDALL;
Q.	All right. Dr. Martin, once you
got through -- and this may not be an exact step-by-step journey we're on. But is there anything else that History Works did in connection with helping you other than what you've already described?
A.	Not that I can think of.
Q.	And did -- how did you
communicate with Miss Fife? Was it all by telephone?
A.	Yes. Except there may have been
two or possibly three occasions when she and I actually were in Columbus at the same time.
Then we would have communicated directly.
Q.	Did she ever -- did she send you
cover letters or anything of that nature with the materials that were passed on from History Works?
A.	No, she did not.
Q.	Do you have e-mail?
A.	Yes, I do.
Q.	Did you communicate with her at
all by e-ma i1?
A.	No, I did not.
Q.	Have you communicated at all with
Mr. Koethe or any other counsel in this case by e-mail?
A.	No, I have not.
Q.	Has any of your research been
formed -- been conducted electronically through which you sent out e-mail requests to anybody?
A.	No.
Q.	All right. Aside from your work
with History Works, what did you do after your trip to Columbus and then your requesting further assistance to help? What’s the next step irl the journey?
A.	Well, I also participated --
besides trying to manage the research operation, I participated directly in it. And I made a number of trips to Columbus and worked specifically on newspapers and did a little bit of work with early laws having to do with tobacco use in the state of Ohio.
Those were the two primary areas that I did work on directly myself.
And then I tried to provide overview and management for my research assistant who concentrated on newspapers primarily and to stay in communication with Terry Fife in regard to other types of research efforts.
Q.	I missed it and I apologize. But
you indicated there were two principal things you did. One was early laws research; what was the other?
A.	Newspapers.
Q.	And you indicated that
Miss Harrison also focused on newspapers.
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Did you subdivide the areas of
newspaper research?
A.	Yes. For instance, I did work in
the Akron Beacon Journal, Cincinnati Enquirer. Some work on the Columbus Dispatch. She concentrated on the Cleveland Plain Dealer and the Youngstown Vindicator.
Now, there would have been moments when we may have traded off for just a few moments, but what we tried to do was to divide the papers up so that we could get through them in an expeditious fashion.
Q.	And tell me exactly what you --
well, not exactly. Withdrawn.
Tell me generally speaking how you would go through a newspaper and what you would look for.
A.	Pretty much the same -- this
would be a very standard research method that one would use working, I think, on any historical topic. We identified certain kinds of key dates where we could expect there might well have been coverage of issues, and then we went to the newspapers and we would look to see what kinds of coverage there was. And if, indeed, there turned out to be coverage, then we would make copies of that material and that
material would have been included in all the documents that have been forwarded to you.
Q.	And did the process entail
looking through microfiches of newspapers principally?	.
A.	Yes. Primarily microfilm, I
believe that one of the papers, the Youngstown Vindicator, they did not begin the microfilming process until -- I can't give you an exact date. Let's say sometime in the mid to late 1960s, so that we actually had to work with the original paper which is far more difficult because of the sheer bulk and size of handling the paper.
Q.	So the research -- a fair amount
of the research actually involves sitting in front of a microfilm screen and scrolling down - -
A.	Yes.
Q.	-- looking for particular things?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you centered your research
around key dates?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Can you tell me -- and if you
want to, we're going to have this marked at some point. We can do it right now -- which is your expert report. So maybe we ought to have this marked as Exhibit 1.
MR. CRANDALL: Counsel, I have copies here for you but I can sort of see that it looks like you already have one so . . .
(Deposition Exhibit No. 1 was marked for identification and is annexed hereto.)
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	I place before you Exhibit 1,
Dr. Martin. Is that your expert statement in this case?
A.	Yes, it is.
Q.	Now, you don't have to refer to
it if you don't need to for my next question. But in terms of your research during the 20th century, were there certain key dates that stand out in your mind and about which you centered your microfilm research when looking through newspapers?
A.	Yes, there were.
Q.	Can you tell me what those were?
A.	Well, there actually are several
of them, so I'm not sure whether I can honestly remember them all.
Q.	Okay.
A.	But I could give you some
examples.
Q.	Hell, I'd like to do, if you can
do it, more than examples but less than exhaustion -- less than an exhaustive list.
In other words,' what I'd like you to do is, either sitting here or if you want to flip through your report, that's fine. But just to get an idea of what you consider to be some of the watershed dates, if there are any, in connection with your research.
A.	Okay.
Q.	In the 20th century.
A.	All right. Primarily the dates
are after 1950 that we key-dated. And the first major key date would be in June of 1954 when preliminary information began to appear in the press nationally with respect to a study by the - - sponsored by the American Cancer Society of 187,000 white males between the ages of 50 and 70. The study being conducted by S. Cuyler Hammond and Daniel
Horn -- C-u-y-l-e-r on Cuyler. And the conclusion that they were coming to is that those who smoked and smoked heavily were more likely to develop lung cancer and more likely to have heart - related problems.
And the story generated a tremendous amount of national coverage in newspapers and actually in some magazines as well. But since we're concentrating on newspapers, that would be one key date.
A second key date would be in 1957. Again, this would be Hammond and Horn. And this is in, as I remember, June and July of 1957. And, again, what is involved here is beginning to announce through, at the American Medical Association convention, the final results of this four-year study confirming the earlier patterns that were reported in 1954.
Another key date in 1957 had to do with the Surgeon General's announcement -and again these dates are - - as I recall most of these dates are in July. The Surgeon General, Leroy Burney by name, made an announcement - - and that announcement is actually quoted in my report -- to the effect
that there might be -- and I'm paraphrasing here -- some causative relationship between smoking and lung cancer.
Another key date, in 1959 -- I think this is 1959. This would be another one of these prosopographical studies involving 200,000 World War I veterans. The individual in charge of the study, Harold Dorn, was working for the federal government. And his study, too, concluded that individuals with -who were smokers had a greater likelihood of developing lung cancer. And so there is media coverage of that story.
Another key date would be 1962 and this is in the spring of 1962. The announcement in England that the Royal College of Physicians had concluded formally that smoking was bad for one's health, that perhaps governmental actions or remedial actions of some kind should be taken.
This, in turn, led to yet another key date, the decision in the summer of 1962 to appoint a committee to advise and to report back to the Surgeon General on questions having to do with smoking and health.
That, in turn, probably resulted in what would be, of key dating certainly, the major one, January of 1964. And that is the public announcement of the report by this committee to the Surgeon General, entitled Smoking and Health. And this report garnered massive national coverage, may have *• well have been -- although this is only a guess on my part -- the most covered -- that is in terms of newspaper coverage, the most covered story of the 1960s.
In turn, the Surgeon General's report led to various actions, one of which would be warning label legislation, putting some sort of a warning label on the actual pack of cigarettes -- packs of cigarettes.
And that would be debated and resolved - - and I'm trying to remember. I believe that the key date there is June or perhaps it's July of 1965. And so we would look for a newspaper coverage there.
Then there would be other kinds of events moving beyond 1965, looking for perhaps coverage having to do with, in 1967, the so-called fairness doctrine with respect
to advertising in which the Federal Communications Commission said that there should be responses to cigarette advertising or there could be responses to cigarette advertising on television. This did engender some media coverage but led to a whole series of public service announcements that appeared regularly on TV beginning in 1967.
Additional key dateB -- and again. I'm trying to do the best I can off the top -- I haven't looked at the list for two or three months maybe. -- would be in 1977, a series of announcements about smoking and health focusing on the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare headed by Joseph Califano. Califano had a major campaign which received extensive media coverage.
And then a final key date that
comes to mind would be the announcement of the -- and this is in -- remember it precisely -- but I think it's in May of 1988. The Surgeon General's report, C. Everett Koop is the signer of that report, in which the statement is made that smoking is an addiction. Smoking cigarettes, I should say,
is an addiction.
So those would be - - that would be a run of some of those key dates.
q.	All right. Now, during your
response, I noticed you appeared to make qualifications saying that these are key dates with respect to newspaper searches that you did.
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. Did you -- in terms
of the other media that you looked at, did you have a different series of key dates or was it -- or did you mean something else by that statement?
A.	No. In terms of media coverage
more generally, I was focusing on newspaper research, per se, and key dates. There will be parallel coverage in, let's say, our news magazines like Newsweek, Time. Reader's Digest haB a whole series of stories but they don't necessarily square with those particular key dates but they deal with some of the issues that are being raised.
Television coverage is very difficult to recapture from the 1950s and
1960s because, frankly, most of what was on television has not been saved, especially in the news category. But after the mid-1960s, there has been at least some effort to preserve news material and that material, while I have not had an opportunity to look at all of it, I've seen a few things which would indicate to me that there would be very extensive television coverage of this - - of these kinds of key date situations.
Q.	And focusing for a moment on TV
coverage, would you have used the same dates -- in other words, say the committee report to the Surgeon General in 1964, the warning label legislation, the fairness doctrine dates, the Califano report, and the Surgeon General's -- Koop report -- to focus your TV research?
A.	Yes. And there is -- for
instance, there was very, very extensive television coverage of the Surgeon General's report. And I have seen -- I believe it is the CBS report, and I've looked at transcripts. And if I am not mistaken, all three of the networks -- but I'm hesitating
because it may have been only two of the three -- did very quickly do major special programming. That is, where they took their regular programs off the air to provide some the Surgeon General's report was announced on a Saturday morning.
The reason for that was there was concern about possible impact on the stock market, so they did announce it on a Saturday morning in a closed meeting. And I believe that these major television programs -special feature programs, 1 guess we might call them -- appeared on Sunday evening, so that yes, there is a parallel. I haven't investigated every Bingle parallel, per se. I did not have the time.
Q.	How did you go about limiting
what you did with respect to TV?
A.	Well, in a certain way you were
limited, as I tried to suggest to you before, by the absence of material. Perhaps I cou-' d tell you an anecdote.
My father was a smoker up until 1954, and he had been reading --he was a reader *-- he read Reader's Digest and he had
been reading various stories in Reader's Digest. He was a subscriber to the Akron Beacon Journal and had read some material in the Akron Beacon Journal.
But on a Sunday afternoon he watched a program - - this was in the summer of 1954 -- by a Bishop Fulton J. Sheen, a very popular commentator at the time. And Bishop Sheen had a program, that I had made an attempt to recover and have failed to recover, that my father watched which said that there is increasing information out there that individuals who smoke may be putting themselves at risk for the development of lung cancer. And so he took it seriously and he put himself on a( program and he stopped smoking.
So -- but to attempt --my point of this is to attempt to recover, let's say, a Sheen program is very, very difficult to do because of for some reason some archive, wherever it might be, didn't save that material. With news programs it's basically impossible, from what I know at this particular point. I know as a good
researcher, you never want to say it's impossible because you never know, you may turn over the stone one day and it may all be there.
Q.	But in terms of methodology, how
did you go about trying to recover what you could recover, say, from the 19 *- mid-1960s forward? In other words, was that an assignment you gave to somebody or did you do the research yourself? How did you go about doing it?
A.	Well, the -- what I have done
myself is that I have looked at -- I've very sparingly looked at some material that is available through an archive at Vanderbilt University. And I have only looked at transcripts; I haven't looked at the specific, let's say, video clips, per se.
Q.	So you went to Vanderbilt to do
this?
A.	No, I did not.
Q.	How did you do the research at
Vanderbilt?
A.	Well, frankly it hasn't from --
my portion of it has not been done yet. But I
looked -- and I guess this would qualify an earlier statement about I looked on the Internet and this archive is available on the Internet. So I reviewed it, the listing of programs they had, and the topics that they had that related to tobacco.
Q.	And how is the Vanderbilt
compilation? How does that appear? In other words, how did you go back and look at -withdrawn.
Using the Vanderbilt compilation, how did you do your research?
A. Well, the Vanderbilt archive begins in 1968. And then it, if I'm not mistaken, becomes more comprehensive after 1968. Again that goes back to the problem of material simply not being saved.
And what I did, I went in and would type in certain kinds of keywords such as "Bmoking" or "tobacco," and then those keywords would register with what would be a summary description, let's say, of what may have been covered on the CBS Evening News at a particular point in time. So that's what I did. I didn't spend very much time doing this
because -- lack of time, primarily. But that's the way one would do that if one would not make the specific -- and I'm sure if you went to Vanderbilt -- although I'm just speculating here -- you would do the research
the same way.
Q,	Okay. In terms of other media
research -- we've talked now about how the newspaper research was done and I think - - and you've given me a glimpse of how the TV research was done. Were there different approaches used for other media?
A.	No. I had already collected a
number of basic items, magazine articles such as those that I mentioned in my statement that appeared in Reader's Digest, Reader's Digest giving very extensive coverage to tobacco-related issues. And also looked at various news magazines such as - - as I mentioned,
Time, Newsweek. There are other articles that appear in other popular magazines such as Consumer Report, so on and so forth. So I already had a base of that fundamental material in place.
Q.	Okay. And how did you have that
base in place?
A.	Well, I compiled that base in
1995 and into 1996 when I worked on a case that - - actually I was deposed in.
Q.	Okay. That was the Burton case?
A.	That was the Burton case.
Q.	And did your research -- what I
guess I'm trying to get at is in terms of compiling that base for the Burton case, did you use the same research methodology that you used for this case or was there anything different in what you did, aside from, let's say, location, one state being different?
A.	Right. No. Fundamentally we - -
I would either have a research assistant look through the magazines or I would find someone who had copies of the material or whatever it might be or actually go and dig it out. And so there is a - - there's kind of a fundamental research base there that isn't going to change, regardless of circumstance. I mean, that is just a fundamental historical base, or base of historical documents.
Q.	And that base of historical
documents was accumulated in the same way as
you did in this case; that is, looking at key dates and focusing your search around those dates in various types of media?
A.	Yes.
q.	All right. I want to just skip
back for a moment to the statement you made about your father. I overheard -- is he still alive?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And is he living in Ohio?
A.	Yes.
Q.	How long has he lived there?
A.	His whole life.
Q.	Did you grow up in Ohio?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And how long did you live there?
A.	I lived in Ohio until I graduated
from college. And that meant -- I was 22.
I've not lived in Ohio since the age of 22.
Q,	All right. Now, you indicated
that your father was a smoker; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Por what period of his life was
he a smoker?
A.	He started smoking when he was in
college in the 1930s. And he stopped in 1954, so let's say 20 years, approximately; maybe
not quite 20 years.
Q.	And you mentioned, I think, that
he put himself in a program?
A.	No, he had his own program. His
personal program - - and he may have read this in some magazine was -- and this is what he's told me because we've talked about it many times. -- that day one he had 20 cigarettes, day two he had 19, day twenty he had one, if that would be right. Or day 19 he would have had one and day 21 he had zero and he's never smoked since. He's 84 years old and very alive and active today.
Q.	And again what was the program
that was his inspiration to quit? it had something - -
A.	It was -- this is a very
well-known Roman Catholic bishop, Fulton J. Sheen, spelled capital S-h-e-e-n. And Bishop Sheen was very, very -- I mean, it was just one of the popular television shows of the '50s. It may well have been a syndicated program. I really don't know for sure. But
he would talk on a whole variety of issues, social issues and also political issues. As I remember, one of his major concerns was the fall of Eastern Europe and the impact that that had on the Roman Catholic Church.
Q.	Was your father particularly
religious or did he view Bishop Sheen as a commentator, a social commentator?
A.	I believe he would view him as a
commentator. My father's not a Roman Catholic.
Q.	Okay. I also think I heard you
say a moment ago that, regarding the Vanderbilt research, something to the effect that my portion has not been done yet. Do you remember that?
A.	I just -- it is one of many
things that I haven't been able to spend as much time with as I would like to have had time. Does that make sense?
Q.	It does. But it alro causes re
to follow up. What are some of the other things that you would have had -- you would have liked to have more time to do in connection with your research in this case?
A.	Probably I would have liked to
have -- although I think we found a great deal of material -- have tried to have found some way to get at more local information with respect to a host of programs having to do -on the local level in Ohio, specifically, having to do with smoking and health-related issues. I think we, in the time frame, were able to come out with a great deal of information but one could always say more.
One of the problems that I think any good researcher has is no matter how much you do, you feel like you've never done enough.
That's -- and then, in turn, I have to advise my own graduate students: At some point you have to stop doing research and you have to put your results down.
Q.	Are you through with your
research or is that ongoing as we speak?
A.	There are - -
Q.	And I'm talking --
A.	Right.
Q,	Just so it's clear, I'm talking
about in this case.
A.	In this case. There are some
documents that I haven't gotten to yet that I still need to review. And that is a reflection of the sheer volume of the material in relation to the amount of time that I have had available to look at the material,
Q.	And what are those documents?
Just generically, what are those documents that you haven't had time to review yet?
A.	They would -- many of them would
be various kinds of state and local documents that would have been gathered along the way by Terry Fife and her researchers.
And then the other thing I guess I should add would be I would like to get back to television and even radio but radio is -if it's hard to recapture television in the '50s and the '60s, it's really, really difficult with radio when it gets beyond kind of the standard programs that people listened to. When I was a little kid we listened to the radio, but today I can't even remember what the standard programs are in many ways.
Q.	Did you do your radio --
withdrawn.
Have you done radio research in
this case?
A.	We have -- and this -- Terry Fife
did find a program from 1946 in which a respected ** I'm trying to remember the name.
I think it was Cameron, Dr. Cameron, a respected doctor affiliated with Ohio State University, made a presentation about the health consequences, possible health consequences associated with smoking. And for some reason this particular tape of this particular program had been saved in an archive at Ohio State University. Cameron was a very prominent member of the Ohio State community, and it may well have been in his papers.
Q.	Okay. And with respect to TV and
radio research, what is it that you're intending to do between now and, say, the time of trial in this case?
A.	Well, I would like to spend more
time looking for television-related material. Radio is -- it's a very, very difficult -because the likelihood of, as I said before, finding anything with respect to radio is very slim.
Q.	And in terms of your research
with respect to Vanderbilt, what is it in addition that you expect to do between now and the time of trial?
A.	I would like to spend more time,
I guess to use a research term, working the documents; that is, the actual transcript summaries that are there, to see what program material might be available and then, in turn, to have an opportunity to review some of that actual video material.
Q.	And is there anything else?
We've covered three categories. Is there anything else that you intend to do by way of additional research between now and the time of trial?
A.	Not that I can think of at this
time.
MR. CRANDALL: Why don't we take a very short break. You can go off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're going off the record, approximately 10 o'clock A.M.
(A recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Coming back on the record," approximately 10:07 A.M.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
q.	Dr. Martin, I want to get back to
the types of research you undertook and the sequence of events leading to the preparation of your statement of expert report which is Exhibit 1, And we digressed a little bit following what, I think, you indicated was your trip to Columbus to do newspaper research and research regarding the early laws. Can we go back now to that trip and focus on the research that you did with respect to the early laws.
A.	Yes. One consideration, from my
point of view, was what actions were taken on the part of the State within not only a context of understanding what may have been awareness about tobacco, the issues that we have identified, but also what Ohio was doing relative to the nation and what I was able to determine was that Ohio was very much in sequence with the rest of the nation in regard to addressing tobacco-related issues.
Q.	How so?
A.	Many states in the 1880s and
1890s passed laws which in some way restricted
tobacco use and consumption. Ohio was characteristic of a great many states by passing a law in 1888 which declared it unlawful for minors, those under the age of 15, to consume tobacco products. And though that law, the 1888 law, would be modified every a period of years and the age would ultimately be raised to 18. And that was in approximately 1910.
Q.	How did you go about finding this
information out about laws in Ohio and Ohio being in sequence with the nation?
A.	Well, I already had a fairly good
sense of the national picture. The number of states that will restrict in this time frame will restrict tobacco use in regard to minors -- well, I can't give you a specific number. The figure that sticks is somewhere in the mid-30s; that is, a great number of them would be doing so in the 1880s and the 1890s. Some states -- a total of 15, as a matter of fact, if my count is correct -- will go even farther during that period beginning in the 18 -- early 1890s and down into the 1920s will actually adopt prohibition laws,
per se; that is, no consumption and/or use of tobacco -- production consumption and/or use of tobacco in that state. So you would have statewide prohibition for everyone, not just for minors.	,
So in Ohio -- I guess I should complete this. In Ohio that type of a bill, complete prohibition, will be debated on two or perhaps -- I'm sorry -* I believe it was three occasions in the early 20th century but the state for what various reasons or the legislators at the moment did not choose to go in the direction of total prohibition.
Q.	How did you go about researching
the debates that took place within the Ohio legislature during the early 20th century?
A.	It's very, very difficult to get
at the actual debates because the legislative minutes are really summaries of actions taken. For instance, in 1888, the legislature, in considering some sort of a bill to prohibit minors from using tobacco products, referred that bill to what was called the medical college committee. That probably indicated that they considered this a medical-related
issue because there was also a temperance committee, and it was not referred to that particular committee. The medical committee, in turn, recommended favorably on the bill and then you can track -- while they do not literally have the debate, per se, available in any way, shape, or form, you can track what is happening, it will come out of committee and individuals will offer amendments.
And in this case those individuals were debating the issue of what the age should be. And some argued it should be as low as 13; others saying we don't need an age, that this is a matter of family decision whether you smoke; and others were arguing even at that time as high as 18. So that was actually what was debated out by virtue of the - - one can assume this on the basis of the amendment process. So that would be the way that 1 would evaluate these materials.
Q.	Okay. Following -- withdrawn.
About how much time did you spend doing the research regarding the early laws, approximately?
A.	I would say -- I'm guessing at
this -- five or six days, something along that particular line.
Q.	And did you spend most of the
time looking at the actual session laws, committee reports, and legislative minutes?
A.	Yes. I would begin with the
legislative minutes because I could go to indexes. And then it would be possible to flesh out from the index to trace the bill, the fate of the bill through the legislative process. Some bills, as we know, go nowhere, they die in committee, never appear again; other bills will go through the whole process and ultimately will be signed off by the governor. And that's what I would do is I would track them to see what would be going on.
Q.	Did you also -- well, withdrawn.
Were you able to undertake research to look at whether certain groups' individuals spoke in favor or against the legislation? Say the American Cancer Society or things of that nature.
A.	Right. No. At least with the
early laws, the -- the modern voluntary health organizations would not have been in place at that particular time. I can't give you a specific date, but if I'm not mistaken, the -roughly speaking, the American Heart Association comes into existence, I think, sometime in the late 1890s; the predecessor of the American Cancer Society, around 1915.
These organizations are not quite in place.
The laws are actually coming before these organizations are there.
In turn, I did try to do some probing, but I found it virtually impossible in terms of was there some sort of newspaper coverage. And I could not -- I could not really come up with clear connections.
Q.	Did any of your research indicate
any forms of lobbying by anybody in connection with any of these laws?
A.	Not with respect to the -- not
with respect to the early ones. I could -- I could find out a little bit about particular legislators who may have been sponsoring bills, but that would not tell you a great deal. 'There didn't seem to be any pattern;
that is, they didn't come from any part of the state, necessarily urban, necessarily rural, or whatever else it might be.
Q.	Okay. All right. Following --
and did this -- I take it that the five to six days you spent, or approximately, regarding this research on tobacco laws was not all done at the trip in Columbus; is that true?
A. No. It was probably done -- yes, all the research was done in Columbus at the state library. And it probably occurred over two or three trips.
Q.	Okay. Now, putting in sequence
your research and the preparation of your report, following your trips to Columbus -let me withdraw it.
Where I was, at least in my own mind -- and I need you to correct me if I'm wrong -- is that you had met with Mr. Koethe, you had then done some preliminary research, you had then requested further assistance, and then you divided up tasks and then began your own research. And we had stopped with a trip to Columbus. Is that a fair brief recap?
A.	Yes,
Q.	Okay. What happened after your
trip to Columbus -- withdrawn.
Approximately when was your first trip to Columbus regarding newspaper research and early laws research?
A.	That would have been in July of
1998. I made two trips to Columbus in that particular month, facilitated by the fact that I drove from Texas to Ohio to visit family.
Q.	Okay. In the sequence of your
research for your opinions in this case, what did you do after your Columbus trip, as best you remember?
A.	Well, what I did was ultimately
tried to, as rapidly as one could, distill the information and sit down and prepare a statement.
Q.	Were there any other field trips
that you did or visits to libraries or institutions other than what you've already testified about?
A.	Yes. I made a trip to Cleveland
and I did so because the Cleveland public library holds in their special collections the second largest collection of materials
relating to tobacco issues in the United States. This is the Gries Collection. It's spelled, I believe, G-r-i-e-s-s (sic) . I think that's the way it's spelled or it may be e-i. And I worked in a variety of publications, pamphlets, and publications -primarily pamphlets and short books that I had not seen before that really helped me, I think, even improve my understanding of the pamphlet literature that has been there for - -well, for more than a century, if not a century and a half.
Q.	And when did you make this
Cleveland trip to the Gries Collection?
A.	I made that trip in early
December.
Q.	How much time did you spend
there?
A.	I was in the -- I spent, I
believe, approximately two and a half days.
Q.	What are the kinds of things that
are available at the Gries Collection regarding tobacco?
A.	Well, as I said, primarily
pamphlet literature and books relating to
tobacco. For instance, one of the earliest pamphlets they have, dated approximately 1837, was a lecture given at Western Reserve University -- then in Hudson, Ohio, long before the institution moved into Cleveland, by a noteworthy faculty member - - in which he addressed issues having to do with tobacco and -- in an attempt to encourage people not to use or consume tobacco products. So that would be one of the earliest pamphlets.
And I looked, then, at a range of pamphlets and/or books down to approximately the 1960s. That was what I was able to do in a two and a half day period. That is a collection involving -- I can't give you an exact number. I'm going to say 2 or 3,000 volumes. That's very much an estimate. And I probably was able in that time frame to look at 100 to 150 items.
Q.	Okay. Do any of the pamphlets,
books, or materials have to do with advertising by the tobacco industry?
A.	Not in regard to the ones that I
looked at. I didn't see anything, no.
is not a question in terms of what you looked at. 1 was just asking you a question generally about the Gries Collection.
A.	Yes.
Q.	To your -- and I wasn't clear
from your response so I wanted to follow up.
To your knowledge, did the Gries Collection or does the Gries Collection contain materials having to do with tobacco advertising?
A.	Not in my -- now, there may well
be something there, but in my review of the card catalog, which had to be done actually ahead of time -- some of it did -- because the collection, per se, is not housed at the library because of space consideration, so you do have to plan ahead a little bit before you go there. But in terms of the portions of the card catalog that I was able to review, I do not recall specifically anything on advertising.
Gries was a collector and then shortly before his death he turned this collection over to the Cleveland public library.
that this collection was probably the second largest collection.
A.	Yes.
Q.	What's the first largest
collection?
A.	The largest collection is housed
at the New York public library. It is called the George Arents, A-r-e-n-t-s, Collection.
And it would comprise in terms of numbers if -- let's say if Gries would be in the 2 to
3.000	range, Arents would be in the 11 to
12.000	range in terms of numbers of documents and/or books.
Q.	And are these -- what are the
topics involved in the Arents Collection?
A.	Pretty much anything having to do
with tobacco going back into the 16th century. Let's say approximately 1550 to about 1900, Arents was a collector of rare books with a specific kind of focus, and in addition there are some letters. He was interested in th» tobacco trade, so there are some letters in that collection. But those letters -- I shouldn't say "but." Those letters do focus on primarily the 18th century.
Q.	Okay. So it's books, pamphlets,
letters, and things of that nature?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And does the Arents Collection
have any materials associated with tobacco advertising?
A.	1 have not visited the Arents
Collection since 1994, approximately. I do not recall materials specifically on tobacco advertising.
Q.	Okay. All right. We have then
the Columbus trips that you took in about July of '98 and a trip to the Cleveland public library in December of 1998.
A.	Um-hum.
Q.	Were there any things that you
did in the field or outside the office prior to - - well, I have to withdraw that.
I think the date of Exhibit 1 is November 17, 1998; is that true?
A.	I believe so, yes.
Q.	So your trip to Cleveland
followed the preparation of your expert report?
A.	Yes. Yes. And I believe that's
covered here as saying that I'm doing ongoing research.
Q.	Okay. I understand that.
A.	Okay.
Q.	I'm not suggesting anything
improper about it.
A.	Okay.
Q.	I'm just trying to put the date
in focus.
A.	Okay.
Q.	All right. But let me then
expand the issue forward. Since your December 1998 trip to the Cleveland public library, have you done any other out-of-office research connected with this case?
A.	No, I have not.
Q.	Okay. And prior to the date that
you prepared this report or finalized this report November 17th of 1998, did you do anything outside the office in terms of field research, trips or anything, other than what you've already testified about?
A.	While I can't give you specific
dates, I made one trip to Columbus in September. I think the primary focus of that
was to work on newspapers. I made one trip in October. Again the primary focus was to continue the work on newspapers. And I know there was one trip in November too, that I'm recalling right now at least.
Q.	Devoted toward newspaper
research?
A.	Yes. And also to try to catch
some -- well, what one always has to concern oneself with in any research project, some loose end -- some loose ends. For instance -I'll give you an example. I had become aware in the process of doing this research that there were some local newspapers beyond the larger papers that I wanted to see if -- take a look at, at least some spot-checking. And, in turn, that there were a number of union newspapers, and I wanted to do some spot - checking. And some of those union newspapers are housed at the Ohio historical society.
Q.	And what, if anything, of
significance did you find with regard to union newspapers at the Ohio historical society?
papers that were there and in other parts of the state, and then in turn, the actual review of those papers going into them because of my own time constraints, that was carried out by Terry Fife.
Q.	And what were the results of your
collective research?
A.	With respect to the union
newspapers?
Q.	Yes.
A. We came up with quite a bit of material. The papers that had the best runs were one in Toledo. The names are very, very similar. Like the one in Lorain, Ohio, outside of Cleveland I believe is called the Lorain Union Leader. The one in Toledo was called, like, the Toledo Union Journal. I may be mixing these up slightly because the names are so similar.
There was a good run of a Dayton union newspaper covering the '60s and the '70s. There was a Summit County, the Akron area union newspaper. I think it's called the Summit County Union News, something like that.
And in addition, in terms of the
good runs, there was a paper called the URW, which would be the United Rubber Workers paper. So these would be -- there are a few others but the runs in terms of what was actually saved, there was so little you couldn't do anything with it. That happens with some papers. They're just not, for whatever reason, saved in an archive.
Q.	Okay. And with respect to the
union newspapers, did you use the -withdrawn.
With respect to the union newspapers, did you apply the same research techniques that you earlier testified about or did you do something different with respect to these?
A.	We did -- tried to -- because the
dates, for instance, would be so limited and in -- many of these are weeklies, for instance, as opposed to being dailies. And I think one of them is actually a monthly.
We couldn't quite do it the same way, so it would be a matter of taking the run that was there and looking to see what kinds of coverage they would give to health-related
issues. That is the way I advised Terry Fife that I would like the work done because it simply is not complete -- as complete a body as you would find with the major dailies in the state.
Q.	So rather than limit the research
around a particular date, Miss Fife was instructed basically to go through the whole range of materials with respect to these union newspapers and pick out health-related type things?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. And how long do you
know that research took?
A.	That's a good question. I can't
give you a specific number.
Q.	Approximately, if you can.
A.	I would say probably -- once the
collection was identified and located, most being in Columbus, some elsewhere -- that probably -- because these are not long runs; that is, like one paper might have the 1960s, one might have the 1970s -- probably a day or two. I would guess probably two weeks. I mean, I*m stabbing.
Q.	Okay. Have we then -- with these
Columbus trips that you've identified to tie up loose ends, have we pretty much exhausted the field research you did in connection with preparing your expert opinions in this case?
A.	Yes, I made one trip -- I'm
sorry. I made two trips to Chicago or to the Chicago area to Oak Park, Illinois, to visit with Terry Fife. The first trip actually occurred when I was in Ohio in July, flew out to Chicago. And that was to discuss overall research plans.
And then the second trip was in late October and - - I guess I should say of 1998, I'm just assuming that all the way through. And that -- the purpose of that trip was sort of to do a review of the materials that had been pulled together to date, many of which I had not yet seen.
Q.	Okay. And did you meet at her
offices and go through the materials that she had accumulated?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. And were there any
written materials that either of you prepared
in anticipation of the meeting?
A,	NO.
Q.	And did you make any notes or any
kind of handwritten or typewritten memoranda regarding either the July or the October meetings?
A.	I don't believe I did.
Q.	And with respect to those Chicago
trips, was there anything else that you discussed other than what you've already told me about?
A.	No. As I said, the purpose of
the first meeting was sort of to get organized, and the purpose of the second meeting was to review materials of various types and kinds that primarily Miss Fife and her researchers had collected and that I had not seen as yet.
Q.	All right. All right. With that
Chicago trip added to the mix, are there any other trips that you recall taking in connection with preparing your expert opinions in this case?
A.	I don't believe so. I think I've
covered everything.
Q. . All right. Then let's focus now on your in-office work. Aside from actually reviewing the accumulated research from various people, how did you go about preparing your expert report? In other words, what are the things that you did?
A.	Hell, what I tried to do in the
expert report was to state up front what my assignment was and then to offer categories of information that would suggest the very high levels of public awareness with respect to the two questions that I was asked to investigate and then basically to provide a summary. So I basically sat down and wrote a report.
Q.	Okay. And over what period of
time did you write the report?
A.	I would say probably -- x would
say -- I'm going to give you -- the basic drafting was done over a three-day period in which I didn't do anything else.
Q.	From when to when, if you
remember?
A.	I'm going to say early November.
But what specific date, I can't give you - - I mean, may have been November 5th and 6th,
something like that; 7th. In that time frame.
Q.	And did you compose it by hand or
did you do it on a laptop or a computer?
A.	I did it on a computer. I long
since switched all writing over to the computer.
Q.	All right. And did you print out
any drafts of your report?
A.	Yes, I did but I don't save
drafts because they only confuse me. Once I've gone to the next version, I get rid of the previous version or I will become confused.
Q.	Okay. And what was the - - in
terms of the drafts that you did, did you send your drafts to anybody else or just use them yourself?
A.	I would say before I showed the
document to anyone, I probably worked it through three or four times. That's my normal way of writing. And that has to do with having the right foe- -- trying to have the right -- to try to communicate with the right focus on content and also to try to communicate with clear writing. Because as a
writer, I throw sentences into a paragraph and then I have to organize them because quite often initially they make no sense to anyone, including me. So I have to go through the classic one, two, three routine where I line things up so that it becomes coherent.
Q.	At some point in time did you
come up with a draft that you then circulated to anybody?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	When was that and how was the
circulation done?
A.	I sent a draft to Jones, Day in
Columbus, I'm going to say sometime around the -- and this is the reason I guessed at the early dates -- around the 10th of November.
Q.	And what happened after you sent
the draft to Jones, Day?
A. we talked about the draft a couple of times on the phone and -- and I'm sorry -- Terry Fife looked at it.
Q.	Okay.
A.	And so we talked about it a
couple of times on the phone. Basically what you have here is what I initially submitted.
Q.	Okay. So there were no changes
made between the time you sent a draft to Jones, Day and to Terry Fife and the final report?
A.	I'll give you an example of a
change. I thought the initial incarnation of the - - what is today the American Lung Association. It was called the American Tuberculosis Association and Terry Fife corrected me and said no, it was the National Tuberculosis Association. So those are the kinds of - - those are some of the kinds of changes that would have been made.
Q.	Were those changes made -- were
those changes faxed to you or just given to you over the phone?
A.	Those were factual in nature, and
I incorporated them immediately.
Q.	You didn't hear me clearly. I
apologize.
A.	Oh, I'm sorry.
Q.	Were those changes actually faxed
to you?
A.	Oh, you mean faxed?
Q:	Faxed.
A.	Faxed. Oh, I’m sorry. I thought
you meant fact- I'm sorry.
Q.	Okay.
A.	No, they were a product of
discussions over the phone.
Q.	Okay. Were they -- and who was
the representative or representatives of Jones, Day who were on the phone with you?
A.	Well, I talked to - - I'm trying
to remember. I think I talked to, at various points, I remember at one point -- I'm going to say Todd Kennard, on my left, was a person I had discussions with.
Q.	What about Mr. Koethe?
A.	I'm trying to remember whether
that was the case, whether he and I ever talked about the report. We may have. If it was, it was a very brief conversation. I don't recall.
Q.	And was Ms. Fife on the phone at
the same time with Mr. Kennard?
A.	No.
Q.	So those were two separate phone
calls?
A.	Right.
Q.	And were you -- did you get --
did Mr. Kennard give you any input into your report?
A.	Well, he -- we talked about
various parts of - - we talked about various parts of the report and he told me that various individuals that liked the report and thought it was a clear statement. I don't remember anything of any - - there may have been a comma here or comma there or remove this or that sort of thing. But the thrust of the comments were largely of a mechanical nature.
Q.	And do you have a copy of the
drafts that you sent to Mr. Kennard or Miss Fife?
A.	No, l do not.
Q.	What happened to those?
A.	As I said, I - - as I go through
drafts, I simply work right on top of the	-
previous draft on the computer and the previous draft is gone and I throw away the copies because if I don't do that, I become confused.
of handwritten notes or typewritten notes in connection with your discussions with Mr. Kennard or Miss Fife as you prepared your report?
A.	If I did, they would have been on
the drafts that I no longer have.
Q.	Did either of those individuals
send you anything in writing?
A.	No, they did not.
Q.	At least from my review of the
materials, I have seen nothing -- and I could be wrong, so I'm not being accusatory. I'm just saying I have seen nothing with respect to anything having to do with Ms. Fife or her group. Is it accurate to say that you never received anything in writing from that group other than the work: product that she did for you?
A.	Right. That is accurate. She
would send boxes of material to my research assistant, who in turn would organize the material and look through it and then turn it over to me and explain the broad parameters of what had come in.
letters or memoranda, however brief, that came with the materials from Miss Fife?
A.	I don't believe there were. I
never saw any. I did receive a couple of boxes directly, and there was nothing there.
Q.	Did you --do you maintain a file
in connection with your retention in this case? In other words, do you have your own file that says Ohio Ironworkers case or something like that?
A.	Not necessarily, no.
Q.	Okay. Do you have a retainer
agreement with Jones, Day or with the tobacco companies ?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form of the question; vagueness.
A.	I don't know what you mean by a
retainer fee.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. No, I didn't mean fee. Do
you have any kind of a written arrangement with anyone regarding the services you're providing in this case?
A.	No, no.
Q.	All right. So that is all
verbal? In other words, there's a verbal understanding?
A.	Well, verbal in the sense, yes,
they've asked me to do certain things and I've tried to do them and report back.
Q.	Okay. But you haven't reduced
that to a contract of any sort?
A.	No, there's no contract.
Q.	Have you billed for your work?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And how have you done that?
A,	I send in monthly statements.
Q.	Okay. And as of today, do you
have an idea of how much you have billed so far in connection with your work in this case?
A.	At most I can give you a rough
estimate. I would say that -- something in the area of $25,000, perhaps a bit more, a bit less.
Q.	Okay. And what about
Ms. Harrison? Does she also bill for her work?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And about how much has she
billed?
A.	That's a good question. I would
say it's somewhere in the area of $10,000.
Q.	What is her billing rate, if you
know?
A.	$25 per hour.
Q.	And are there any other types of
billing that you have done or anyone working for you has done -- well, withdrawn.
Do you have any idea how much Ms. Fife and her group have billed Jones, Day or the tobacco industry?
A.	No.
Q.	Are there any other individuals
who, to your knowledge, have been working for and therefore billed either Jones, Day or the tobacco industry in connection with your research?
A.	I don't think I'm aware of
anyone.
Q.	Now, we were provided with a --
one copy of your Burton deposition which I think took place in 1996. Is that what you remember?
A.	Yes, February of 1996.
since then?
A. No, I have not.
Q.	Prior to that date had you been
disposed on any occasion?
A.	No.
Q.	So this is basically the second
deposition you've ever provided in your life?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Nov, have you ever testified at a
trial of any sort, ever?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. In connection with your
testimony here today, did you meet with anyone prior to this -- today to go over your testimony?
A.	Yes. I met with Hr. Koethe and
Mr. Kennard. He had a meeting. I'll give you -- I believe it was December 21st here in Houston. And we met briefly yesterday, and we also had a very brief meeting -- I had forgotten about that -- in Cleveland at the time when I was doing the research in the Gries Collection. And that would have been approximately December 10th.
let's go chronologically backwards.
A.	Okay.
Q.	You met briefly with both of them
yesterday?
A.	Yes.
Q.	About how long did you meet with
them?
A.	Well, Mr. Koethe's plane was
delayed, so that makes it a tricky question to answer. I'm not trying to be evasive.
Q.	Well, let me break it up.
A.	Okay.
Q.	How long did you meet with
Mr. Kennard?
A.	We had lunch together and talked
for about an hour or so afterward.
Q.	Okay.
A.	And then we took a break until
Mr. Koethe arrived. And I'm guessing at the time. I think it was around 4:30, quarter to 5. And then we talked for maybe an hour and a half and that was it.
Q.	Tell me in as much detail as you
are able, taking into account it was yesterday, what you talked about. And I'm not
talking -- and I want to omit from the discussion weather, family, things unrelated to your testimony and I want to -- but I want to have you detail for me as best you can remember from yesterday what you talked about in terms of things of relevance to this case and this deposition today.
A.	We talked about -- reviewed the
material that I've tried to summarize in my statement, and we talked about various kinds of questions that I might be asked relative to that material. I guess that's pretty much a description of what we did.
Q.	Okay. In terms of the questions
you might be asked, could you just list for me as many of those as you remember. In other words, was this more than ten questions or subject matters or can you -*
A.	No, no. It was basically had to
do with questions about the material, per se, and the matter of focusing on that material and trying to describe that material as honestly and as fairly and as completely as I could.
take out of the mix any questions that either of these gentlemen talked with you in terms of procedure; that is, to not interrupt one another and to tell the truth and to -- things of that nature. But I want to talk about substantive areas that may have -- that they touched upon you about where I might ask you questions. You know, the examiner might ask you this or he might ask you that.
A.	Right, right, right.
Q.	What are some of the things that
you remember?
A. well, certainly I think the major item we talked about was to be prepared which is, I think, important to do to discuss research methodology, and I think we have discussed that. And that would have been a primary focus of our discussion. And we also discussed the matter of maintaining a focus on my area of expertise.
Q.	Okay. Would you consider those
to be the two major substantive areas?
A.	Yes. Yes.
Q.	Okay. With respect to research
your discussions yesterday with either of these gentlemen that was different from what I've been asking you? In other words, did they ask you something about research methodology or pose a question to you about research methodology that I have not covered?
A.	No, I don’t think so. I mean the
purpose of the question was to -- I'm not -■question" isn't the right term. We were really talking about is this what I would normally do when I went about the business of doing research, and the answer to that is, very much, yes.
Q.	Okay. So that the research
methodology questions had to - - were more focused on does this type of research that you did in connection with this case mirror academic research that you would do if you were writing a book or something like that?
A.	That's correct. That's correct.
Q.	All right. Were there any ways
in which your research differed in this case versus what you would do for academic purposes?
A.	Not that I can recall because I
try to follow the same research methods, regardless of circumstances, and I am a great believer in doing comprehensive research, for one tries to draw conclusions from the materials. And that may even mean overresearching, looking beyond what might be obvious, that sort of thing.
And I guess then a second area, that I have traditionally, in my own work, been fortunate enough to have access and availability to research assistants, and I have traditionally used research assistants in gathering information. Those were two things that I remember in particular.
Q.	Okay. Let me go through with you
a little bit then, since we're on the subject, research methodology and your own research methodology. What do you view as the hallmarks of good historic research? It may be stating the obvious but I'd like you to enumerate.
A.	No, I will. I will. I would go
back to my training in graduate school. And that is good research begins in the archives, not by reading some secondary work, and by
that I mean someone who has written about what they have allegedly seen in the archives but by going in and actually mining the documents themselves, looking for the patterns that -of information that would then yield appropriate fair-minded conclusions. So that that is the hallmark of any and all research that I do.
That is not necessarily universal among scholars. I have read many things -I'm sure you have too -- where people have conclusions and then they'll go and sort and hunt and look for what -- they'll look for the documents that will verify their position.
Q.	Okay. In areas of science,
that's sometimes called the scientific method. At least the methodology that is used is supposed to be an unbiased look at the subject, correct?
A.	Right. Yes.
Q.	Is that also something that you
consider to be important in appropriate historic research?
A.	Yes, I consider it essential.
Q.	I've just been touching on some
things, but with the hope that you'll bring up others if you think that they're appropriate, but one point you mentioned was thoroughness, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Another was the use of a
fair-minded, open-minded approach to conclusions to be reached; is that correct?
A.	That's right. Not going in with
conclusions reached. And some researchers do do that and they might as well in many ways not go in because they have predetermined.
And I would guess what I would call that sort of work would be social commentary as opposed to real historical research.
Q.	Okay. So those -- that -- is
that - - that would be a way that you would be comfortable referring to people who go in with an axe to grind or a bias?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. And the other type of
research would be what you label historical research; is that correct?
A.	Right. Right.
My mentor in graduate school said
all serious history and historical work begins in the archives. And that is a foundational principle. That doesn't mean that someone couldn't -- excuse me -- at some point write a work of synthesis that might pull several different interpretations of material together because that is a legitimate form of activity of a legitimate form of writing and perhaps sometimes essential to getting on top of the whole. But it still has to begin at some point in the archives.
Q.	And does the universe of the
search bear on the - - again, may be stating an obvious point but let me ask it a different way.
Does the universe of materials looked for and used in the research bear upon the conclusion? That's too obvious, so I'll withdraw it.
But in conducting archival research, doing the research, does it matter in your opinion that the -- all possible areas that can contribute to a subject matter be utilized in a historian's research?
need to do is you need to look at a whole variety of sources. That's good research.
Q.	Is it important to define
appropriately what you're going to look for before you begin the research?
A.	Oh, you have to have -- yes, you
have to have a plan. You have to say, well, relative to this topic, there are going to be talking about what I call primary source material, there are going to be books, there are going to be pamphlets, there are going to be newspaper articles. There might be visual materials. On down the line, to put the whole array out there because that's essential to the whole process of evaluation of those materials so that, yes, as much as possible to try to look at a whole variety of material.
Q.	And aside from looking at a whole
variety of material, would you also consider it important that you look for everything in that material that bears upon the issue that you've been presented with?
A.	Hopefully yes,
Q.	In other words, one could go and
through newspapers, magazines, TV, and radio and because of what would -- the definition of the search, not look for certain things that would render the conclusions perhaps meaningless, correct?
A.	That's -- yes, that's possible.
Q.	Now, this was -- I had hit on
some points of appropriate research methodology, and I'm not sure whether in my -in your discussion with me now you can come up with any others. One was going to the primary authority, another was fair-mindedness, another was an unbiased approach, not going in with conclusions predetermined and thoroughness. Are there any others that come to mind now in terms of your own standards for appropriate research?
A.	Not at this moment, no.
Q.	Okay.
A.	I may be missing something very
obvious that I should -- I don't think so, though,
Q.	Okay. And if you do, that is --
that's possible, that as I'm posing these questions to you that at some point either
during lunch or in a discussion with counsel or something, you'll say, "Uh, I remember this" or "I forgot that." And I'd just ask you to let me know if that happens so that your testimony can be supplemented, okay.
A.	That's fine.
0.	Let me go to the second point
that was covered during the session yesterday or the sessions or meetings yesterday which had to do with maintaining focus on your expertise. What was it -- withdrawn.
Can you tell me the nature of your discussion more specifically with these gentlemen in terms of what the -- that point of the discussion was?
A.	Yes. If I could give you an
example to remember that the focal point of my work is on public awareness, not necessarily, let's say, on evaluating a medical research report of some type or kind as to its meaning; rather what information circulated to the broader society about that medical or scientific research report, which is the awareness component of the equation.
give you examples of things that would be outside your expertise or probe that issue with you in more detail?
A.	Not that I recall.
Q.	Now, aside from these two - -
withdrawn.
Have I covered with you the sum and substance of what was discussed with you with respect to maintaining the focus on your own expertise?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. And the other major
theme being research methodology; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Can you give me any one question
that either Mr. Kennard or Mr. Koethe asked you specifically about what you might be asked? That was a lousy question, so let me rephrase it.
Did either Mr. Koethe or Mr. Kennard do a mock examination where they would ask you a question pretending that they were the examiner and say -• to see what your response would be on any particular issue?
questions like that yesterday.
Q.	Can you tell me what those
questions were?
A.	Well, I really don't remember in
detail, but I remember sort of something to the effect, well, what is the conclusion of this particular scientific report. As an example - - well, I'm not a medical person. That's not my -- I'm a historian.
So for me to evaluate the meaning of a medical document is pretty irrelevant because I don't know whether the numbers were crunched correctly or that sort of thing or whether the conclusions were necessarily reached fairly. All I would know is that it went through an evaluation process presumably before it was published.
So in that case -- and it serves like a reminder that I should remember that what is important is what appear? in the newspaper, what appears on television, or what may have been heard on radio or on down the line.
Q.	Okay.
part.
Q.	Right. Okay. You gave me, I
think, one type of example.
A.	Yes.	.
Q.	Are there any other specific
questions you can remember having been asked yesterday about what I might ask you?
A.	Host of the questions were very
much like the ones that I just offered. I mean, nothing in particular comes to mind.
Q.	Can you remember any single
question? In other words, can -- and I'm -just so it's clear, what I'm saying, could you take any one question that Hr. Kennard asked you and say, "Well, Mr. Kennard asked me this question” and then repeat it almost verbatim or in substance? Can you do that?
A.	Well, most of our discussion was
not in a question and answer form, so it makes it a little bit difficult for me. I'm not trying to be evasive. I just honestly didn't -- the conversation really wasn't in a -- what is the right way to put it? --a Socratic format.
g.	Okay. Well, that's all -- if
there were none or very few, that's fine. I'm just trying to explore if there were any -*
A.	Okay.
Q.	--and if you can remember one.
A.	Okay.
Q.	So can you remember one?
A.	Well, I gave you that one example
where we talked about --we didn't -- and that was not addressing any particular research or scientific report so much as it was a reminder that I not decide to play medical doctor or something like that, if we could put it that way.
Q.	Okay.
MR. CRANDALL: Why don't we take a break right now for the change of tape, and let's make this 10 minutes.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the end of Tape No. 1. We'll proceed onto Tape No. 2.
The time is approximately 11:06 A.M.
(A recess was taken.)
VIDEOTAPE NO. 2 BEGINS HERE:
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the beginning of Tape No. 2. The time is approximately
11:21 A.M.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, I want to go back
to - -
A.	I don't mean to interrupt --
Q.	Sure.
A.	-- but I just want to clarify the
record on one point that I -- completely slipped my mind.
Q.	Okay.
A.	One of my graduate students - -
his name is Chris Smith -- did do some work on this case. I had forgotten about that	'
altogether. It just slipped my mind. And I asked him to review the depositions and to provide me with summaries. I believe there were some 100 to 110 depositions, and he did do that work. He's done that sort of work before. He does part-time work with a law firm here in Houston. So that was one additional person that just slipped my mind.
Q.	Okay. And Mr. Smith works for
you?
A.	He is a full-time graduate
on his Ph.D. in U.S. history.
Q.	Did you make arrangements to pay
him or did he bill Jones, Day?
A.	I made arrangements to pay him
but his bill was submitted to Jones, Day.
Q.	Okay. And what was his hourly
rate and how much time has he invested?
A.	I believe that his hourly rate
was $20 and I would -- I can almost -- because this was a very specific assignment. I would say that he earned somewhere in the neighborhood of $1200. So we could then, I guess, divide by 20 and come up with the number of hours but - -
Q.	I'm not going to do that.
A.	-- I'm not going to go --
Q.	That's a bad sign that you and I
both can't add and subtract but that's what we're stuck with. Okay, well, thank you for bringing that to my attention. Let me pursue that a little bit with you, though. Did -were these digests of depositions given to you by him?
A.	Yes, they were.
Q.	About how many depositions were
involved?
A.	I think in the end he summarized
approximately 70 to 75 of them.
Q.	Okay. And do you still have
those deposition summaries in your possession?
A.	Yes, I do.
Q.	Okay.
MR. CRANDALL: Counsel, I don't know whether those are in the nine boxes or not, to tell you the truth. It was -- having gotten them three days beforehand, I'm not sure but I would ask that they be produced if they haven't been. I just don't know the answer so I can't say anything one way or the other.
MR. KOETHE: He'll take that under	.
advisement.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Let me follow up with that. Just'
these - *■ you reviewed these deposition summaries either before preparing your report or afterwards in preparing for your deposition in this case?
A.	These were done after
approximately the middle of November so that they would have been after -- they would have
been after my report. I think it's indicated in the report that I'm reviewing the depositions. And the focal point was very much on awareness, awareness-related responses. That was the only thing I asked Chris to do.
Q.	And those summaries were reviewed
in connection with preparing your expert opinions for trial, correct?
A.	I guess, yes, we would say that.
Q.	All right. Now - - and
approximately how long was each summary? And I know -- if they varied, that's fine, but were they one- or two-page summaries or ten-page summaries?
A.	No, there were -- the longest one
would have been a half page, double spaced. They are very brief.
Q. All right. Let me go back then to in terms of preparing your report. Now, the date of your report, which is Exhibit 1, is November 17th, 1998. Is that the day that you actually signed it?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And then you sent it to whom?
A.	I sent it to Todd Kennard in
Columbus.
Q.	All right. And I may have asked
you this already. If I do, I apologize. But after you had your discussions with a draft that you sent to Mr. Kennard and the lady whose name is escaping me right now •-
A.	Terry Fife.
Q.	Right. -- did you do any other
drafts that you had a similar discussion with or did this just happen on one occasion?
A.	It happened on one occasion.
Q.	All right. So then Exhibit 1 was
the result of your research and then having these conversations with Ms. Fife and Ms. Kennard -- or Mr. Kennard.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, before you signed the report
and you put this into final, did you review any materials that the plaintiffs had developed in connection with this case, such as the complaint, for example?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you've described the nature
at the beginning of the deposition.
A.	Yes.
Q.	is there anything else that you
find pertinent to your opinions in this case in the complaint?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form of the question.
MR. CRANDALL: I'll withdraw it.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Did you find anything useful in
the complaint in terms of preparing or - -preparing your opinions or conducting your research?
A.	As I understood the complaint --
and again I would have read this sometime last summer. It assumes that there are not -there's not much public awareness with respect to health problems associated with tobacco and with respect to the alleged addictive qualities of tobacco until the very, very recent past. Based on my general knowledge and research up until that point in time, I was somewhat surprised by that.
Q. And why were you surprised by
that?
A.	Because of the research that I've
done on the subject.	•
Q.	Now, did you review any other
materials that had been prepared by plaintiffs such as expert reports or deposition transcripts before you rendered Exhibit 1 in final form?
A.	No, I don't believe so. I'm
willing to be corrected. I don't believe so.
I did at one point go through, I guess, documents that were produced by the plaintiffs during discovery. So if that would fall in the category of what you are asking about, the answer to that portion would be yes; but no, I have not seen the other materials.
Q.	Okay. Nell, let's take the
materials that you did look at. You say that you looked at some materials that were produced by plaintiffs during discovery?
A.	I thought those were •• yes, I
think that's right, yes.
Q.	What types of materials were
those?
A.	Well, they varied tremendously
charters of the various trustee funds to materials -- let's say the minutes of meetings of the trustees of various funds. Those would be the two primary categories. There was very little there. The trustees did not necessarily put out newsletters so that - - I think there was only one instance where one of the trust funds had actually done a brief newsletter. And that was in the mid to late '80s so that what I was really doing, I guess, was to try to get a sense of the kind of material that had been produced during discovery.
Q.	Okay. Did you find any of those
materials relevant to your task at hand? That is, the trustee charters of the minutes of the meetings or any publications that -A.	Generally speaking, no.
Q.	All right. Now, I take it that
the deposition exercise that Hr. Smith conducted was done after your report was submitted. I think you said that.
A.	That's correct, yes.	.
Q.	Now, what about any expert
this case? Have you reviewed those?
A.	No, I have not.
Q.	Do you know who the experts are
that have been retained by plaintiffs in this case?
A.	No, I do not.
Q.	And are you familiar with an
individual who goes by Dr. Davis? A Dr. Davis?
A.	No.
Q.	All right. And I'll --
A.	There is a Davis who was a major
Union Leader in the '60s. Is that what you're referring to here?
Q.	NO.
A.	Oh, okay. I'm sorry.
Q.	No, no. I'm referring to a guy
named Ronald M. Davis, H.D.	'
A.	No, I am not.
Q.	Okay. All right. Now, let me
turn to some of the substantive areas and opinions that you issued in this case. And if you want, we can -- if it'll -- if you want at any time to refer to Exhibit 1, do bo; and if you don't have to, that's fine too. But as I
reviewed the * - as I reviewed your report, which I think is about 22 pages long, I did not see any references in that report to tobacco advertising. Is that accurate, that you did not look at tobacco advertising in connection with your research?
A.	I did not specifically seek out
tobacco advertising.
Q.	Okay. Why didn't you look at
tobacco advertising in conjunction with the research that you were doing on public awareness?
MR. KOETHE: I will object to the form of the question. I think it mischaracterizes the testimony.
A.	Could you repeat the question,
then?
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Sure. I'll take the objection
and repeat it. Why didn't you -- well, let me rephrase it this way: Did you in connection with any of your research, undertake to find out what types of tobacco advertising were going on contemporaneously with the events that you've described in Exhibit 1?
A.	Well, I've seen tobacco
advertisements, but I'm not really an expert in advertising so . . .
Q.	Okay. I understand that, and I
understand that your field of expertise is historical.
Let me approach it this way:
When you undertook your newspaper research, just for example, you focused on certain key dates that we've already gone over, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	For instance, June 1954, the
American Cancer Society study that was spearheaded by this fellow named Cuyler, right?
A.	Right. E. Cuyler Hammond.
Q.	E. Cuyler Hammond.
A.	Right.
Q.	Okay. Now, when you went back
and did the search for the newspaper stories on the subject, would it have been possible for you to also look for tobacco advertising that was appearing in publications that were right around this same time frame.
Q.	All right. And is that true with
the AMA final report concerning the American Cancer Society research in 1957? In other words, is it also true that you could have gone and done a contemporaneous search for tobacco advertising in the publications that you were looking at in 1957?
A.	I wasn't specifically looking for
tobacco advertising, but I can answer yes at the same time.
Q.	Okay. All right. So your answer
to that is yes, and I see a crack of a smile. What is it that you discovered in terms of tobacco advertising in 1957 as you were doing your other research?
A,	Well, I wasn't thinking of any
one particular item. I mean the key dates were - - we were looking for specific news stories that may have been an important element in public awareness about health related issues and/or so-called habit-forming qualities of tobacco. That's what we were focusing on.
Q.	Right. I understand that. And
right now I'm just asking a series of
questions in terms of whether it would also have been -- I think what you're generally saying is that you did not focus on tobacco advertising because that wasn't your assignment, right?
A.	Yes. Yes.
Q.	What I'm asking you now, though,
is a different question, which is: It would have been possible as a matter of historical research, had you been asked to do so, to go back, for instance in June of 1954, and as you looked at the publications containing public awareness, you could have also with sufficient time and resources looked at tobacco advertising within those same publications, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you could have done that -- I
won't go through each and every date, but with the dates of the AMA final results in 1957,
you could have done that, right?
t
A.	Yes.
Q.	And with Dr. Burney's causative
announcement in 1957, you could have done that, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And for each and every one of
these key dates, that research assignment would have been possible to do, correct?
A.	I believe so. But I don't want
to say yes because I'm not sure how the advertising varied over time or whether there were restrictions placed on it at any point in time.
Q.	I see what you're saying.
A.	I don't want to misstate the
proposition.
Q.	Okay. And you're thinking about
bans on advertising in certain media that occurred over time?
A.	Yes. Yes.
Q.	And I'm not -- I'll be -- let me
clear it up this way: I'm not suggesting that you would have found something.
A.	Yes.
Q.	But in terms of historical
research tools, you could have -- if you'd been given the task to say I want to know all of the tobacco advertising or a representative sample’of tobacco advertising that was going
on right around the same key dates that you've identified, you as a historian could have done that with sufficient resources and time, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And if we go to other media,
aside from newspapers, would your answer be the same? In that had you been tasked to look at tobacco advertising occurring in magazines with key dates you could have done that as well ?
A.	with some magazines, yes. But
with Reader's Digest, for instance, the answer would be no. So it would depend. Some magazines did and they still do, so far as I know, accept tobacco advertising and others did not and do not so that I would have to - -and that may well be true with some newspapers too.
Q.	Okay. But again -- and I'm not
saying that you would have found something.
I'm just talking about the research methodologies, that you as a historian would have had the capabilities to go back and make that search, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. And is the same true
with respect to TV coverage? That is, could you, if assigned to do so, have gone back to try and recapture tobacco advertising during the relevant time period when you were looking for public awareness issues?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And I asked you earlier about --
well, let me just go through and ask you briefly, when you did the research from Vanderbilt regarding local information regarding Ohio, you could have also, had you been tasked to do so, look and try and pull up tobacco advertising that might have appeared in those files as well, could you not?
A.	I don't believe, although I'd
really have to go back and check, that the Vanderbilt archives kept records or that they've maintained records of, let's say, advertisements that would have been placed in segments through news programs. Because that is their primary focus, it's not everything but it really focuses on news programs so I don't think that would be there. I would only
have to guess some of those news programs may have carried something on tobacco advertising. That would be a different situation.
Q.	Okay. All right. Now, in terms
of your research in Columbus at the state library that was done in July of 1998, I think you indicated that it was difficult, if not impossible, to figure out any lobbying efforts, correct?
A.	Everything in the case of Ohio,
if I could just provide a little bit of background information, the records are not good until about 1953 when you have an entity come into place called the Legislative Services Commission which made a much more strenuous effort to try to save documents having to do with the legislative process, but yet in terms of the matter that's a saving committee hearings or public presentations for and against bills, there was --my understanding, there was no really systematic attempt to save this material until the mid to late 19B0s. And that really gets beyond my time period in many ways.
go back as a historian and look at efforts that were undertaken by the tobacco industry attempting to oppose the early laws or ■■ yeah, the early laws restricting the sale of tobacco to minors, could you have done that?
HR. KOETHE: Objection to the form of the question; lack of foundation.
A.	I'm not sure that information
would exist. But from what I could tell, that -- I'm unaware based on the records that I have read that there was any strenuous lobbying going on on anyone's part.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. Well, were you
specifically, though, looking for lobbying when you did your research?
A.	I couldn't because it's not
there. I mean, I was able to determine early on, based on the records that were available and discussions with the librarians that the universe of available documents really would be the legislative records and in some instances, the original versions of laws that could be compared to final versions.
A.	So that I could determine -- for
instance, let's go back to 1888 -- that I believe the original bill had the age -- the age for minors at 16 and then it was changed to 15. I may be reversing it, but I could determine that much, that that's also evidence that that was a focal point of a debate as to what the age should be.
But whether there were particular groups that were fighting that legislation or promoting that legislation, it would be very difficult for me to say. Ny guess is if I had to say it that - - anything iB, is that there is a campaign in the 1880s and the 1890s on the part of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union to restrict tobacco use. So that if there was some lobbying effort there, it may have been coming from that side, from the WCTU, and later on from the anticigarette lobbying groups that would be developing by the turn of the century.
Q.	Okay. But during all of your
research regarding the early laws passed on tobacco, did you ever come across any lobbying whatsoever that had been done in any form by
A.	No, I didn't.
Q.	Now, I think I touched on your
trip to Cleveland earlier and asked you questions about whether tobacco advertising materials might be within the Gries Collection and then in the Arents Collection in New York, and I think your answer was you weren't sure about New York but there might be a few in Cleveland but you weren't sure. Is that a fair statement?
A.	The reason I can't say for sure.
I only was able to go through, in the case of the Gries Collection, about -- just because of time constraints -- one-third of the card catalog because it is a massive collection.
And given that the Arents Collection is four or five times larger than the Gries Collection, it's -- making it the leading collection -- I didn't get through -- I was able to get through an overview and just nothing stands out about advertising in terms of trying to obtain an overview of the Arents Collection.
Assuming that you had -- let me have you assume this for a second. Assume that you had been tasked to go back for the same period of time that you did your research regarding public awareness issues and been tasked to also look at advertising that occurred -- the amount of and the types of, the descriptive types of advertising in the media fora where advertising had taken place over that time.
How would you have structured research had you been tasked to do so?
A.	Well, I have to say at the
outset, I'm not an advertising expert. And that we're dealing with an assumption. But I could have, I guess, looked for advertisements but I would have had to do it within a context of the whole array of material that I have gone through and been through. And I guess I could give you two kinds of examples by way of response.
I would have likely not have come to a conclusion that advertising had very much impact in terms of affecting levels of awareness with respect to my questions because there are a number of, first of all, public
opinion polls which indicate that there were very high levels of public awareness very early on in the 1950s, for instance, with respect to the potential health haj -- haz- -hazards of smoking -- I'm sorry I couldn't get the word out. Sometimes that happens. - - and also in relation to the alleged addictive qualities of smoking.
And I've referred to some of those in my report and so I'm not sure how advertising would have affected that, say, that in -- if I'll give you one example that appeared in Senior Scholastic magazine in 1960 and I believe this is included in the report - - that the number is approximately - -if you just give me a second, I can turn to it, I think.
Q.	Sure.
A.	It will be at the bottom of page
17. "In 1960, Senior Scholastic magazine surveyed 10,763 junior and senior high school students and found that" 98 -- I'm sorry -"97 percent of them believed in the possible link between smoking and lung cancer."
”... can serve as a demonstration of health
education teachers were filling their mandated assignment to inform their students about claimed health problems associated with tobacco."
My point being advertising didn't seem to have any impact in terms of comprehensive public awareness and/or common knowledge.
A second kind of an example I could give you - - and this would be based on studies from the late '50s into the mid-'60s. And X can cite, in particular, a study - - this was a master's thesis done at Ohio State University. As I remember, the person's name was Barbara Adams, and she did an analysis of 625 students in the Parma school district outside of Cleveland. And she was looking for rating 25 factors that would affect decisionmaking about whether students would start to smoke or perhaps if they'd already started, to stop smoking, and advertising as a factor, that is. And what she was saying is if we banned advertising, would it affect your decision to start or stop, and it finished very low on the list. I believe it was 18 out
of 25 factors.
The factors that were really affecting the decisions to start or stop smoking, the top five included concern about lung disease, concern about breaking the law, so there's obviously a very high awareness of the restrictions on smoking by youth. And then concerns about heart disease. And there were also - - I believe, peer pressure comes into play.
But my point being as a factor, the students themselves were saying advertising would have no influence on our decision to start or stop or very little influence compared to other factors.
Q.	Okay. But I want to get back to
this concept of how you would have gone about doing research because you prefaced your response by saying that -- I think reiterating, in fact, that you were not an advertiser and you're not in that area of expertise, right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	But you are an historian --
q.	-- who researches lots of subject
matters with which you are not an expert, correct?
A.	Well, I look at material I may
not be familiar with it.
Q.	Right. And, for instance, just
to go back to make it germane, in your session yesterday you were told, look, stay within your field of expertise. You're not an expert on lung cancer and smoking relationships, correct?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	But nevertheless, when you went
back as an historian and looked at articles, you came across articles and were able to do a search for those articles -A.	Right.
Q.	--in terms of public awareness,
correct?
A.	Um-hum, urn*hum.
Q.	And so what I'm asking you is:
Had you been tasked to do a similar research for tobacco advertising, how would you have gone about constructing your search to find that material, as an historian?
A.	I guess what you would have to do
is you would have to -- if you're looking for tobacco advertising, per se, you would have to start turning the pages of what we've talked about, newspapers and magazines. As I said, 1 think it would be somewhat more difficult with advertising on television and radio just because I don't know whether that material is there anymore. As I don't know whether material is there in terms of programming, what was saved and what wasn't saved.
Q.	Right. But the research
methodology that you would use would be substantially similar, although it might differ somewhat for idiosyncracies, but it would be substantially similar to what you did, right, for the project that you did do.
A.	I don't think it would
substantially differ. I mean, you'd have to go and turn pages.
Q.	Okay. And in fact, had you and
Ms. Fife and the researchers been tasked to undertake that responsibility, you could have done it at the same time you were doing your research on public awareness, couldn't you?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, when you -- let me also
switch now from advertising to money spent by the tobacco industry in other area *- in other fora, for a second. Well, withdrawn.
In connection with the work that you did do on public awareness, did you -- was part of your research methodology to also look at the industry response to the public awareness issues?
A.	The industry response?
Q.	Yeah, for instance -- let me --
that was not a perfectly clear question.
A.	Okay.
0.	But if we go back and look at the
key dates, for example.
A.	Okay.
Q.	When the American Cancer Society '
June 1954 announcement came out about lung cancer, did you, and your researchers go back and look for what might have been the industry response to those announcements?
A.	We looked for any article that
would bear upon those announcements, that's -yes.
Q.	Okay. And is that true with all
of the key dates that you factored into your thinking?
A.	Yes.
Q.	So that you didn't filter out
anything that the tobacco industry might have done in response to any of these announcements or reactive strategies by the tobacco industry?
A.	We tried to -- if we were
covering a key date, we tried to get all the stories. That's the best answer I can give you.
Q.	Okay. Let's go through then the
key dates. And I just want to ask you with respect to each of these key dates whether or not you're aware of a tobacco industry response that occurred after these certain public events. Are you aware following the June 1954 American Cancer Society announcement regarding the association between smoking and lung cancer as to whether the tobacco industry responded in a public forum about that announcement?
anything about a public forum. You mean where they may have called a press conference or -is that what you mean by - -
Q.	Yeah. Okay.
A.	I can't say a reporter didn't
call an individual and say, “Can you give us a point of view on this?"
q.	No, no. I under- -- it was a --
let me rephrase it so it's clear.
A.	Okay.
Q.	I'm not asking for anecdotal
stuff but I'm asking you to summarize in your - - withdrawn.
You said a moment ago that your research was blind to who may have commented on the material, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	So that if a tobacco industry
executive had given a statement that appeared in a newspaper saying smoking doesn't cause cancer or we are unsure whether smoking causes cancer and more research is needed, something like that, that you would pick it up if it was around the key dates that you were talking about.
A.	Yes, yes, sir. And it may well
be contained in the story.
Q.	Right.
A.	In other words, a journalist may
in an attempt to represent all points of view - -
Q.	Right.
A.	-- may well have contacted some
person or persons and said give reaction, give a reaction.
Q.	Right. Okay. Then my question
to you with these key dates is, to your knowledge, was there, in fact, a tobacco industry response and if so, what it was. And I just wanted to go through these dates with you if you can remember.
A.	Well, I guess we'd almost have to
go and look at specific articles to remember any one response.
Q.	Well, maybe we can generalize it.
If we can't, we can't.
A.	Okay.
Q.	But is it accurate to say that in
your research, generally speaking, on almost all of the key dates where there was a
pronouncement about links to cancer through smoking or causative associations being made, that there was a tobacco industry response of some sort?
A.	There wasn't on every occasion,
no. Sometimes reporters would contact someone. And that's the best I can -- answer I can give you. And quite often the response would be, well, yes, we need more research.
Q.	Okay. And I don't want to take
the time if we don't have to, but I'm sort of looking at the key dates that we identified earlier in the deposition. But are there any dates where you specifically do remember the tobacco industry coming out forcefully saying "That's not true" or "We dispute this" or "You can't reach this conclusion"?
A.	Well, okay, yeah. I'll try to
give you one example off the top of my head, and this goes back to my report. I guess I am certainly very interested in the extensive coverage of the Surgeon General's report in January of 1964.
The Cleveland Plain Dealer had, I believe I mentioned, over 30 articles in the
period of a month after approximately January 10th to the end of the month, for the last 20, 22 days of the month, in January. And there may well have been * * I don't recall a specific, but there may have been one or two stories out of some 30 in which some reporter said, "What is the reaction of the industry?" And someone may well have said, "Well, we need more research" or something like that.
So that what I'm trying to indicate to you is that my best recollection is that when there is industry comment, it is not featured; it tends to be in the lower portion of the articles as an attempt to be sort of, "Well, let's balance; let's appear to be balance." Or if there is an industry response, it quite often is buried in a welter of other articles such as at the time of the Surgeon General's report.
Q.	Okay. Can you think of any
occasions on which the tobacco industry ran its own media campaign to dispute any of the information in these key dates that you've identified?
A.	A specific media campaign?
Q.	Um-hum.
A.	Well, I'm sure that they must
have. I mean every major industry and every major business will be running public relations campaigns, I would assume. But I'm not quite sure I could point to any particular one.
Q.	Okay. Okay. I wanted to focus
on page 2 of your report and the three paragraphs where it looks like you are summarizing your opinions; is that right?
A.	Right. Yes. Yes.
Q.	In terms of there being a vast
amount of information disseminated over the years resulting in very high levels of public awareness and knowledge about the possibility of serious diseases, are you able to give any kind of assessment in terms of the amount of ■ information that has been offered by the tobacco industry to counter or dispute this vast amount of information?
A.	I’ve -- well, we were just
talking about this before, when the media would give an opportunity, I'm sure there would be some sort of spokesperson there, but
beyond that it's very difficult for me to say, except in the sense that if there was a message, it wasn't getting through based on all the public opinion polls and surveys that we have.
Q.	All right. Now, you did not look
at the role of industry advertising and how that might factor into your opinions and conclusions. Is that true?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. To the extent you're characterizing his earlier testimony, I think it's inaccurate.
MR. CRANDALL: Okay. I'll rephrase it.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	I've gotten two objections over
there, so there must be something wrong with	!
<
my phrasing, but let me try this question.
Did you, in any way, look at the role that advertising would play in the dissemination of information question?
A.	I tried to give you two specific
examples before, and I can only -- I'll try to add a third. And I referred to a public opinion poll and then a study which said advertising -- removal of advertising would •
have really no influence on a decision to take up the use of tobacco or not.
And that is yet a third study conducted by Dr. Daniel Horn, who was one of the two individuals invplved in the American Cancer Society study that I had mentioned before from the mid-1950s. Horn did a very extensive study of school children and tobacco use in Portland, Oregon, in the late '50s, published on this particular subject and found that decisions having to do with using tobacco very much would be a reflection of family and peer influence as primary factors and that advertisement at no point seemed to be a critical factor.
Q.	Okay. Now -- all right. So then
you did take advertising into account in your analysis, but discounted it based on at least these three factors; is that accurate?
A.	When you look at a -- let me back
up. When you look at a whole range of possible sources and factors, some will clearly be more important than others.
When -- if 1 could give you an example. When everyone refers to cigarettes as coffin nails,
my guess is, is that that says that there is some common understanding that cigarettes aren't good for you. That's probably more important than just to give you -- I'll go back to advertising because I guess I remember this from being a kid. "Call for Philip Morris." So I'm just trying to compare the two, that one has to, in any evaluation, weight factors or the categories of information and certainly I tried to do that.
Q.	And did you make that -- and am I
accurate -- if I am not accurate, tell me.
But I am -- what I take from this series of questions that we've just gone through on advertising is that you made a decision that in the questions posed to you to answer, that advertising wasn't terribly germane because you concluded by looking at public opinion polls and the Horn study and I think it was a study by Adams and others, that advertising really wasn't having an impact and therefore it wasn't germane.
A.	I would agree with at least the
latter part in the sense that - - and again I'll give you yet another example.
There was a study in,Yellow Springs, Ohio, associated with Antioch College in 1926. And questionnaires were sent to varieties of persons about reasons why young women should or should not smoke. And here they're presuming at’ least college age, above the age of 18. And mostly the respondents said that no, this wasn't a good idea. But they didn't do so because of, let's say, moral issues; "Well, women who smoke, we know what they're like." They did this on the grounds of health-related reasons.
I believe the number was 74 percent of the respondents said that the reason we wouldn't encourage women to take up smoking is that it's not good for their health; and that the second number, as I remember - - again X don't have this in front of me -- is something in the area, it's not good because it's a habit, it's going to be difficult to stop. And that was 70 percent.
And then the closest, the third factor, was, well, it's not ladylike. And ■ that waB 35 or 4 0 percent, something,,!ike that.	' ■■■ ' , . . ■ ■■ - ■ . ..
What I'm trying to say then is that when you have that high a level of awareness even in the 1920s, of problems associated with tobacco consumption, I would have to conclude that advertising isn't going to have much effect.
Q.	Okay. And I -- and we've been
through four things.
A.	Right.
Q.	And I do want to explore this
with you in more detail, but first I want to make sure that my premise is right because if it's wrong, I want to clear that up. But when you were undertaken - - withdrawn.
When you undertook your assignment to prepare Bxhibit 1, you made a decision to minimize the role of advertising because in reaching a conclusion about whether or not there was dissemination of the risks of -- the health risks and the addictive risks, you didn't think it was important. Is that true in terms of what -- the conclusion that you reached?
A.	It - - let me back up. First of
there are students of advertising. I am not a student of advertising. I am not an expert in advertising. So it makes it a category somewhat difficult for a historian to evaluate.
Secondly, I assume at the outset -- I did assume at the outset that I wanted to have a broad base but that I cannot single out any one particular element and say that that is the critical factor in any situation. I can't make that judgment at the outset. But since my own personal knowledge of how to evaluate advertising and possible impact would be so limited, while it is a source, it's not a source that I chose and it was my decision to pursue specifically. And when I kept finding over and over again that the -- the survey numbers were so high in	'
terms of public awareness, that there were problems associated with smoking or tobacco consumption, I had to say this was not necessarily a factor that was that critical.
Q.	Okay. And when you say -- and I
want to follow up.
Q.	When you say it was not
necessarily a factor that was critical, from my reading of Exhibit 1, it really, with very little exception doesn't appear even in the analysis of yours.
A,	Right. That's right.
Q.	Okay. So it was a very
unimportant factor?
A.	I would say my conclusion is yes,
that it's not a critical factor. I think that's what I just said. I mean, I've seen lots of advertising in my time. We all have.
I looked at the newspaper this morning and the Houston Chronicle is, as one --as some would argue is nothing more than advertising but they make us pay for it. But I didn't look at the advertising. I read a few stories before I got in the car and came out here. So I'm not very good at advertising except that it's there.
Q.	Okay. I understand but the only
thing you did in response to my last question, I think you said, "Well, it wasn't a critical factor." And I said, "Well" --to myself -"if it's not a critical factor, it could be an
important factor." But I think your testimony is that it is a very unimportant factor?
A.	In terms of affecting levels of
awareness with respect to my basic questions,
I don't see it as an important factor.
Q.	Okay. Now, I want to then
explore with you — and if I can, exhaust your information -- that leads you to believe that advertising -- withdrawn.
I want to go into as much detail as we are able in terms of the fact -- the things that you consider that led you to conclude that advertising was not an important factor in the analysis, okay.
A.	Okay.
Q.	One had to do with public opinion
polls, right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you pointed me to page 17, I
think, for example, where a Senior Scholastic magazine survey that was - -
A.	I've just got to get there.
Q,	Yeah, sure.
A.	Okay.
Q.	All right. That was one of the
polls that you relied on, right -A.	Yes.
Q.	--in reaching your conclusion?
A.	Um-hum.
Q.	All right. What other polls were
there aside from that one?
A.	Well, if we go to the bottom of
page 16.
Q.	Okay*	.
A.	Public opinion polls -- and this
refers to the Hammond and Horn study of 1954, the preliminary report, and then 1957, the completed report, we have the Gallup organization asking, "Have you seen (sic) or heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung," and 90 percent of the respondents answered yes. In terms of public awareness, that's off the charts.
A second example I mentioned here is the Gallup pollsters asked, "Did you happen to read or hear about the recent report of the American Cancer Society reporting the results
of a study on the effects of cigarette smoking?" And in this case,, 77 percent of the respondents said yes, they had seen or read or heard something about that study.
George Gallup himself at this particular time -- whether he wrote them or his assistants wrote them, I don't know -- had weekly columns in newspapers across the country. They would pick him up in a syndicated column. And Gallup wrote about this second -■ the second survey in July of 1957 and commented specifically that this was a extremely high level of public awareness by any measure. He compared it, as I remember, to the Kinsey report earlier on, the sex study reports of the early '50s, and seemed to be very impressed that people were even more aware of problems associated with tobacco than they were with human sexual practices.
Q.	Okay. Are there any other public
opinion polls other than those two that led you to discount advertising as a possible offset or counterbalance to public awareness?
examples already.
Q.	You gave -- let me just go over
those.
A.	Right.
Q.	You gave me a study by Adams, one
by Horn, and the Antioch study.
A.	Right, right, yes, okay.
Q.	Okay. Were there any others?
A.	If one takes the whole universe
of primary and secondary education, I have seen textbooks in which students are specifically warned not to pay any attention to tobacco advertising from various decades, not just from one decade. That is increasingly true as we move into modern times. So I mean you even have in the schools you have those kinds of -- you have those kinds of warnings. I have seen articles in newspapers warning do not pay any attention to advertising about tobacco. So that would be yet another source of warning process that is going on.
But I keep having to turn it around and say the information that I was asked to investigate is so pervasive that I don't see the impact of advertising. I mean,
if we were talking numbers here, 30 percent were aware that there was lung cancer and that that might be very interesting and have an influence on what I'm saying here, but what we're finding is 90 percent are saying it.
Q.	Hell, are you aware of any
authorities whatsoever that take a different view than you and say that the industry advertising that has taken place over the years has, at the very least, tended to counterbalance the public awareness or dilute the message that smoking is bad for you?
A.	1 can't name any particular
individual. I certainly have read that accusation of sorts in the newspapers in recent years, but I couldn't name a particular -- there may be some advertising experts out there that take that particular position. I am not aware of historians who
-	4
have written on or taken that particular position.
Q.	Are there -- you're not aware of
any historians who have taken that position?
A.	Hell, I guess I'm talking about
who have thoroughly studied the issue. I
mean, I'm sure there are people who think that's true and they may be historians, but I don't know whether they've studied the issue.
Q.	Okay. Well, but I wanted -- you
made a pretty broad statement. I want to follow up and make sure that that's what you're saying. Are you, as you sit here today, any -- aware -- withdrawn.
As you sit here today, are you unaware of any historians, whom you know, either by reputation or otherwise, who have taken the position based on research that, in fact, industry advertising has tended to offset the public awareness of health impacts and has diluted the message of both tobacco, addictiveness and public health?
A.	We're talking about formally
trained historians.
Q.	Well, I don't know --
A.	That means to me that they have a
Ph.D.
Q.	Okay.
A.	And that they've gone to graduate
school and that they have studied -- they have a sense of historical methodology. I mean,
those are the sorts of things that I would be talking about. I can honestly tell you that in all of my reading, I am aware of one study where the person makes reference to advertising, and it's not -- tobacco advertising and it's not in a positive sense. But this would be a John Burnham at Ohio State and -- but the material I'm thinking about is -- it's an assertion, it's not a conclusion.
Q.	Okay. So other than -- then is
John Burnham a Ph.D.?
A.	Yes.
Q.	So and what is his position at
Ohio State?
A.	He's a professor of history. He
may be retired. I don't know.
Q.	And what is it that you recall
Professor Burnham saying, with respect to advertising and the issues we're talking about in this deposition?
A.	Hell, it's been a long time since
I read it, but as I remember, he mentioned tobacco advertising. But I can't tell you.
regard to other categories of issues that he was looking at with respect to -- he’s also written on alcohol. I'm much more familiar with his work because he's written extensively on the history of alcohol. And I'm sure he's had negative words about advertising with respect to alcohol too. So because somebody brings something up doesn't -- you said broaden the universe so that's what I'm trying to do.
q.	So you're aware that Professor
Burnham at Ohio State, at least you believe, has taken a position contrary to yours, believing that industry advertising over the years has tended to offset -A.	I can't say that because I do not remember exactly what he Baid.
Q.	Okay.
A.	I do remember -- I have some
recollection that he may have said something to this effect. Whether it was researched well, footnoted properly or just a comment and an assertion, I can't tell you. It's been years.
reference -- and you're not even sure what position he espoused, correct?
A.	Right.
Q.	So aside from that one reference,
you're not aware of any formally trained historians who have -- having researched the matter have taken a position that industry has diluted the message regarding public health and nicotine facts?
A.	No. I can't say any -- what I
can say to you is to turn it around and say there's no evidence that it has, based on my own research.
Q.	Okay. But that's not what I'm
asking you to do. I understand your opinion because we covered that earlier in the deposition, but I'm asking if you're aware of others in your field defined, as you say, formally trained historians who have taken a contrary position from yours?
A.	No, I'm not.
Q.	Okay.
MR. CRANDALL; Why don't we take a break for lunch right now and be back at 1:30.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're going off the
record, approximately 12:23 P.M.
(The luncheon recess was taken at 12:23 P.M.)
*
(P.M. SESSION)
CHARLES STEVENS CRANDALL, ESQ.
PAUL D. KOETHE, ESQ.
J. TODD KENNARD, ESQ.
ALSO PRESENT:
JOE MIECZKOWSKI, VIDEOGRAPHER
REPORTED BY:
KAREN L. D. SCHOEVE, TEXAS CSR NO. :
(The deposition of JAMES KIRBY MART was reconvened at 1:39 P.M.)
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, having been previously duly sworn, testified further as follows:
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Coming back on the record, approximately 1:39 P.M.
EXAMINATION (CONTINUING)
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, I just noticed you
took an aspirin. Are you still okay in terms of -A.	Oh, sure. No, I think I had probably -- I got up so early this morning, I probably had one too many cups of coffee.
Q.	Okay. All right. That's fine.
I just want to make sure.
A.	No, I'm fine.
Q.	Second question is during the
lunch break, did you, with counsel, discuss your testimony at all?
Q.	in what respect? And again. I'm
not asking for all the discussions you had at lunch but if you discussed the actual nature of your testimony in any degree. I'd like to know what that was.
A.	Well, we talked about the key
dating. And maybe it's my own -- sometimes I simply assume that individuals have been there with me and done that and that's really -- I think we all do that at times. The key dates are not just sort of arbitrarily selected at all, but actually go back to a lot of work that I've done with the New York Times, going back to 1994 and before. And the New York Times is quite often considered sort of -- if we have a paper of national record, some would say it would be the New York TimeB. But in addition, it is also extremely well indexed, and I've done a lot of work in the New York Times and then in turn in regional papers.
And this will go back to the David Burton case that we talked about before. And so I'm trying to put this in the context of the notion of the key dates, where they come from. It's very much in the context of
that national research the key dates are derived, and it's a shorthand way of getting at information.
I certainly understand there's a lot more information in the newspapers than would be represented by particular key dates. But it's a method of getting at that information in a hopefully responsibly quick fashion. But it's not just some arbitrary selection of dates. That's very carefully derived from a lot of research that has come before.
Q.	Okay. How did that -- how did
this topic of the key dates come up at lunch?
A.	Well, I think it was probably
because when I talked about the newspapers, I probably didn't do a good enough job to sort of explain the total universe. That really our newspaper work for this particular case is predicated partially, at least in my involvement, is predicated partially on earlier work that I have done in newspapers such as the New York Times.
And also we didn't just - - we didn't necessarily just do key dating, because
we talked about the union newspapers, that when we have a run with the union newspapers, we would do the whole run. We would not - -because there's no necessary -- because of the concerns of what might be presented, isn't like a regular newspaper.
And that also I probably - - I should have -- and we didn't discuss this, but I should have mentioned this before. Through happenstance, and really I think good researching, we were able to find a number of scrapbooks containing newspaper articles on - -newspapers from the very local, local level going beyond the dailies.
And these were scrapbooks that were collected by - - as I remember, there was one set of scrapbooks from Toledo. There was a set of scrapbooks from the Cleveland area, and these were local, like, weekly newspapers. And the articles were pulled together by persons working in both instances for what today we call the American Lung Association, having a different name at that time,
Anti-Tuberculosis League.
very helpful in showing the amount of local activity, local concern about addressing questions having to do with smoking and health, so that it was really like - - there are several levels here, and I think I may have presented the picture in a static fashion, and I didn't mean to misrepresent the totality of the research effort.
Q.	Okay. How did the subject of key
dates come up at lunch? In other words, you've been discussing a lot of substantive things - -
A.	Right.
Q.	- - and my question really was
antecedent to that as to how did it come up?
A.	Well, we were -- actually we were
talking about the total -- sum total of the research, and it was suggested to me that maybe I was putting too much emphasis on the key dates. So I guess that would be the way it came up.
Q.	Okay. And who suggested that to
you?
a.	i think it was Hr. Koethe,
although I don't -- I mean, we were just
having a general conversation over food.
Q.	All right. And can you remember
exactly what he said in terms of putting too much emphasis on key dates or - - I mean, I want to know exactly what he said, if you remember your conversation.
A.	He were just talking generally
about the issues that we had been discussing, and I think that what perhaps he was - - he wanted to make sure that I didn't somehow slight the work that had been done.
Q.	Okay. Now -- and was that --
that was one area of substance you discussed. Did any other areas of substance come up during the lunch?
A.	No, actually that was it. And of
course that reminds me now that - - and you do have this material in the nine boxes. Or I think you mentioned nine boxes, or whatever, before, that I had asked and we did have done a complete run of the Cleveland Plain Dealer over a 20-year period from 1950 to 1970.
And by that I mean this goes well beyond key dating. It's what you do. In this case, even though we unfortunately don't have
an index, we will go in and with certain, as you can say, instead of key dating or key wording.
In other words, if you -- if the word "tobacco" appears, the word "cigarette" appears, the word "smoking” appears, then what I do is that I would work to set that in motion so that that could be done so that we could get a full run of one paper. So that, too, we talked about that.
Q.	Okay. In terms of the Plain --
the Cleveland Plain Dealer, what were the years?
A.	The years are 1950 to 1970. And
I'm going to guess it's a stack like this. I mean it's -- maybe even this (indicating).
It's very, very full. I mean anything that in any way related to the subject of smoking.
Q.	Okay. But again that run did not
include advertising by a tobacco company?
A.	Yes, it should have. Yes, it
does so far as I know.
Q.	Okay. Well, let me go there
then. In other words, they *- if the search that was done -- in other words, the way the
material -- let me withdraw and backup.
How did you call up material for that 1950 through 1970 time period? Or did you just, when you were referring to the foot-or two-foot high stack, is that just all the newspapers from between 1950 and 1970?
A.	Oh, no, no. That is the
Cleveland Plain Dealer.
Q.	Right.
A.	It is the Cleveland Plain Dealer
between 1950 and 1970. And then we talked about certain words -- this is another method -- certain words to look for and then what you do is you say, okay, your keywords will include tobacco, smoking, cancer, heart disease, emphysema, on down the line. I'm just trying to give you some examples. And then the researchers will actually go in and they will look specifically -- they will go cover to cover on every newspaper every day over a 20-year period, in the case of this particular paper.
Q.	Okay. I'm confused. I'm sorry.
I understand you had a 20-year time period between 1950 and 1970; is that correct?
A.	Right, that's correct.
q.	That's for the Cleveland Plain
Dealer.
A.	For the Cleveland Plaint Dealer,
right.
Q.	And then did you key search using
certain words to narrow the newspapers down through which you would then do a search?
A.	Nell, the only paper that we did
the keyword was the Cleveland Plain Dealer.
Q.	For that 20-year period?
A.	For that 20-year period.
Q.	All right. When you did the
keyword search for that 20-year period, is that what you came up with - - when you mentioned a stack earlier -A,	Yes. Yes. Oh, I see. Yes, oh, yes. When I went like this, yes, that produces a (indicating).
Q.	Okay. So the keyword search --
A.	A lot of paper.
Q.	Gotcha. So the keyword search
from 1950 through 1970 of the Cleveland Plain Dealer produced a stack of materials maybe 2 feet high or something like that?
A.	I'm guessing. A foot, foot and a
half. I mean, I don't know. It's a lot.
Q.	Okay. Then from those
materials -- withdrawn. And then in those materials, you're saying, would likely be tobacco advertising because of the keyword nature of the search?
A.	Yes, that's correct.
Q.	Okay. From that stack of
materials, then, researchers went through that stack and culled it down further, correct?
A.	No. You have it all, so far as I
know. Am I -- I think I'm not -MR. KOETHE: I think we can short-circuit this, maybe make it go a little bit quicker. I think your questions to you is getting at were all the papers looked at or were only some subset of the papers looked at for that 20-year period.
MR. CRANDALL: That's where I was going,
yeah.
MR. KOETHE: And I think there's just a miscommunication here.
THE WITNESS: All the papers were looked
at.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. You said -- the reason I
picked up on it -- and I'll try and clear it
up - -
A.	Okay. All right.
Q.	--is that I thought you said,
"And then the research assistants went through that and from that" -- and then you went on and I said, "Aha, there must be a subset."
A.	Oh, no. No. I'm sorry. I
didn't mean to miscommunicate on that.
Q.	well, it may have been my
misunderstanding but the bottom line is that you did a keyword search in the Cleveland Plain Dealer for a 20*year period using -- do you remember what keywords you used?
A.	Well, I gave you some. They
would include smoking, tobacco, health, heart disease -- various versions -- bronchitis, emphysema, a few others. I'm not going to remember every single word.
Q.	Right?
A.	But this is, again, another way
to go through and try to look. And I think we came up with some -- you will always --by
this approach, you're going to pick up things you might not otherwise find.
Q.	I understand. And all those have
been - - and this is more a question to Counsel than to you. But all those have been -- those are part of the nine boxes?
A.	Yes. That's my understanding.
Q.	All right. Now, you mentioned in
response to this key date issue being discussed at lunch, something about the New York Times and prior research you had done involving the New York Times. And I missed exactly what you were saying about that prior research. What, if any, prior research had you done involving New York Times that assisted you in your expert opinions in this case?
A.	Well, I've spent a lot of time
going through -- the New York Times, one of the advantages is, besides being sort of a national paper or record, national record, at least in the informal sense, is that it is very, very well indexed, unlike most papers, most dailies. And so that you can go through and very quickly pick out the major stories
that are being covered with respect to whatever subject you are using.
I mean, historians sort of automatically gravitate to the New York Times first and that's one of the major reasons, because of the excellent indexing.
So what I was trying to suggest to you was that by virtue of having worked extensively in the New York Times the last two or three or four years, and then that, in turn, helped me work with regional papers -such as the Kansas City Star, the Kansas City Times, the Emporia Gazette in the Burton case -- all of this then comes into play in having an understanding as to what the really key dates are in terms of newspaper coverage with respect to important stories that relate to the matter of awareness issues that we've talked about before.
Q.	Okay. So the gist -- and I'm not
trying to resummarize it. But the gist of what you're saying is that the key dates that you have in this case were not something random but they resulted from prior research that you had done in the Burton case - -
A.	Exactly. Exactly.
q.	- - and that gave you an idea when
this case came along of which dates to use.
A.	Right. Right. That's right.
That's right. So I - -
Q.	All right.
A.	It wasn't that the key dates sort
of just came out of thin air. I was trying to simply establish that there was a base for them.
Q.	Very well. What I would like to
do now, Dr. Martin, is to ask you whether you agree or disagree with certain statements that I will read and then we'll get into the reasons for your agreement or disagreement, okay.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Well, okay. Let me read this
statement: Smoking rates among adults have leveled off in the past five years or so at about 25 percent and smoking rates among youth are rising. Do you agree or disagree with that statement or have no opinion about it?
A.	Well, I guess I couldn't agree or
disagree unless I knew the source and the
q.	Okay. I'm not so much --we may
get into the source and may not. But what I'm getting at here is in connection with your research that you did in this case, did you find data, whether it be newspaper articles, periodicals, TV runs, or things of that nature, that state these things as being true?
A.	I did see periodic, over periods
of time, articles that would deal with whether sales of cigarettes specifically were going up, going down. And sometimes those articles are written in the context of tax revenue that in - - quite specifically in this case would be flowing into the coffers of the State of Ohio. So they might say, "Well, tax revenue is going up. People are drinking more and smoking less or smoking more and drinking less” or that sort of thing. So.
Q.	Okay. Did you find any
evidence - - let's take the last ten years, just focusing on the period between 19, say,
88 and 1998. During that period of time did you find any evidence in your search as to whether smoking rates among adults have
leveled off or increased during that time frame?
A.	Well, it's a little bit beyond
the years that I concentrated on, I mean, when we talk about 1988 to 1998. But my impression is -- and so this would just be my own personal impression. I mean, this is the best I can do - -
Q.	Okay.
A.	--is that with respect to
smoking among adults, that it has continued to decrease to the point where the numbers are -and I'm going to guess between 20 and 25 percent; whereas 30 or 40 years ago, the numbers would have been more, perhaps 60 percent of males and 40 percent of females.
So let's just round it off and say 50 percent, so that in terms of the adult population there's been a - - in the last 20 to 30 years, a reduction of whatever that would be, cut in half, approximately.
Q.	You mentioned something that I
did want to focus on. What was the end point of your research? In other words, what date do you use as the termination date for your --
A.	Well, after you get beyond the
mid-'80s, the actual end point in terms of what I concentrated on and what I asked others to do was -- would be the Surgeon General's report in 1988, the C. Everett Koop Surgeon General's report. And this is the report in which he says that smoking is an addictive behavior. Well, actually there's lots of material in there, that that's the conclusion that's derived from that material.
Q.	Okay. So beyond that point, you
basically didn't conduct any extensive research forward from 1988?
A.	Not in any sort of organized
fashion, no.
Q.	Why not?
A. Well, I guess because probably because of time constraints more than anything else.
Q.	What do you mean by time
constraints?
A.	Well, there's only so much time
to try to get through so much material because we're talking about a body of material that actually as you move through time becomes yet.
yet, yet, yet more voluminous.
Q.	Okay. But -- okay. Were there
any other reasons other than time constraints that cause you to put a cap, if you will, on 1988?
A.	No. I would say it's just -- I
don't think there's any particular reason.
It's almost -- and maybe it's partially because as a historian, I kind of think anything sort of from the last 10 or 20 years is almost not history yet. Maybe that'© just an invalid way of looking at reality, but it more or less is the way I do it. It's hard to evaluate, it's hard to shake down, it's hard to understand where the forces and trends are taking us and so on and so forth.
Q.	Okay. In the course of your
review that you conducted in this case, did ' you come up with any information -- and by that -- let me preface these questions with this: I'm not asking you to agree or disagree substantively with the things I'm saying.
What I'm going to be asking you is whether you found articles, periodicals, or things of that nature that reflected these points of view,
okay.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you find any information that
discussed smoking trends as it was related to tobacco advertising? Did you come across any such material?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the question. I think it's vague.
A.	Smoking -- I'm just going to
repeat it if it's okay. Smoking?
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	I'll rephrase it for you.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Did you come across any
information showing that smoking trends were being affected one way or the other by tobacco industry advertising?
A.	i do not recall anything
specifically, no.
Q.	Okay. Did you come across
anything in your search that shows that - -Go ahead.
A.	I'm sorry. Could I --
Q.	Yeah. Sure.
frame too. You mean from the beginning of time or in the last ten years?
Q.	Well, no, I wasn't -- I was
trying to say at any point in your research.
A.	Oh, okay.
Q.	Okay. Would your answer change
if 1 said that -- I mean, I'm talking about the gamut of your research.
A.	I don't believe so, not within
that specific context that we've established.
Q.	Okay. Did you come across any
periodicals, journals, literature, or scientific information saying that -- alleging that tobacco use would be much lower now than it is, without tobacco advertising? in other words, in the absence of tobacco advertising?
A.	In terms of an actual
sophisticated argument, no.
Q.	Okay. Did you come across any
scientific information, literature, periodicals, articles, or anything that suggested to you that -- not suggested to you, but that suggested that hundreds of thousands of premature deaths could have been averted had tobacco advertising not existed?
A.	Hell, we're asking questions
outside my area of expertise, but I'd say no.
Q.	Okay. And again I want to be
absolutely clear with you on this point, that I am not asking you to voice an opinion as to whether you disagree, agree, or think studies are valid or poorly constructed or anything of that nature.
A.	Right.
Q.	I'm asking you as a historian in
the context of your search in the work that you did for this case whether you came across these things. That's all I'm asking you. And the - *
A.	Like I say, there's certain
things I'm not quite sure how to weigh because they would not be quite as specific as you are suggesting because earlier I indicated that I had read or reviewed textbooks that warn about advertising, but they don't necessarily then conclude that something would have been - -lives would have been saved or whatever else that might have been. That wouldn't have been part of the argument. So it isn't that I didn't see things about advertising but I
didn't see them with the specific -- presented in a specific way that you're now saying.
Q.	Okay. But again -- and I don't
want to get into a fence over specifics if I can, the syntax of my sentences, because I'm asking what I think is a pretty basic question; I'm trying to. Which is: As you did your work in this case and you went back and you looked at newspapers and you had researchers look at researchers' articles, editorials, whatever, did you come across articles regarding the impact of tobacco advertising on increases or decreases in human life due to smoking?
A.	Not in some specific measurable
sense, no.
Q.	Okay. And that leads me to
believe that in a nonspecific unmeasurable sense -- withdrawn.
Are you - - when you refer - - are you just referring to the anecdotal work of Burnham as - -
A.	No. No, no.
about?
A.	I'm trying to come up with -- I'm
honestly trying to come up with - - I assume you're suggesting there's some article or book or something that has made certain kinds of calculations. I haven't read it or I'm unaware of it. I guess that's what I'm saying.
Q.	That's all you have -- that's a
perfectly appropriate answer. And I don't want you to assume - - and I should have said this earlier in my questioning -- that I'm trying to get you to say one thing or another.
A.	Right. No.
Q.	I'm just asking a question. I do
want to exhaust your knowledge. And what I'm trying to do -A.	Right.
Q.	-- since the trial is coming up
is find out as much detail as I can about what you intend to testify about at trial. So I take it then your answer is you did not find that type of material in your search?
A.	No. I think it falls outside the
purview of my assignment but . . .
information in your literature search indicating that the tobacco industry was using a deceptive and alluring advertising and promotional campaign for cigarettes?
A.	Not that I'm aware of, that I'm
recalling at this particular point.
Q.	Did you come across any newspaper
articles, press conferences, or other literature showing that the tobacco industry had opposed the adoption of tobacco control policies by either the state, federal, or local governments?
A.	I've read things that have said
that they have in terms of lobbying efforts, yes.
Q.	Okay. What have you read? And
tell me what it is that you're aware of on that point.
A.	The book that I am thinking of --
well, let me -- these would be items primarily from the 1960s. There is a U.S. senator by the name of Maureen Neuberger. 1 think it's N-e-u-b-e-r-g-e-r but I'm not positive. And she wrote a volume. She was a major antitobacco advocate in Congress, and she
wrote a volume called Smoke Screen in the 1960s that charged the companies with trying to avoid having a tough enough warning label. So focusing on 1965, that particular issue, there was a -- I don't know whether he's still living. And I believe his name is Harold Diehl, capital D-i-e-h-1.
And he produced a textbook, political science type of work that talked about the politics of tobacco lobbying. And I remember a long time ago looking at that particular volume in which he studied the process of tobacco lobbying. And he was also a research director for the American Cancer Society, so he tended to bring their perspective to the table. These are -- I'm trying to give you some examples here because - -
Q.	No, and that's exactly what I'm
asking you to do - -
A.	Yeah, yeah.
Q.	-- and I'm going to keep asking
you.
A.	Okay.
A.	Those are two from the '60s that
I -- I mean books that would cover issues during the 1960s, that I recall.
Q.	Okay. Those are secondary
sources, however.	;
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you come across any primary
sources indicating that the tobacco industry was opposing the adoption of tobacco control policies at either the state or federal level?
A.	No, I did not.
Q.	Okay. Did you come across any
information reflecting the -- I'll withdraw.
Are you familiar with the -- I'm going to withdraw that too.
In the course of your research, did you come across a controversy in the so-called causation dispute; that is, whether smoking causes cancer and whether it doesn't cause cancer?
A.	Yes. There are some newspaper
articles about that, certainly in the 1950s. There are various schools of scientific opinion, with quotations around scientific.
normal in science, actually in any academic field.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Trying to come to some sort of
consensus or conclusion.
Q.	Over the period of time that you
researched being, I guess back into the prior centuries up through about 1988, did you come across - - withdrawn.
As of 1988, was there still a question or controversy regarding the issue of whether cigarettes cause cancer?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the question. Outside the area of this witness's disclosure.
A.	I was going to say I'm -- in a
certain sense that forces me to render a medical or scientific judgment.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Well, I'm not trying to do that,
actually. But I am trying to ascertain whether you came across TV broadcasts, articles, journals, and things of that nature evidencing an ongoing controversy regarding smoking and cancer, even as late as 1988.
q.	So that as far as your research
showed, by 1968 it was a done deal in the sense of there was no more debate. Isn't that true?
A.	well, again. I'd have to point
out I'm not a medical person or a scientist, so it depends in a certain sense how you define "debate" in regard to causation because there is an ongoing debate about what causes cancer in our society. For instance, 30 years ago we had pretty much dismissed heredity as perhaps conditioning with respect to types of cancer, and it's very much back front-and-center today in lots of different areas, as I understand it, as a layperson.
Q.	Okay.
A.	So that that is -- that's very
important in terms of causation, what factors we're taking into consideration.
Q.	Okay. But I'm focusing now
directly on tobacco and its relationship with cancer. And at least as I understand -understood one major thrust of your research, it was to examine the public arena to see how well widely distributed knowledge of the
potential health risks was, right?
A.	Well, we haven't talked about the
difference between knowledge and awareness, but I do think there is a difference. To be aware of something does not necessarily mean that you act on it, if I could put it that way. It can be part of your knowledge, but it doesn't mean that it governs your behavior.
Q.	Could you be a little more
specific with me?
A.	Right. I'll give you a very
specific example. I smoked for several years when I was fully aware and knowledgeable that smoking might not have been the best thing I could have been doing for my health.
Q.	But you, in your example -- do
you still smoke today?
A.	No.
Q.	When did you stop?
A.	I stopped in - - the Great
American Smoke Out of 1996 which would be 26 months ago, November. It's always in November.
distinction -- withdrawn.
I don't think I understand your distinction between knowledge and awareness. Let me do it in the context that you used.
A.	Okay.
Q.	You would say with your
continuation of smoking, you were aware of possible risks but kept on smoking, right?
A.	I was not only aware, I was
knowledgeable. 1 had read a lot of things.
Q.	Okay. All right. So you were
both aware of the problem and you were knowledgeable of the problem, right?
A.	I think so, yes.
Q.	All right. Then how are those --
I don't see how those terms are different in use as far as how you use the words.
A.	What I was trying to say was that
to be aware - - you can be aware of the - -let's go back to one of our studies, let's say the Hammond and Horn. You can be aware of that study, of its contents and indeed it can even be a part of your general knowledge of understanding, but that doesn't mean that you act on it. So that you don't have to have complete knowledge, I guess, is what I'm
trying to say, in order to be aware of something.
Q.	Okay. All right. Anyway, to get
back to this issue of what you were tasked to do, I want to ask you a few more questions about how long you understood the cigarette causation controversy. And by that I'm talking about the controversy over whether smoking cigarettes causes cancer to go on.
I'm not asking you to express an opinion as to whether you think it's valid or not valid or anything like that. But you did an historical research that covered this topic, right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. When did the debate end as
far as you can tell?
A.	Well, I'm not Bure there's
necessarily one ending. I think on a national level, the Surgeon General's report in 1964 made a rather declaratory statement on the subject, summarizing several thousand research reports and -- in concluding that smoking was a cause of lung cancer. I would say that would be the beginning of the point of some consensus. But I'm not sure that it was fully
there because the debate would continue as to factors such as environmental pollution. And that could be a product of everything from chemicals in the environment to the internal combustion engine.
And personal heredity becomes a focal point of debate so that to say that it is definitively A causes B, cut and dried, I'm not quite sure how I can take that because I'm not sure -- I'm going back to what I said before. I'm not sure the debate's over. I'm not sure it will ever be over until we really know.
Q.	Okay. Now --so from an
historical perspective as an historian you believe the debate over whether smoking causes cancer is still ongoing even today?
A.	No, that isn't what I said. The
elements which cause cancer, that debate is not over. The debate will not be over until we have solved the cancer problem, and we certainly have not solved the cancer problem because cause is critical to effect in any situation. That's what I'm trying to indicate to you.
Q.	All right. I fell off the rails
when you were talking about cancer in general. I want to keep my questions focusing on cancer, smoking and cancer.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Is the debate, in your view from
an historical -- historian's view, regarding smoking and causing cancer still ongoing today?
A.	I don't know whether it is a
historian's view, but if you want my personal view, I think that smoking can be a cause of cancer, yes.
Q.	Okay. But now -- but I do want
to take not your personal view as much as your opinion. When did -- you used 1964 as a - -saying - - I think your words were the debate was pretty much over. Going forward from 1964 to 1988, did that debate go on during that time or was it pretty -- in what form did it go on if it went on at all?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
A.	I guess I really don't know what
form it took. I guess I'm also trying to say, is that before any cause and effect equation
is established, there is going to be a vigorous scientific debate, scientific/medical debate and that that did take place in the.
'50s and the '60s and some of it did carry and spill over into the '70s. And there are matters of proof that can be a part of that debate that probably most people have declared over. But for me to give you a specific date when this happened, I can't.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	No, you've done it. You've -- I
think that last response and your others have done it. I was just trying to get -- I'll move on from that. Let me switch topics - -A.	Okay.
Q.	-- and we'll talk about now the
research that you did showing the widespread knowledge of the nicotine problem, if you will. In terms of what you saw in the literature and in your research, can you generally describe how that has evolved over the --up through 1988? Let's say between 1978 to 1988.
A.	Nicotine in relation to?
Q.	Having a health problem, its
addictive tendencies or things like that?
A.	Okay. Well, I have to go way
back. I mean, sorry, but that's the problem with historians.
q.	But I don't mean to interrupt
you, but I'm gonna. I don't want you to go way back, if you can avoid it. If there's no way to answer my question without going way back - -
A.	There's no way to - - I will tell
you the first time that I saw the term "addiction11 used in a pamphlet having to do with tobacco. Is approximately 1650.
Q.	Okay.
A.	So the term "addiction" is not
new. It has only been declared new in recent years. And it is used interchangeably with other kinds of terms, as I tried to indicate in here in my statement. Terms like "bewitching" at certain times, "enslaving" at other times. And there are various kinds of artificial passion sort of comes in during the Victorian era, and on and on and on and on.
So the term that -- itself has been around for a long time, the term
"addiction." Now, whether 1850 is actually the first time it was used or not, I can't say but that's the first time there was a pamphlet by Joel Shew that is rarely read these days, I might add.
But the term reaches a certain - -kind of, shall we say, a critical mass prominence in the 19teens and into the 1920s, when antitobacco advocates used the phrase over and over again. One of the problems with smoking is you become addicted to the tobacco habit. The term then will be around very commonly in the 1950s and the 1960s. You can read it all over the place.
But the term in terms of the kind of a definition that it is given in the Surgeon General's 1988 report, that kind of a definition with a specific definition does not occur until that. That's what I'm trying to say, and it's not coming out right -- until 1988 .
Q,	Okay. Let me just focus on your
smoking behavior for a minute. Do you believe that you were addicted to cigarettes?
I put them down and walked away and I haven't looked back.
Q.	Did you ever try to quit before
the Smoke Out in 1996?
A.	Oh, sure.
Q.	How many times?
A.	One or two or three.
Q.	And were those unsuccessful? I
presume.
A.	No, I switched off to other
products. I just -- I liked tobacco. I'd smoke cigars. I didn't ever do chewing tobacco; there are limits. But X even tried snuff for a while, so I certainly liked tobacco.
Q.	All right. Have you had
discussions with your father in terms of his smoking habit? Did he feel that he was addicted or did he have difficulty quitting?
A.	Well, he did the -- I described
earlier on his 20-day method, and that's worked for almost 45 years now for him in terms of not smoking. So that was his method.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Mine was a daughter who said. Why
don't you participate in the Great American Smoke Out. So . . •
Q. All right. In terms of -* tell me, as best you can, the state of public awareness of nicotine addiction as of 1988 Surgeon General's report. In other words, what did you find in your research was the state of knowledge with respect to the addictive properties of nicotine as of 1988?
A.	Well, my feeling is that the
understanding that it's going to be difficult to stop if you start. If you define that, whether habit, habituation, addicting, whatever, that has been kind of a common knowledge proposition about tobacco since the beginning of tobacco time.
Q.	All right. And did you see a
substantial body of literature in the scientific/medical community as of 1988 disputing the fact that nicotine and smoking of nicotine through cigarettes was addictive?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form; foundation.
A.	Well, I wasn't -- the problem --
I wasn't -- 1 was Interested in getting public
awareness. I wasn't -- my assignment didn't include digging through medical and scientific j ournals.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. Well, that's fair enough.
But did you -- in your search through media, did you come across a substantial body of research being publicized that disputed the fact that smoking was addictive?
A.	I mean -- I don't quite know how
to answer the question because, as I've tried to indicate, whatever term you select, that information has been in newspapers with references to tobacco products going back a long, long way.
Q.	Okay. My question -- all right.
I guess my question is has a contrary position that there is no addictive tendencies toward nicotine or smoking, has that been also widely disseminated among the public during the same period of time you researched?
A.	That there was a contrary
position?
Q.	Yeah, meaning a contrary
viewpoint that disputes any addictive
properties of smoking or nicotine whatsoever during the same period of time when you were doing your research and finding a different result.
A.	Well, I think the term, as I say,
whether you want to call it habit, habituation, addiction, form of slavery, on and on and on. Those terms have been around for a long time, and I mean, they're commonly associated with tobacco.
0.	Okay. Are you familiar with
something known as the Tobacco Industry Research Council?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What do you know about the
Tobacco Industry Research Council?
A.	That it was a body put together
in, I believe it was late 1953. It came about in reaction to various reports about certain kinds of scientific experiments, mainly the mouse painting studies of Ernst Wynder and --W-y-n-d-e-r -- and Evarts Graham. And that -I think it's commonly written about today that it was a public relations arm of the industry when a research in the newspapers would
demonstrate that various bodies were calling upon the industry to spend money on research since so little money was being spent on research in the early 1950s with respect to searching for potential causes of lung cancer and other diseases.
So part of the function of the TIRC was to support various kinds of research. And the other part of the function was public relations to say there's more than one side to the story.
Q.	And in your work did you come
across press releases and articles on the TIRC at any point?
A.	I've seen some material on the
TIRC either -- I don't know whether press releases would be the right way for me to describe it.
Q.	How about newspaper articles or
news reports?
A.	Yes, I've seen news -- there is a
news article somewhere, I mean, I think, in early 1954 announcing the formation of the TIRC.
term "Council on Tobacco Research"?
A.	I believe that comes in in the
1960s. I'm going to say 1963, 1964.
Q.	And what was the Council on
Tobacco Research?
A.	Well, I think it was a
continuation of the TIRC.
q.	Did it have the same purposes, as
far as you know?
A.	Yes, so far as I know. I don't
know very much about it.
Q.	Okay. Are you in the process of
drafting or participating in a book that will discuss the history of smoking in any way?
A.	I was -- two, three years ago was
involved in a study. I co-authored a book called Drinking in America, which came out in the early 1980s and -- with a revision in 1987 with the same coauthor, Mark Lender. And it's L-e-n-d-e-r. We had talked about doing some sort of a companion volume which would continue an investigation of questions of prohibition, and that was to be the focal point of this particular study.
And the problem that developed
was that Mark developed a mouth tumor and he had to have that situation dealt with, obviously, medically and he's never shown a lot of interest in the project since that particular time.
Q.	How far did it get?
A.	Oh, there was some preliminary
drafting at a very rough, rough stage. But it's -- right now is a dormant project.
Q,	Did you -- did it ever get to the
point where -- withdrawn.
Had you divided up topics for
this book?
A.	No. Our method was to research
in common and our work method was that Mark would be the first drafter, I'd be the final drafter. And that's where everything broke down because for whatever reason he chose not to continue.
Q.	Is that -- had you picked the
title of the book?
A.	He had a working title with the
publisher, Banned in the USA.
Q.	I'm sorry.
A.	Banned, b-a-n-n-e-d. Banned in
the USA, which would refer to prohibition. We were going to sort of -- we were going to compare the prohibition movement, the drive on prohibition with respect to drinking and compare it to what, at various times, has been a drive to eliminate tobacco from American society.
Q.	Did you do any research in
connection with the writing of Banned in the USA?
A.	Did I?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. And do you still have the
results of your research?
A.	Well, I don't know quite how to
answer that question because I have a research base, yes. Well, I did, for instance, newspaper work in the subject. I did look at some -- went back to the research base for the Drinking in America project. I guess what I'm trying to say is my research base tends to just grow. So like I can't say one particular item or a few items were just for that particular project.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the end of Tape No. 2. We'll proceed on to Tape No. 3. The time is approximately 2:33 P.M.
(A recess was taken.)
VIDEOTAPE NO. 3 BEGINS HERE:
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the beginning of Tape No. 3. The time is approximately 2:42 P.M.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, we were just talking,
when we left, about the book Banned in the USA. And I had been going -- asking some questions about materials that you may have still in existence about this book. I want to go back and just ask this question: Did you - - do you have in your possession a file that pertains to this book that contains notes, writings, ideas, and things that you intended to put into print with Mr. Lender?
A.	I would say a mess, rather than a
file.
Q.	Go ahead.
A.	That's the best description I can
give you. This is a project that got cut off largely because of another person's health
problem. And I haven't looked at the materials. I honestly haven't looked at the materials for a year or two. But it wouldn't -- I don't think they're -- I guess that's the best answer I can give you.
Q.	Okay. There was another book, in
reviewing your prior deposition, that looked to be -- had a different title but it may be the same book -- having to be with prohibitionism on the nature of coercive reform in America.
A.	Right. That's the same project.
Q.	Okay.
A.	The editor at New York University
Press, like all good editors, they're trying to come up with titles that will prove to be intriguing to try to enhance. So we maybe came up with a good title, but we don't have a product to back it up.
Q.	Has that contract been rescinded
or - -
A.	No, it hasn't, only because I
have -- I still hold out hope, but very little, with each passing month or, indeed, year now that -- years I should say -- two
years -- that anything will happen. So I've really asked the editor to be indulgent but I think with probably little or no reason.
Q.	Okay. Are there any financial
advances you were given on that?
A.	No. Actually I had the contract
set up in such a way so that there would be no advance money, that advance money would only come should the product actually be put on the table. So there is no -- that's one reason you can leave that kind of a contract open. Because it isn't a matter of returning advance money. And when I say advance money, I mean advance against royalties. So in this case, while there is a contract, no money exchanged hands.
Q.	Are you familiar with something
known as the Frank Statement?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What is the Frank Statement, to
your knowledge?
A.	It's a statement that appeared in
newspapers in - - across the country in early January, I think it was -- well, the date doesn't* matter. It was early January of 1954.
Put out by a number of tobacco companies. The entities are listed at the bottom of the
statement.
Q.	And what did it say, in
substance?
A,	Well, I guess I'd almost have to
look at it to give you -- because it's a rather lengthy statement.
Q.	Can you - -
A.	But I can attempt to - - and I
haven't looked at it. I think there will be copies of the Frank Statement in materials that you are receiving. Certainly there will be from the Cleveland Plain Dealer. In essence it says that we are concerned about reports that have been emanating recently about the health consequences of smoking, referring "we" referring to the tobacco companies, undersigned tobacco companies, and we intend to become involved in -- if I'm paraphrasing correctly -- trying to find out what the problems, if any, are.
Q.	Now, either in the course of your
research in this case or just as a citizen, have you come to be aware of allegations, at
least, pertaining to what's been described as a cover * up within the tobacco industry?
A.	Oh, yes.
Q.	And tell me what your knowledge
is of that cover-up and upon which your knowledge is based.
MR. KOETHE: Again I object to the form of the question.
A.	I've read, I guess, some
newspaper articles and books which allege there was a big cover-up. I'm trying to come up with the author's name. Phillip Hilts, H-i-l-t-s. And I think he borrowed Maureen Neuberger's -- I mentioned her earlier -- her title -- and called his book Smoke Screen, too. And he charges specifically that this was all part of the cover-up beginning in 1954 and that -- or so he asserts, that only in recent years have the blinders been removed and have people really come to understand the potential health hazards and/or addictive qualities of tobacco. That is my understanding of this in a general way. And I think Hilts's book, if I could just add this -- sort of is a summary of that position.
BY HR. CRANDALL:
Q.	All right. Now -- and when was
Hilts's book published, if you know?
A.	I am going to guess again. I
would say 1994, 1995, right around that time.
Q.	Did you become aware of it at
about the time when it was published?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, from the time you became
aware that Hilts's book was published and about the allegations of cover-up, did you make any request of the tobacco industry or itB lawyers to look at any internal documents that may exist pertaining to Mr. Hilts's allegations?
A.	No.
Q.	Why not?
A.	Because internal documents don't
bear on public perceptions because they are internal documents. It's a contradiction in terms,
Q.	And I think I recalled from your
prior deposition that you have not undertaken any efforts to find out or assess the extent of the volume of tobacco industry advertising
at any point in time; is that true?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	And that comports with your
belief that it's of basically no value in performing your task,
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
A.	I guess I don't know how to
answer that question because I don't think I ever said it was of no value.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Well, I think you're
indicating -- then maybe your term was "not important." Is that what you -A.	Well, I think what I was trying to say was in any situation, cause and effect historical situation, and any public awareness situation, you have to go through a whole sum total of factors. And I tried to indicate what I thought some of those factors might be and some -- I gave some examples where measurements could be taken. And that my conclusion was that tobacco advertising had little or no impact, depending upon the situation and circumstances, in regard to public awareness about the potential health
hazards and/or alleged addictive qualities of tobacco.
Q.	Okay. Were there any articles or
books or sources of information other than Hilts's book that you became aware of regarding a so-called cover-up within the tobacco industry?
A.	Hilts's book is the most direct
in making that charge. I mean, the book opens with that theme, that somehow the blinders were put on and no one knew anything until - -and he really features three personalities: David Kessler and C. Everett Koop, former Surgeon General, and Congressman Henry Waxman -- until they sort of helped remove these blinders that had somehow had been placed on everyone.
But you can pick up a feel of this kind of argumentation in at least two other books that I've read. Or I should say in one case read portions of. And I'm referring to a volume -- I've got the title. Ashes to Ashes. Why can't I come up with the author's name? I just blanked on his name.
blatant as you get from Hilts, in this particular volume.
And then there is another book. Now I'm going to remember the author and not the title. So we can't put the two of them together unfortunately.
But a volume by a Peter Pringle, which focuses on the attempted global settlement that failed, whenever it was, a year or so ago, with respect to the state attorney general cases. And Pringle assumes that there has been a conspiracy of sorts on the part of the tobacco companies.
Now, I'm sorry I can't remember the author in one case and the title on the other, but these are books that have sold fairly well so far as I know.
Q.	Okay. You made a statement a
moment ago that internal documents don't bear on public perceptions or something to that effect. without trying to go back to that statement, I just want to put in context what I'm going to ask you now. Is it your opinion that no matter what was contained in the internal company documents, that the public
perceptions about smoking would not have changed between the time of the Frank Statement in January 1954 and the Surgeon General's report in 1964?
A.	I think the Frank Statement is a
much overrated document.
Q.	Why?
A.	Because it didn't cover anything
up. If that was its purpose and that's what individuals like Hilts said it did. Because if you continue to do research, you will find that -- well, I'll just give a specific example. In late June of 1954, you have the Hammond and Horn preliminary report that garners tremendous national attention. As I remember Hammond and Horn was on the front page of the New York Times.
And knowledge is sort of cumulative, and it's the last story, perhaps, that counts. And here you have thiB major story that we have all of these problems, and that's going to be the focal point of the continuing story, not that -- the newspapers are not arguing and other sources are not arguing there's no story there. They're
saying there is a story there with respect to health, with respect to potential problems associated with smoking. So that if it was an attempt at a cover-up, it had to be one of the most feeble attempts in the history of American conspiracies.
Q.	Have you heard the term, though,
"lulling"?
A.	Lulling?
Q.	Lulling.
A.	Yes.
Q.	What does it mean to you?
A.	Sometimes when I try to get to
sleep, I have had particular -- I need to be because I can't get to sleep. How can I describe it?
Q.	Well, you don't have -- I mean --
A.	I mean, it'B sort of --
Q.	Let me - -
A.	I think I know what it means.
Q. What does it mean?
A.	Well, sort of - - I guess sort of
taking people off guard. Would that be a possible -- is that the way --
term -A.	Okay.
Q.	•- but let me focus on
specifically this Frank Statement and the period between 1954 and 1964, if you will. Isn't it true, in the course of history and your knowledge of history, particularly American history, that it can make a difference in a public debate when one of the protagonists gives up or agrees that the debate is over. Doesn't that have a tendency to take the newsworthiness out of a subject?
A.	I think it depends on the
circumstance.
Q.	Well, let's take 1954 --
A.	Okay.
Q.	- - and the tobacco industry.
Could it have made a difference in the public's perception of the risks of smoking had the tobacco industry, at that time, said, "You want to know something? The research we've shown, smoking causes cancer" or "Smoking's a major health risk and while we sell it, we think it's very bad for you." Would a statement like that, in your opinion,
have influenced public awareness?
MR. KOETHE: object to the form. I think it's vague and speculative.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Well, you're an expert and so - -
A.	Well, it's actually what a
historian would call a counterfactual question.
Q.	Okay. I don't know what that
means.
A.	To use a cliche' if wishes were
horses, beggars would ride question. But it's not what happened but so we can only speculate about what might have happened. And what I can say in regard to what did happen is that if the Frank Statement lulled some people to sleep, it's not reflected in the survey information that I've gone through. And if there was a lull, Hammond and Horn took care of that very quickly. I mean, we're talking about basically about a five* to six-month period.
And I'm trying to think if there were any other major stories in that time period. I'm not coming up with anything, but
whether it lulled anyone in this context, Life magazine had pictures of the — I believe - -I don't know whether Evarts Graham was in this article but Ernst Wynder was. And this was in November of 1953 with the mouse painting studies, with the mice painted with tumors.
And sometimes a picture is the most important thing that there actually is, and no amount of wording will change the image that was established by that picture. And that was pretty powerful stuff.
Q.	But did the tobacco industry at
that time agree with the conclusions in that mouse painting situation?
A.	I would say no. And beyond that
I can't think of a specific comment. There were a number of people who would says that those kinds of studies bear no relationship to human experience. And that was actually a comment made at the time not by tobacco company individuals. Some scientists questioned the validity of those studies, who had nothing to do with the tobacco industry for instance.
to sort of revisit the key dates with you because, in terms of what the tobacco's industry position was on those key dates and those events, isn't it true that in June 1954 when the American Cancer Society pronounced smoking to be associated with lung cancer, that the tobacco industry took a contrary view?
A.	The comments that were made, as I
recall, in relation to Hammond and Horn were made in the context of there is a statistical association and we need more study, we need more information before we conclude that the statistical association is accurate.
Q.	But the tobacco industry
certainly did not agree in June 1954 that Hammond and Horn were right, right?
A.	No.
Q*	And in June 195 7 when the AMA
came out with its final report, the tobacco industry did not agree with that conclusion either, did it.
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form; vague. A. I don't remember the specific statement in 1957. I do remember the
statistical association from 1954, so it's a little bit hard for me to say what kind of a statement -• one of the patterns here that I perhaps haven't alluded to is that as you move through time, the media coverage, especially newspapers, moves away from feeling an obligation to quote a source from the tobacco industry so that it isn't -- or if there is a quotation, it would be buried in the article in such a way it might be final paragraph, the kind of thing that a lot of people, at least like me, don't ever get to because I'm skimming through everything. But I can't remember a specific statement from 1957.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	What about from July 1957 and
Dr. Burney's causative statement? Did the tobacco industry agree with that?	'
A.	I don't think so.
Q.	And what about the 19 5 9 study,
what I think you termed earlier, the 200,000?
A.	Right, the Dorn.
Q.	The Dorn study.
A.	Yes.
with the results on the Dorn study?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form; vague.
A.	So far as I know, they did not.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	And what about the pronouncement
in spring of 1962 by the Royal College of Physicians in England that smoking was bad for your health? Did the tobacco industry agree with that statement?
A.	Not so far as I know.
Q.	And what about the committee to
the Surgeon General's report -- leading up to the 1964 Surgeon General's report? When the committee issued its findings, did the tobacco industry agree with them?
MR. KOETHB: Object to the form; vague as to what conclusions you're referring to.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	You may answer if you're able?
A.	Not so far as I know of.
Q.	And what about the January 1964
actual surgeon -- withdrawn.
What about the 1964 Surgeon General's report itself regarding the smoking impacts on public health? Did the tobacco
industry agree with the conclusions reached in the Surgeon General's report?
MR. KOETHE: I'm going to object to the form; vague as to the specific conclusions you're referring to.
A.	I think I answered that before,
but I'll say -- I'll give you the same answer. No.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	And what about the June 1965
warning label legislation? The tobacco industry did not acquiesce in that, did it?
A.	Yes, it.
Q,	Did it fight putting warning
labels on cigarettes?
A.	There was an initial debate about
it and in turn you have a -- the debate will focus on what the actual wording should be.
And as I remember the actual wording, it comes out "Caution. Smoking may be hazardous to your health." I think that -- that's an approximation. And some antismoking advocates have said that the government sold out with a weak statement, but the industry accepted it and it began to appear on cigarette packs as
the law of the land. And I believe it was the first or second of January of 1966.
Q.	But isn't it true that initially
the tobacco industry took a position that opposed any kind of warning label on cigarettes? And I mean initially.
A.	Well, actually, curiously enough,
not only the tobacco industry but Leroy Burney, Surgeon General of the United States at one point in the late 1950s, made a statement that -- if I'm not mixing this up -that warning labels would more or less be redundant because everybody already knows. There's no surprise here.
Q.	Okay. And again, if you can,
just focus on the question, but you did partially, which was basically in the beginning of that warning label legislation effort. But the tobacco industry opposed it; isn't that true?
A.	I can't say that for sure.
Actually, I cannot. I'm not positive about that.
Q.	What about when the fairness
Isn't it true that the tobacco industry opposed that in 1967?
A.	Yes, that was adjudicated in the
courts.
Q.	And isn't it also true that the
tobacco industry took issue with the 1977 findings by the Department of Health services under Mr. Califano?
A.	I can't say for sure because I
don't recall seeing anything on that.
Q.	And isn't it true that in 1988
when the Surgeon General, Mr. Koop -Dr. Koop's report came out regarding smoking and addiction, that the tobacco industry took issue with that conclusion as well?
A.	I believe that is correct, yes.
Q.	In fact, isn't it true even to
today. Dr. Martin, that the tobacco industry disputes the concept that smoking causes cancer?
A.	I can't answer that question. I
honestly don't know.
Q.	Isn't it true that even up into
today the tobacco industry is taking the position that smoking is not an addiction or
addictive behavior?
A.	Again, I can't answer that
question.
Q,	Isn't it true that even up until
today, the tobacco industry is taking the position that smoking that smoking - - nicotine is not addictive?
A*	Again, I can't answer that. I'm
literally not sure where things have evolved since the rather famous Waxman hearings in 1994 .
Q.	Now, let me see if you agree or
disagree with some further statements based on your review of the literature and the work that you did preparing your expert opinions in case. And again I'm not asking you whether you agree or disagree with the substance but whether you've found information regarding these.
Children and adolescents are especially prone to uhstimate (sic) the dangers of smoking?
MR. KOETHE: Could you repeat that?
A.	Yes. I missed that too. Sorry.
MR. CRANDALL: Sure.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	The phrase that I want you to
respond to is: Children and adolescents are especially prone to underestimating the dangers of smoking.
A.	No, I disagree with that
statement.
Q.	Why?
A.	Well, I go back to the 1964 Parma
study. 200 of the children who were randomly sampled in the Parma school district were sixth graders, and I guess we would count them as children because they are -- how old are you in sixth grade? 11? 11, 12, something like that? And quite specifically, the children showed a definite health consciousness and awareness in their responses as to -- well, they were saying what would prevent you from smoking as the questions were asked. And heart disease and cancer are, as I recall -- I don't have the report in front of me -- among the top five reasons.
Q.	Do you agree or disagree with
this statement? Children and adolescents are particularly susceptible to messages from
And again I don't want you to agree or - - well, let's do it in two steps. First you would agree or disagree with this statement, that children and adolescents are particularly susceptible to the messages from the tobacco industry?
A.	Would I agree or disagree with
that statement? I'm asking.
Q.	Yes, that's the question.
A.	Is this my personal opinion?
Q.	Yes.
A.	That children and adolescents are
particularly susceptible?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I don't think I can give a yes or
no answer to that. I mean, they can be susceptible to a lot of things.
Q.	Okay. And in the course of your
research now - - this is again now focusing not on your own personal beliefs but on the research you did. Did you find any information in connection with your research that children, adolescents are particularly susceptible to the messages from the cigarette
industry?
A.	No.
Q.	This is again a personal belief
question. Do you believe that children tend to think that they are invulnerable?
A.	No, I don't believe that.
Q.	All right. And as a - - this is
now a matter of research. Do you believe that -- withdrawn.
In the course of your research, did you find articles and evidence indicating that children tend to think they are invulnerable in any of the materials you reviewed?
A.	No, I did not.
Q.	Did you find -- withdrawn.
This is a question as to your personal beliefs. Do you believe that about half of the minors who smoke underestimate the strength of nicotine addiction?
MR. KOETHE: Before you answer the question, I just want to clarify that you're not asking for his personal view as an expert who's studied that question. Is that -MR. CRANDALL: Hell, I'm asking for his
personal view, and 1 think that whether he - -I think the subject matters where --he believes his subject matters are fairly well articulated but whether or not it's within his purview, I think is -MR. KOETHE: Well, I just want to make clear that I've been assuming that all these questions have been - - at least these last three or four questions -- have been directed to him in a personal, lay opinion sense and not as something that he has studied as an expert for purposes of this case.
MR. CRANDALL: Well, you're right as to the ones where I've asked for his personal opinion. You're wrong as to the ones where I said based on research that he -MR. KOETHE: Has it appeared in the literature.
MR. CRANDALL: Right.
MR. KOETHE: Okay. That's fair enough.
MR. CRANDALL: Okay.
MR. KOETHE: And this question, you may have to have it read back by her.
THE WITNESS: Could we maybe hear the question again?
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Sure. Do you believe that most
young smokers or minors underestimate the strength of nicotine addiction?
MR. KOETHE: Again . . .
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Personal opinion.
A.	I really don't know how to answer
that question. I have no information at all.
Q.	Okay. So that's a good way to
answer it.
A.	My youngest is 20 years old so
I'm sort of --
Q.	How many children do you have, by
the way?
A.	Three.
Q.	Are they smokers at all?
A.	My oldest, no, she's a medical
social worker. My middle daughter is an investment banker in New York; and no, never. My youngest is an occasional. The 20-year-old is an occasional smoker.
Q.	Okay. Now, this again goes to
the research that you did conduct. Did you come across information of any sort in the
media publications and things that you looked at, that showed that half of the minors who smoked believed they will not be smoking in five years?
A.	In termB of my research. Well,
it falls outside the purview of my research, but, no.
Q.	And did you come across any
information in your research indicating that minors are unaware of or underestimate the strength of nicotine addiction?
A.	Well, I'd have to have the same
response to the previous question. I think that's outside the purview of my research, but no.
Q.	Now, in the course of your
research did you find that the tobacco industry had engaged in public relations tactics to present itself in positive ways?
MR. KOETHE: Could you read that back for me, please.
MR. CRANDALL: I'll say it again.
MR. KOETHE: Okay.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
did you come across any information showing that the tobacco industry had engaged in public relations tactics to present itself in positive ways?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form of the question.
A.	Well, I have to give the same
answer. I think, again, that falls outside my purview of research but I would say no, I don't recall reading anything along that line. BY HR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Did you come across any research
in the work that you did in preparing your expert's opinion in this case indicating that the tobacco industry has used imagery themes and strategies that are likely to appeal to children and adolescents?
A.	Same answer. I think that isn't
within the purview of the questions that I have been asked to consider. But no, 1 don't recall anything.
Q.	And did you come across any
information showing that -- withdrawn.
Did any of your research in connection with forming your opinion in this
case unearth the fact that -- withdrawn.
Did any of your research unearth allegations that the tobacco industry had intimidated scientists who publish findings contrary to the industry's self-interest?
A.	Same response as before. I think
that's outside my purview. And no.
Q.	Okay. And the same question -- I
mean the same type of question. Did you come across any information, articles, or things written in the media that the industry has attempted to skew the scientific literature and scientific conferences with articles, letters to the editor, and presentations by industry consultants?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form; lack of foundation.
A.	Again, 1 think that's outside of
my purview, and I would have to answer no.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Did you come across any
information in the course of your research in terms of forming your expert opinions that the tobacco industry has funded what are called front groups masquerading as independent or
grass-roots organizations?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form; foundation. It's argumentative also.
A.	Hell, again, it's outside my
purview. As I understand the question, I would have to answer no.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	And just want to back up right on
that last response. You're not answering no because it's outside the purview of your field of expertise, are you? In other words - -
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. So that we can -- there's
a -- we can disagree or agree about what that purview might be. But I'm asking you, look, did you come across any of this stuff?
A.	Right. And I'm honestly saying
no. But I don't recall anything. I could say I don't recall.
Q.	Okay. Did you come across any
articles or news information at any time indicating that the tobacco industry has used political funding to gain access to political process in order to protect its interests?
A.	Same response. With our
understanding that I think it falls outside of my purview, and my answer would be no.
Q.	When you -- withdrawn.
Do you believe that you have brought any bias, any personal biases to your assignment here in this case? In other words, do you come at the issues that you've addressed in Exhibit 1 with any kind of biases?
A.	No.
Q.	When you wrote the book or
co-authored the book Drinking of (sic)
America, what was the purpose of that book?
A.	To give you a little bit of
background, Hark Lender, whom I've mentioned before was a graduate student of mine when I taught at Rutgers University back in the 1970s. The job market in history is never particularly good for college professors but the year or two that Mark was finishing up, we couldn't find anything, almost anything to interview for. So he was able to get an appointment as the first historian ever with the Rutgers Center of Alcohol Studies, which is a major research center in the United
States. It used to be at the Yale school. It moved to Rutgers in the '60s. As the first, sort of, historian in residence and to try to bring a historical perspective to the scientific inquiry that was going on at the center.
In turn because of Mark’s involvement, I too became involved in the work of the center and became an adjunct faculty member when I was at Rutgers and actually maintained that appointment for several years after leaving and moving to Houston.
And Mark and I became convinced that one of the things that we could do would be to put together a study which would look at America's, I guess for lack of a better term, sort of ongoing ambivalent love/hate relationship with alcohol over a 350-,
'60-year period going back to earliest Colonial times in terms of settlements.
So that's how that book evolved, as sort of a -- it became a history of not only patterns of consumption but problems associated with alcohol and proposed solutions, some of which went all the way to
formal public policy in the form of national prohibition.
And then why we backed away from that for other alternatives to deal with an ongoing commodity in society which can be a source of trouble and problems. So that was the goal of the, book, was to bring historical perspective to bear. And it's had a pretty successful run along that line.
Q.	In that book, did you also try to
maintain objectivity in your presentation?
A.	Very much so.
Q.	Did you engage in any value
judgments or make recommendations as a policy matter?
A.	No.
Q.	Did you express your personal
views in that book?
A.	We tried as much as possible --
in fact, that was one of the things reviewers were very kind to us about. They might not have liked this or that, but they said the book was an honest attempt to lay the issues out as subjectively as possible.
I want to turn to some specific areas of your expert report, so it probably would be useful to have that right in front of you as we go through this. In the first pages you're defining the job to do. You say -- you see there's a sentence that begins "First, I was asked"?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And then when it gets down there,
it says "the potential health risks associated with tobacco use and smoking cigarettes." Do you see that word?
A.	Yes.
Q. Why did you use the word "potential" there?
A.	Well, I think I'm -- what I'm
doing is I'm qualifying in the sense that for some there may be health risks and for others there may not be health risks.
Q.	What about in the next sentence
when you Bay "Second"; and then it goes on, "I was asked to consider the subject of public awareness regarding the so-called" -A.	Right.
q.	-- "habit - forming or addictive
nature of tobacco." Why did you use the word "so-called"?
A.	Because our vocabulary continues
to change. Habituation was the word of the '60s. Addicted to the cigarette habit, of the '20s and the '30s. Enslaving in the 19th century. Bewitching in the 17th century, so by using "so-called," what I'm suggesting here, this is a changing vocabulary and that is, again, one reason why I put quotation around "addictive."
Q.	Okay. If you look on page 2
where you're summarizing the three parts of your opinion, again you, on about the first numbered paragraph, fourth line down, you use the word "possibility of serious diseases."
Do you see that?
A.	Right. Yes, yes.
Q.	And why did you use the word
"possibility" there?
A.	Well, it goes back to what I said
before. Por some people, they can smoke for incredibly long times and they never develop a serious disease so that it's not universal.
Q.	Okay. And in the second numbered
paragraph, fourth line down, again, you use the word "potential difficulties in quitting smoking." Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Why did you use the word
"potential" there?
A.	Because I think it -- in all
fairness, it does vary. Some people do not have difficulties in quitting smoking and other people do. We have -- let me just expand just for a minute. The estimate, when I received the American Cancer Society literature back in 1996 was that 47 million Americans have quit smoking since the Surgeon General's report in 1964.
I think the number now is around 50 million, although I haven't kept up specifically with the literature but I think 50 million would be fair. So for some -- for that many people to quit, some of them did not have -- some people do have a hard time and others don't. I mean it does vary. I think that's what I'm trying to indicate there.
very first sentence -A.	Yes.
Q.	-• you talk about the claimed
health risks associated with smoking.
A,	Right.
Q.	Again, why did you use the word
"claimed"?
A.	Because there are ongoing claims
of various health risks associated with smoking and I thought that that was the best way to qualify that and to make that point.
Q.	Couldn't it just as appropriately
read -- read as follows in relation to both questions? "Popular awareness of the health risks associated with smoking”?
A.	It could have, yes.
Q.	If you look at page 3 -- no,
sorry. Just quickly -- this may be trodding upon ground we have already covered. But if you look at page 6 - -
A.	Page 6?
Q.	-- first full paragraph.
A.	Okay.
General Assembly?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And just if you would read that
paragraph again, I just want to ask you one question about it to make sure I've covered this thoroughly.
A.	Do you want me to read it out
loud or - -
Q.	No, you don't have to do that.
A.	Oh, okay. (Witness examined
exhibit.) Yes, okay.
Q.	We covered this this morning, I
think.
A.	Yes.
Q.	But did you come across any
information anywhere to show lobbying activity opposing any of these laws by the cigarette industry?
A.	Not in relation to this period in
time .
Q.	Okay.
A.	And I'm referring to Ohio and the
other state laws.
Q.	Yes.
A.	I think that I indicated that the
lobbying was to have these kindB of laws
primarily coming from the WCTU.
Q.	Let's turn to page 9, paragraph
capital D when it talks about court cases and rulings.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Can you -- the second full
paragraph says, "In more recent times, lawsuits directed against tobacco companies .
. . have garnered extensive media coverage.* Did you have in mind any particular lawsuits?
A.	One of the lawsuits that I had in
mind, because it did get extensive coverage in Kansas -- and I'm going to date it for you as -- I think it began in the late 1950s, but it's been a long time since I've looked at that material. And I think the person named was Ross. -- did garner extensive media attention in the local regional network.
And there were other cases in the '50s I have seen references to back in the more -- the global searching of the New York Times. And I think that must have been what I had in mind when I wrote that particular sentence.
interest with respect to the Ross case?
A.	Hell, I hope I'm giving you the
right name, first of all. I may or may not be.
Ross had sued the companies because he had had, I believe it was cancer of the larynx. I'm guessing at this because, again, it's been three years. And the media followed that case.
Q.	Let me just stop you for one
second because I don't want you to guess.
A.	Okay.
Q.	But I do want to know -- and
again this goes back to the purpose of this deposition.
A.	Right.
Q.	Hhen you say - - make a general
statement that says, "In more recent times lawsuits directed against tobacco companies and court deliberations have garnered extensive media." I'm trying to find out as much as I can in detail about what you mean by that statement. So that's my reason for asking you. And I want you to be as detailed with me on this paragraph as you are able.
That's all.
Q.	When you say, "In more recent
times,* what time frame are you referring to?
A.	Oh, I think I was referring to
whereas the Austin versus Tennessee is a reflection of the state prohibition laws. I was -- "more recent times"; I'm referring to the period approximately 1950 into the 1980s.
Q.	Okay. Then go ahead. I didn't
mean to cut you off on the Ross case.
A.	Well, I guess I could go from
Ross to - - again, I'm trying to remember the names. Also I would go up in the late 1980s -- I suppose if I use that as a benchmark, the Cipollone case of New Jersey was certainly on the back of my mind. And that did garner not only extensive newspaper coverage but television coverage aB well.
Q.	In what connection was the
Cipollone news coverage -- in other words, what was there particularly noteworthy about the Cipollone case, in your mind?
A.	Hell, this would be based on the
television reports that are somewhat vague in my mind, from watching. Was noteworthy that -- that in New Jersey law, it is possible to assign portions of liability with respect to who was responsible for her death that was associated with smoking. And because of that, the tobacco companies, if I'm not mistaken, initially did receive a judgment for a portion of the responsibility. And that was, I believe, quite newsworthy because that had not happened before.
Upon appeal - - and I am not familiar with the details of the appeal. I'm not even familiar with the details of the Cipollone case. I believe that on appeal the judgment was reversed, but I do remember -and I'm just giving this as an example of extensive media coverage.
Q.	Okay. If you turn to page 14
down at the bottom, the last paragraph beginning at the bottom of the page, talks about the FCC fairness rule. Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	You make the statement there, "In
television to spread information to large audiences." Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q,	That's one of your opinions,
correct?
A.	I think television has the
capacity to spread information to large audiences, yes.
Q.	Okay. Now, you go on to say --
and this is - - let me back up.
Throughout most of your report, you speak about the public exposure to various forms of media activity, correct? You're talking about the media receiving -- or the public receiving information, right?
A.	Hell, yes. I mean. I'm looking
at media sources among a host of sources.
Q.	Right. And the focus is the
dissemination of information to the public, for the most part.
A.	Yes.
Q.	When -- in this statement at the
bottom, the very bottom of the page 14 going on to the top of page 15, you make a statement that says, "No one watching these messages,
many of which were produced by the American Cancer Society and the" -- some other word.
A.	American Lung Association.
Q.	- - "could miss the intended point
that smoking could be deleterious to personal health.” That's what you said in your report, correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, why did you make that
statement?
A. Because?
Q.	Well, let me withdraw it. Let me
withdraw the question.
That statement essentially puts yourself in the position of the recipient of the message as to -- as opposed to making a assessment of whether a message was conveyed. Do you see the point that I'm making?
A.	Well, yes, but I assumed that
people also read newspapers, and they received the information from the newspapers and that they may have watched movies and they may have received information from movies. They may have listened to the radio and received information, so I'm not quite sure what the
distinction is.
Q.	Well, the distinction is you --
in this sentence, you appear to be making a judgment as to what people took away from what they were exposed to, basically putting yourself in the shoes of the recipients. I'm not sure you did that in other portions -- in other parts of your opinion.
A.	Well, I mean, I can give you a
couple of examples of these public service announcements. And then, certainly, one of the most graphic was the coughing cowboy would come in and threaten people in the saloon but he was smoking so he started to cough and was spewing forth blood before it was all said and done and couldn't hold up the saloon, or whatever it was, because he lost control of himself coughing over the cigarette. That's a pretty powerful message that's being conveyed.
A second message was the -- that I recall was the William Talman message. Talman, I think, is T-a-1-m-a-n. And Talman was an actor, the prosecutor on the Perry Mason series. And he was dying of lung cancer/ and he put out a message shortly
before his death encouraging people not to smoke. Again, I think that's very graphic material. And would support the sentence that no one could miss the intended point.
Q.	In your mind with that point
having been made would there be anything that could counterbalance or dilute that point in any form of media?
A.	With reference to those ads, no.
Or I guess they're not ads. They're really called public service announcements.
Q.	If you look at page 15, the
second to the last paragraph, it talks about -- well, you make this statement. I will read this one. "I have every reason to believe that the body of knowledge derived from the historical sources and materials described in the preceding sections was widely available to all persons, including union members, living in the state of Ohio." Do you see that?
a.	Yes.
Q.	On what do you base that
paragraph?
A.	The sum total of information that
I have gone through. I can begin with the newspapers and point to the five major dailies that we reviewed. I can point to the union newspapers which carried extensive stories about tobacco and possible health consequences, and difficulties in stopping smoking.
I can point to local newspapers, one of which in Cleveland, for instance, carried a story to the effect that in the year 1964, according to the local American Cancer Society head in Ohio, that over 250,000 school children, presumably teenagers he's referring to, had seen antismoking films, instructional films prepared by the American Cancer Society, films like "To Smoke or Not To Smoke."
I can assume based on all of the relevant pamphlet literature that was circulating through society. I can assume on state requirements with respect to teaching health education and examining on that education among school children. I think that virtually every type of source and kind of source that I have looked at supports and sustains that statement.
Q.	Okay. Let's look at page 21 now
in the middle of the page.
A.	(Witness examined exhibit.)
Q.	Let's first look at the paragraph
that begins "In addition." Do you have that in front of you?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. That's talking about the
depositions in this case.
A.	Yes.
Q.	And we indicated, I think,
earlier that Mr. Smith had done some synopses on those depositions on your behalf; is that right?
A.	Right. Right. Very brief
summaries.
Q.	Okay. How, if any -- how, if at
all, have you used those depositions in connection with fortifying your expert opinions, changing them, or how are they relevant in the course of your anticipated trial testimony?
A.	Okay. At this point I had
received the depositions but I was, as it says, just beginning the process of evaluating
them so they would not have affected what we were just looking at.
Q.	Right.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Right. And I just -- I'm not
sure if you caught the end of my question which was how, if at all, will the depositions that you've reviewed impact your testimony at trial.
A.	I think the depositions, as a
general statement, show that those trustees of the funds who were deposed had significant levels of awareness with respect to my areas of review, potential health riskB associated with smoking, and difficulties in quitting.
I'll give you two or three examples. I have not tried to quantify anything. Different questions would be asked in different depositions, so that's quite difficult to do. But based on what -- I'll give you two or three examples.
Virtually all of the trustees seem to have some familiarity with or had heard of the Surgeon General's report, the 19 64 report. A number were very aware of
terms like "coffin nails,’ some cases, "cancer sticks." Some indicated in essence they would say, Well, I've been aware for a long time that there were health risks associated with smoking or it would be difficult to quit depending on, again, the kind of question that was asked. So that I would say that the depositions would -- the depositions or those who were deposed or comments would sustain the statement that's made there.
Q.	Did you find any -- did you
review any depositions that did not support or confirm your beliefs and opinions in this case?
A.	There were two types of responses
that did not necessarily conform. One type of response is that "I wasn't a smoker, so I didn't pay any attention"; and the second kind of a response was -- and I think I was very surprised about this one, given the state law and the requirements of taking health courses in school. I remember them very vividly as a kid, growing up in Ohio and going to school in Ohio in the '50s, in primary and secondary schools, -- that they remembered no
instruction in school. Those were the two qualifications. And I'm not saying that's everyone. I'm saying a few indicated that.
Q.	Were these facts highlighted in
the summaries that you received from Mr. Smith?
A.	I asked him to provide me with --
to summarize statements that would touch upon awareness issues and quite often he did it by just putting a quotation down and the page number.
Q.	Okay. Now, I think I talked to
you this morning about ongoing research that you were doing. Is there any other additional research than what you've described this morning that you contemplate doing between now and the time you testify at trial?
A.	No.
Q,	Now, is there --
A.	Well, in the context of this
conversation this morning.
Q.	What do you mean, in the context
of this conversation?
A.	Well, I mean, I had indicated
television programs. I think I specifically stated that. So then --
Q.	Right. That was --
A.	Right. The no is saying I
wouldn't change what I said this morning.
Q.	Right. Okay. Now, are there any
opinions that you intend to express at trial that are not contained within Bxhibit 1 in some measure?
A.	I would not -- I'm not sure quite
how to answer that question because there may be items that would be on the edge of something that is expressed here.
I'll give you an example of what I'm talking about. There are lots of examples of local programs going on in the state, and yet I don't make a special category out of local programs going on in the state. I give a few examples at various points along the way. So that would be how I would have to qualify it.
Q.	Okay. I understand that. And
you have a 21-page report, or 22-page report. I'm not trying to limit you to each word that you will say at trial - -
A.	Yes.
q.	--or each example you may give
at trial- But putting aside examples of points to makei are all the points that you intend to make in terms of discrete, identifiable opinions identified in Exhibit l?
MR. KOETHE: I'm going to object to that question, Steve. I think it touches on legal issues more so than -- you know, a lot of what he's going to do at trial depends upon what you folks do in your case. And he doesn't know specifically what questions we may be asking him. And this report i£ a fair summary of the opinions that he holds. I don't really think it's fair to ask him whether or not any single thing he might say is inside or outside of that report.
MR. CRANDALL: I'm not asking -- while you were discussing, I think, something with co-counsel, he and 1 had a little colloquy in which I said I'm not asking to know each and every word or each and every example, but I think I am entitled to know whether there are topics that aren't listed in Exhibit 21 (sic) that you intend to testify about at trial.
And that's my question.
A.	I guess I don't know how to
answer that question. I would say that the report touches on but does not necessarily go into detail of virtually every area that I would expect to testify.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Does this report touch on every
area that you expect to testify?
A.	I qualified it with the word
"virtually."
Q.	See, here's the problem, at least
my problem, and it may be partly a legal problem. It's also a factual problem. If there is something up inside in the head of Dr. Martin by way of a point to make or a separate opinion. I, as the plaintiffs' representative am entitled to know what your opinions are at trial. I don't need to know every single word you're going to say or every single document you've looked at to support your opinion or every single example to support your opinion.
But I think I am entitled to know: Oh, in addition to this, I'm going to
testify that smoking doesn't cause cancer, okay. All right. That's an area that is not listed in Exhibit 21 -- Exhibit l.
A.	Right.	.
Q.	Are there any areas that you're
aware of that you intend to bring up at trial and discuss with the jury that you have not put forth in Exhibit 1?
A.	Broad areas?
MR. KOETHE; I'm going to object to the question. I don't see how you can expect him to answer that until we know what case the plaintiffs are going to put on and what questions we're going to ask him. He doesn't know what questions we're going to ask him. And we're obligated to put forth a summary of the opinions that the witness is going to offer, and I think we've done that.
It's my understanding we've also supplemented this report, at least in some limited fashion, on the supplementation date which simply reflects that fact that he may offer opinions within his area of expertise that respond to or relate to documents or opinions that your witnesses may offer at
trial. And we're not in a position to know what that's going to be until you actually do it.
But certainly I'm willing to. state that this Exhibit 1 is a fair summary of the witness's opinions and the research that he's done, and I think you're unfairly trying -- and improperly trying to get him to make a statement that he's not going to discuss anything else. And I object to that.
MR. CRANDALL: Well, I am going to ask the question, and if you want to instruct him not to answer, I guess that's your option. I don't think it's unfair at all. I think that it's a routine question to ask of any expert. So it's a matter of surprise, and I don't want to debate it with you, except to say in any case I've been aware of, the parties each try and limit -- and properly so -- the other side's expert opinions from the expert's mouth in terms of what topics will be covered on the stand.
And it is not a question of it is not sufficient, to my way of thinking under the law, to say, Well, we don't know what
you're going to do so we're not going to tell you exactly what. We do have expert reports. We've exchanged them and now we’re at the point where we're almost a month away from trial. And I already do have some concerns about ongoing research which we could take up after the deposition -- after the testimony's over. But I think this is kind of an elementary question of a witness.
So I'll ask it again and you can object, and if you want to instruct him not to answer, you can certainly do so. But I do want to ask the question.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, having heard the
colloquy now, maybe it places it more in a frame of reference. But my question to you is does Exhibit 1 contain all of the topics upon which you expect to offer an opinion at trial?
MR. KOETHE: I'll just impose the same objection but you can answer.
A.	I would intend to testify within
my areas of expertise as I've tried to outline and define them in what is a fairly lengthy reportThat would be my purpose .
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. That's not really though
what I asked. And if you can't answer it yes or no, you can say that too.
A.	1 guess I can't answer the
question.
Q.	All right. Okay. Now, I have
some questions that I want to pose to you -MR. KOETHB: Steve, we've been going for about an hour and 15 minutes. And this would probably be a time to take a short break - -MR. CRANDALL: Sure.
MR. KOETHE: -- unless you're about ready to finish up.
MR. CRANDALL: No, I'm not.
THE VIDEOGRAPHBR: We're going off the record approximately 3:55 P.M.
(A recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHBR; Coming back on the record, approximately 4:05 P.M.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. Dr. Martin, these are a
few questions that I want to address and they involve your personal views on things, not your expert opinions in this case.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Do you believe that advertising
affects tobacco use?
MR. KOETHE: Objection; vague.
A.	It might a little bit.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	In what way do you think it might
affect tobacco use?
A.	Well, it depends on the kind of
advertising, but a lot of it is brand oriented, convincing people probably already using the product to switch from Brand A to Brand B or from Brand B to Brand C, that sort of thing.
Q.	What do you believe to be the
appropriate role of government in regulating tobacco use?
A.	I think the government has every
right to adopt laws which provide for the good health of the community. Some of the laws that have been adopted in the last 15 to 20 years, such as no smoking on airplanes, no smoking in some types of buildings, government, federal buildings -- government buildings, I should say, I think these are
probably pretty good laws and I think most people would agree, including smokers.
I have not been and never will be a prohibitionist. I believe that adults should make reasonable choices about what they want to do with their lives.
Q.	when you use the word "adult,"
how old? Where do you draw the line?
A.	Well, I guess I would draw the
line as an adult would be a voting-age person, which is 18. Old enough to serve in the military, you ought to be old enough to decide what you want to do with your life since if you get in a war, that's the biggest risk of them all.
Q.	Do you believe that educational
programs that exist today are effective in getting out the dangers of smoking?
MR. KOETHE: Again, I just want to make sure that we're clear that this is his personal and not expert opinion.
MR. CRANDALL: Yes.
A.	Right. Well, I say that it's my
personal opinion. I would say yes and no. It depends on the program. I think some of the
programs have a potential to backfire because they become so horribly preachy and at the same time, I think, also redundant. If you tell people long enough they can't do something, it's a well-known -- well. I'll just give national prohibition as an example. The harsher the enforcement, the more people seem determined to break the law. I BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. I want to focus your
attention now on some questions about youth smoking. Do you believe that there's a problem with the youth uptake of smoking today?
A.	A youth - -
Q.	Youth uptaking.
A.	You meaning taking up the --
Q.	Taking up smoking, yes. Do you
believe that there is a problem with young people beginning to smoke today?
A.	I think the going numbers, again
depending on who you talk to, are -- what is it? 20, 25 percent of youth will attempt smoking and then you get into definitional issues, as I understand it, about how do you
define a smoker.
There was a recent study in Texas -- it was either state or federally funded -- that garnered front page headlines which said, in essence, that the numbers of youth smoking were going up dramatically; and then when you read the story, it was -included anyone who had ever attempted or even puffed on a cigarette.
Hell, that is hardly smoking from my point of view. Experimentation shouldn't be confused with using a product on a regular basis. But so I thought that was kind of loading the numbers.
My own personal opinion, I would prefer for young people not to smoke.
Q.	Okay. What do you think should
be done about getting young people not to smoke or is everything being done that can be done?
A.	I think education is the real
key, continuing education without being overbearing. And a lot of times reformers don't know how to not be overbearing. And 1 think that that's worked in the past. X mean
we can look at the last 40 years of activity and just go back to our 50 million Americans have stopped smoking or go from a population where 50 percent were smoking to a population where 20 to 25 percent are smoking. And I think some of that is related to education and constant repetition of messages.
Q.	Now, you -- when I asked you a
little bit about advertising and its effect on smoking and tobacco use, I think you said the words that it had had a little bit of an impact. My question now focuses on the impact of advertising on youth uptake of smoking.
What is your view about that? Do you think that tobacco advertising has an impact on children starting to smoke?
MR. KOETHE: Again, I want to object to the extent that you're calling for anything other than strictly personal, nonexpert opinion.
MR. CRANDALL: I'm calling for personal, nonexpert opinion.
MR. KOETHE: Okay.
A.	And I will give a personal,
nonexpert opinion which would be reflective of
the material I've already discussed today.
And that is that I've seen no convincing evidence that identifying a cartoon character has little children out there smoking, I think that advertising is not a consequential factor in the decision-making process. I think peer pressure is much more important, for example, by comparison.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	I take it therefore that you
would not be in favor of further restrictions on industry advertising even aimed at children.
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
A.	Well, someone is, first of all,
going to have to convince me that advertising is specifically aimed at children. I've read assertions to that effect but I'd like to see the hard data.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Okay. You're familiar with the
cartoon character Joe Camel; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, in your view is the Joe
appeal to children?
A.	No.
Q.	Now, when -- and are you aware of
any tobacco advertising that you've ever seen that could be classified as trying to appeal to children?
A.	In recent years or in the sum
total of my life?
Q.	Sum total of your life.
A.	I would say no, not - - when I say
■children," too, I'm not talking about 15-,
16-, 17-, and 18-year-olds.
Q.	Okay. All right. Hell, then let
me go back with Joe Camel.
A.	Okay.
Q.	Do you believe that Joe Camel was
aimed to appeal at adolescents?
MR. KOETHE: Again, I'm going to object to the question, to the extent that it calls for anything other than his personal opinion.
I also object to it on the ground that it calls for sheer speculation as to what the intent of an advertising campaign was .
BY MR. CRANDALL:
then. In your -- from what you know and have read about the Joe Camel campaign, did that, in your view, have a tendency to influence adolescents? And that wasn't a very good question either so I'll rephrase it.
From what you've seen about the Joe Camel campaign, did that have the capacity to appeal to adolescents and encourage them to smoke?
A.	I guess I really feel kind of
unqualified to even answer that kind of a question. I don't -- I've never worked in an advertising agency. I have no idea what goes into it. I've read things about alcohol that the little frogs that appear on TV now are to induce kids to drink beer and they do studies and they prove that the kids really have identified the beer with the frog and I'm going -- I don't know. I just can't -* I don't know how to answer questions like that.
Q.	Well, you can answer it this
way -- I mean if you -- I would like a response.
A.	I can say I don't know.
say "I don't know."
A.	I don't know.
Q.	Okay. But -- all right. And so
do you have any opinion on the subject of Joe Camel and whether it's -A.	I guess maybe my problem is Joe Camel, I guess, is a relatively recent phenomenon within the last, what, 10 years or so. And I as an individual ignore advertising, and I don't think I'm all that unusual. I maybe use advertising to find out that something exists, but beyond that it doesn't influence my decision-making. So it's -- not very well wired-in or attuned to this. And this is personal. I'm talking just about me.
Q.	Right. Okay. Now, you mentioned
you had some knowledge of this Professor Burnham who was at another university, someplace that I forgot. Can you remember and he may or may not still be there, but this -which university was Dr. -- Professor Burnham affiliated with?
A.	So far as I know his whole
academic career he's been at Ohio State.
Q.	Okay. Now, in reviewing your
deposition in the other case,, it looked to me like there had been some controversy that you were involved in with Professor Burnham having to do with whether or not something should be published. Does that ring a bell with you?
A.	There was a -- I serve as general
editor for a series of books with New York University Press. He have published some 40 books to date in that series. Professor Burnham's book was one of those 40. He had a very vigorous debate about whether that book should be published or not. I think that's what was reflected in that deposition. I was not convinced by the book's argument, and the book needed some -- how do you say this? -stylistic work. The head of the press -- of New York University Press wanted to publish the book and his vote is a big one, bigger than mine and so that's how that issue -- that issue was resolved.
Q.	Hhat was the book that was at
issue? In other words, what was the book that you - -
Habits."
book?
A.	The book looks at issues which
according to Burnham were suppressed in 19th century Victorian America and it was sort of like society and individuals rushed in to tap into all of these bad habits in the 20th century that they couldn't get to in the 19th century, focusing mainly on drinking, some on smoking, some on gambling, some on vice and prostitution, pornography. And swearing was one of the categories too.
Q.	Okay. Now, in terms -- and you
took issue with having the Bad Habits book published because you didn't think it was -it met the standards in the field?
A.	I just personally didn't think
the book was convincing, the argument. But I am not opposed to publishing books that -I would say one-fourth of the books in that series I may not agree with every word or with them. I mean, that's normal. I think that there is a ■■ part of the scholarly process is a venti-ng of differing points of view and
opinions. And this is a book with a definite kind of an argument.
Q.	Did you -- were your criticisms
of the book reduced to writing?
A.	I, as the series editor - - I, as
the series editor, will invariably prepare some comments which are given in confidence to the publisher.
Q.	Okay. Have you retained copies
of those comments?
A.	I doubt it because that had to be
five or Bix years ago, if not longer.
Q.	So that the book Bad Habits was
published by the New York University Press?
A,	Yes.
Q.	And is there a line of books that
it's published under? Is there a -A.	Yes, the series is called the American Social Experience Series.
Q.	Now, as a result of that book
getting published, did you take any actions vis-a-vis your editorship?
A.	No.
Q.	Did you consider taking actions?
"Sorry, I disagree with you. I resign."
Q.	Did you consider doing that?
A.	No.
Q.	Now --
A.	Let me rephrase that. I knew
that that option was available to me, but we've disagreed before. And while I am an advisory editor, I do not control the final decision-making.
Q.	So you never seriously considered
resigning over that issue?
A. No. What I can do -- and I didn't do that in this particular case. X can always say, "Well, it is" -- "the series is mine" or "Xt is my concept.* So I could say, "You go ahead and publish the book outside the context of the series." And I did not choose to do that. X never have and I never will be afraid of material that doesn't necessarily reflect my point of view or my opinion or whatever.
Q.	Do you still have copies of the
Burton deposition from 1996?
A.	I probably do somewhere, yeah.
talked about the Richard Rogers case in Indiana. Does that ring a bell?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What was that case?
A.	That case came to trial in. I'm
going to guess, late 1994, early 1995. I began doing background research, newspapers, the same kinds of general questions that I was asked to investigate in regard to this particular case, awareness issues. And when the case was nearing trial, a decision was made to involve other historians, so I was never involved in that case except just at the ou t s e t.
Q.	Okay. Were you retained in that
case on behalf of the tobacco industry?
A.	I had Jones, Day had discussed
that case with me and I was doing some preparation as an expert, but I did not become involved in that case, no.
Q.	Did you write any reports or
convey anything to writing with regard to the Richard Rogers case?
A.	No.
regarding that case?
A.	No.
Q.	Now, that to my mind, brings this
case, the Ironworkers case, the Burton case, and the Rogers case on which you have performed consulting or expert work on behalf of the tobacco industry; is that right?
A.	I can't really answer that
question because I have never met or talked to anyone in the tobacco industry.
Q.	Okay. Then your relationship has
always been with Jones, Day?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Have you been paid by Jones, Day?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Then is it accurate to say that
your relationship with Jones, Day on tobacco issues involves the Burton case, the Rogers case, and this case?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Are there any other cases outside
the field of tobacco, such as alcohol or any other social issue on which you have done research on behalf of Jones, Day and been paid for it?
A.	No.
q.	Were your affiliates and research
assistants paid for by Jones, Day in the Rogers case?
A.	Yes.
Q,	How much were you paid in the
Rogers case, if you remember?
A.	I believe my rate was $195 an
hour.
Q.	And how much time did you invest
before you were called off?
A.	I have no idea at this point.
Q.	And did you -- you say you had an
assistant working for you in that case as well?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Was that Katie Harrison?
A.	No.
Q. Who was that?
A.	A person by the name of Dianna --
two n's - - Dean, D-e-a-n.
Q.	And was she also paid by Jones,
Day?
A.	Yes.
A.	I believe her rate was $25 an
hour.
Q.	Okay.
MR. CRANDALL: Why don't we go off the record and, Dr. Martin, if I could just excuse you for a few. minutes, I wanted to have a discussion off the record with counsel and then we'll have you back in if necessary.
THE WITNESS; Okay.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're going off the record, approximately 4:25 P.M.
{A recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Coming back on the record, approximately 4:32 P.M.
BY MR. CRANDALL:
Q.	Dr. Martin, just a -- really
one - - a few questions you may or may not know the answer to. Are you aware that after the initial disclosure of documents was made to the plaintiffs that there was a supplemental disclosure of documents toward the end of December 1998?
A.	From the plaintiffs to . . .
company lawyers, to the plaintiffs regarding documents that you had reviewed or would rely on.
A.	Well, I knew that there were --
there was a shifting date in terms of first and second and, I presume, then final. But I don't know exactly what the dates were.
Q.	Do you know that there were --
there were basically two sets of documents that got disclosed on your behalf in this litigation?
A.	I knew that there was an initial
set and there would be a second set because some of the things weren't done.
Q,	And subject, matterwise, were
the - - was there any method to the madness of the second disclosure? In other words, were there - - was there certain types of documents contained in the second disclosure that were different in kind from the first disclosure or were there just more?
A.	Not so far as I know. It was
more. I believe that's correct.
Q.	Okay.
questioning. And I just want to quickly put on the record with everyone present these requests:
Earlier in the deposition testimony there was reference to Dr. Martin's culling out certain documents. And we would like -- the plaintiffs request that they be advised the documents that were not culled out and the documents that were culled out and put into what I call a discard pile earlier in the deposition.
No. 2, there were --we would ask that the exhibits in the Burton deposition be produced, but I don't need the actual documentary exhibits but I would like Dr. Martin's handwritten notes and his typewritten notes and anything reflecting his own work product in that case.
No. 3, we have concerns that Dr. Martin is not done with his research in anticipation of trial and that he has various areas where he intends to do further research regarding local information in Ohio, state and local documents accumulated by Fife, TV and radio advertising, I think, involving the
Vanderbilt collection. And we think that this may necessitate - - in fact, does necessitate a redeposition or a continued deposition when this review is complete, and before trial.
And draft reports were mentioned that were sent to Terry Fife and to the Jones, Day law firm, we would ask that those be produced together with any notes that may have been placed on those, if any, and sent back to the witness.
And I think that is it.
MR. KOETHE: And just for the record.
I'm not going to agree or disagree today to produce this material. We'll take it under advisement, although I guess for the record, would note that we will object any further deposition of Dr. Martin. I think his report sets forth the opinions that we expect him to offer at trial and . . .
MR. CRANDALL: Counsel, could we just agree that we'll resolve this quickly, given the upcoming trial date?
MR. KOETHE: Yeah. I think that's a good idea.
MR. CRANDALL: Okay. Then I'm done with
the deposition and I guess the usual rules regarding signing, although it's January 15th. The trial's February 22nd. So we probably need to expedite the signing and review by the witness. If that's amenable to counsel for the defense.
MR. KOETHE: Nell, as long as the witness has a sufficient opportunity to - -
I assume you want to review the
deposition?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. KOETHE: And as long as he has a sufficient opportunity to do that, we'll do it as quickly as we can.
MR. CRANDALL: Okay. Very well.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: There being no further questions, we're concluded, approximately 4:37 P.M.
(TIME NOTED: 4:37 P.M.)
I	declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of Ohio that the foregoing is true and correct.
Executed on______________. 19____
at___________________,________________
SIGNATURE OF THE WITNESS
1	STATE OF TEXAS )
2	COUNTY OF HARRIS )
4	I, Karen L. D. schoeve, Texas CSR no.
5	3354, do hereby certify:
6	That the foregoing deposition of JAMES
7	KIRBY MARTIN was taken before me at the time
8	and place herein set forth, at which time the
9	witness was put under oath by me;
10	That the testimony of the witness and
11	all objections made at the time of the
12	examination were recorded stenographically by
13	me, were thereafter transcribed under my
14	direction and supervision and that the
15	foregoing is a true record of same.
16	I further certify that I am neither
17	counsel for nor related to any party to said
18	action, nor in any way interested in the
19	outcome thereof.
20	in witness whereof, I have subscribed my
21	name this 27th of January, 1999.
24	--
25	Karen L. D. Schoeve, CSR No. 3354, RDR, CRR
INDEX VOLUME I
FRIDAY, JANUARY 15, 19 9 9
WITNESS	EXAMINATION
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN
(By Mr. Crandall)	4
{By Mr. Crandall)	143
t ■
DEPOSITION EXHIBITS JAMES KIRBY MARTIN
NUMBER	DESCRIPTION	IDENTIF:
1	Statement of James Kirby Martin.	25

lent of James Kirby Martin in regard to Iron Workers Local Union No. 17 Insurance Fund Trustee, et aL, v. Philip Morris, et al, Case No. 1:97 Cl' 1422
I am currently a faculty member at the University of Houston, holding tile rank of »uished University Professor of History. I earned the Ph D. degree from the sity of Wisconsin in 1969 and taught United States history at Rutgers University in srsey between 1969 and 1980. Since then I have held a faculty appointment with the sity of Houston. I have attached a copy of my curriculum vita that describes my qualifications, and professional experiences.
I have prepared this statement in response to two questions 1 was asked to ;ate in my capacity as a professional historian. First, I was asked to examine the af public awareness in the United States, the State of Ohio, and among union ts residing in Ohio about the potential health risks associated with tobacco use and g cigarettes during, but not limited to, the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
, and for the same geographic region, group, and time period, I was asked to consider ject of public awareness regarding the so-called habit-forming or "addictive" nature of
>	products and smoking. In both instances, 1 was asked to assess whether substantial ition was received and understood by die general public and union members in Ohio of that public.
I have examined an extensive range of historical materials and have come to these
isions:
1.) In response to the first question, a vast amount of information has been linated over die years, dating back to the nineteenth century and even earlier times, has resulted in very high levels of public awareness and knowledge about the Hity of serious diseases—and even premature death—being claimed or associated with asumption of tobacco products, including the smoking of cigarettes.
Z) In response to the second question, a vast amount of information likewise has isseminated over the years, dating back to the nineteenth century and even earlier which has resulted in very high levels of public awareness and knowledge about the ial difficulties in quitting smoking. These materials invariably discuss nicotine in ition with the difficulties just noted Numerous sources, dating back to the early ?enth century, employ the term "addictive" or equivalent terms, such as "bewitching" aslaving." These descriptive terms were often used loosely and interchangeably with mns as "habit," "habit-forming," and "habituation." Regardless of the terminology, terials clearly conveyed the meaning that for some persons, at least, quitting smoking >e difficult
3). In rdation to both questions, popular awareness of die claimed health risks ted with smoking, including awareness of the possible difficulties in quitting smoking, sn so pervasive that such information must be regarded as common knowledge ; passing generations of Americans, including union members resident in the State of
-JIn reaching these conclusions, I have investigated several categories of historical
lation. Among these categories are the following:
A.) Laws, Teaching Requirements, and Other Items Relating to Primary and Secondary ion. Since the late 1800s, state education departments and local school districts have d instruction in certain basic curricula, including hygiene, physiology, and health, and Jected various textbooks as acceptable for classroom adoption and use. In addition, lave required teachers to become certified to teach in designated special fields such as physiology, and health education.
The State of Ohio was not an exception. The state has had an activist history in to teaching about reported problems associated with tobacco use in general and ig cigarettes in particular. In 1888 the General Assembly specifically mandated school tion, in relation to physiology and hygiene courses, on alcohol and narcotics, which d tobacco, as well as their effects on the human body. This same act called for ; and certification of prospective teachers of physiology and hygiene.
The Ohio General Assembly, as well as the State Department of Education has !y updated these requirements. In 1915, for example, the Department of PubHc tion distributed an Elementary_Course of Study guide that addressed teaching about issues related to tobacco. Under Section VIII, on narcotics, the guide indicated that graders needed to be instructed in "the use of tobacco and especially cigarettes" in g "how the tobacco harms a person in general, [and] how it affects the blood, the hroat, and lungs." Specifying such school lessons at the primary, middle, and
crized in the wording of a 1976 Ohio law that required "health education, which shall instruction in the harmful effects, and legal restriction against the use of drugs of alcoholic beverages, and tobacco."
Health-related textbooks, dating back to the nineteenth century, have uniformly :ed school lessons about tobacco, portraying tobacco use as both habit-forming and ble source of disease. In Ohio, local school districts have traditionally determined rooks would be adopted for classroom use. Physiology, hygiene, and health >ks at all grade levels invariably have emphasized problems associated with tobacco iption. As early as 1884 one text, the Pathfinder Physiology volume, Hygiene for People, claimed that persistent tobacco use would shorten lives by as much as 10 . Continued the author "Many men who are now slaves to the poison, would gladly from it; and very few tobacco-users would advise their sons to adopt the expensive, ly, worse than useless habit/' Such themes have predominated in health texts used tout the country, including the schools of Ohio, down to our own time.
In addition to textbooks, teachers have increasingly drawn on a variety of audio-visual Is, including educational filmstrips and films, to help reinforce classroom ations about the possible adverse health consequences—and "addictive" qualities—of g. They have had the active support of parent-teacher organizations (PTAs) in ng informational programs about the reported problems associated with smoking, chers have had the assistance of state-level administrators as well. Certainly a jrthy example of such a leader was Howard E. Hamlin, who served as the Supervisor
o	1955. Hamlin tirelessly criss-crossed the state, traveling from county to county to to students, PTA gatherings, and teachers' institutes among other groups in mfng awareness about problems alleged to relate to alcohol consumption and ag. During the school year of 1941-42, for example, Hamlin stated that he ddivered 600 talfcs to a cumulative audience of about 150,000 persons throughout Ohio.
B.) Anti-Smoking and Voluntary Health Organisations. Dating back to the years before Dprirati Civil War of 1861-1865, a variety of anti-smoking organizations in the United focused on public education about possible problems associated with tobacco use and ig. For example, as part of the temperance/prohibition movement related to alcohol nption, the Rev. George Trask of Massachusetts organized the American Anti-:o Society during the 1850s and called for national abstinence in the consumption of
o	products. Other organizations--the Woman's Christian Temperance Union U), the National Anti-Cigarette League, and the International Anti-Cigarette League-late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries likewise sponsored widespread ional campaigns against smoking. Invariably, these groups stressed that smoking, tarted, could be difficult to quit and could have serious health consequences. Lucy Easton, an Ohio native and activist superintendent of the National and International ligarette leagues, not only devoted countless hours to disseminating the anti-smoking but to convincing state governments that they should adopt prohibitory laws in to cigarette sales and consumption.
During the early 1890s the WCTU mounted a national petition drive calling for an
-ues in the United States. In 1893 Congress referred this matter to the states, indicating : maintenance of public health should be treated as a state issue. State governments by adopting laws prohibiting the sale of cigarettes to minors and, in several instances,
3	as well. Local municipalities likewise adopted various restrictions, including g prohibitions on public forms of transportation.
During this time period, the Ohio General Assembly considered bills that would have ted the manufacture and sale of cigarettes within die state; but, in the end, law makers not to go beyond legislation that banned the sale of cigarettes and other tobacco s to minors (first adopted in 1888 and later raising the age from fifteen to eighteen), is the pattern in many other states as well, predicated on the assumption that adults n presented with enough information through schooling and other information to decide for themselves whether or not to use tobacco products.
Besides anti-smoking groups, various national health voluntary organizations, ig die American Heart Association (AHA), the American Cancer Society (ACS), and erican Lung Association (ALA and predecessor groups, such as the National riosis Association), actively promoted public education campaigns about the claimed isks associated with smoking. In the early 1960s these three associations, through ite chapters, began working with the Ohio departments of Health and Education in iting an interagency campaign to discourage cigarette smoking, especially among high students. State AFL-CIO leaders such as William A. Davies, Director of Education search for the Ohio AFL-CIO, would join this major effort, even as it gained full
m on Smoking and Health with the broadened mission of fostering a host of local es and programs for all Ohio citizens regarding health awareness issues relating to
Such union involvement was a continuation on the state and local level of earlier activities on die national level. In 1962, for instance, 118 international unions and ocal unions of the AFL-CIO linked up with the American Cancer Society to establish s March on Cancer, designed in part to educate union members about the causes and g signs of cancer. In late 1963 and 1964 an expanded cooperative endeavor between 'S and the AFL-CIO resulted in a national cancer awareness educational campaign for members that featured grass-roots programs about links between smoking and lung Showing important ACS educational films such as "Is Smoking Worth It?" and the ip, 'To Smoke or Not to Smoke," was characteristic of this major union effort. In nion leaders in Ohio were active in helping to sponsor varieties of local programs tiealth issues related to smoking.
C) Government Involvement and Actions. Government involvement, prior to the 1950s ostly on the state and local level and focused on public school education and laws ed to prohibit in some way the consumption of tobacco products—primarily by youth. y the 1950s, in the wake of various research reports linking smoking and lung cancer, }f which received financial support through such federal agencies as the National r Institute, the national government began to take a more activist role in matters g to health and tobacco use. Besides vastly increasing funding to help underwrite
to smoking, Congress held hearings, such as those of Congressman John Blamick in hat received widespread media coverage about health dangers associated with
Public education campaigns became a thrust of federal activity through the Surgeon il's office, the Public Health Service, and other federal agencies. In 1957, for example, n General Leroy Burney announced publicly that "there is an increasing and ent body of evidence that excessive cigarette smoking is one of the causative factors cancer." In 1959 Burney made a related statement, in both instances with extensive mention that included coverage by newspapers in Ohio.
Perhaps the best known federal initiative in relation to tobacco use was the tion during the John F. Kennedy administration of a special committee to investigate ns about health in relation to smoking. In January 1964 this committee issued its of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General [Luther Teny], Smoking and Representing a detailed review of hundreds of medical-sdentific studies, the report d front page headlines everywhere and resulted in a variety of federal actions ranging te placement of warning labels on packages of cigarettes to die formation of the eJ Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health under the U. S. Public Health Service. The al Clearinghouse was to serve as a resource agency for information that could be ited to the public through state- and local-level interagency councils, whose formation iraged. Ohio moved quickly and obtained a Public Health Service grant to set up die Education Program on Smoking and Health (see pages 6- 7 above). Various Ohio
gpstical assistance from the state program, that resulted in much locally-based mining about the claimed health hazards and habituating nature of smoking. In some es, local Ohio labor unions, at times in cooperation with die ACS, AHA, and ALA, mmunity health departments and other local agencies, helped sponsor these
D.) Court Casts and Rulings. Courts on the national, state, and local levels have :d a variety of rulings relating to smoking. In 1900, for instance, die U. S. Supreme a Austin v. Tennessee ruled that prohibiting the sale of cigarettes in Tennessee was ed for die protection of the public health." The court also stated "that nications are constantly finding their way into the public press denouncing their tes*] use as fraught with great danger to the youth of both sexes."
[n more recent times, lawsuits directed against tobacco companies and court trions have garnered extensive media coverage because of high public interest, an an of widespread public knowledge and concern about the possible adverse health lences and "addictive" qualities of smoking.
EL) Newspapers and Popular Magazines. Beginning in the 1950s, newspapers, whether
I,	regional, or local in circulation, gave extensive coverage to medical and medical-studies dealing with various reported health risks associated with smoking. These ronveyed to the general public research findings initially reported at medical tions and later published in medical, medical-related, and scientific journals. Major pers in Ohio, including the Akron Beacon Journal, the Cincinnati Enquirer, the
ator- were no different rhan papers in other parts of the nation. They regularly d medical and scientific reports about smoking as well as related stories. Certainly 950 and down to the present, no person who read newspapers in Ohio could have inaware of questions relating to personal health and tobacco consumption.
Widely-drcukting popular national magazines, such as Time. Newsweek. Life, and ■'s Digest among others, were also constant sources of information. Readei’s Digest, imple, having one of the highest circulation rates of any popular American magazine, covering smoking-related issues in the 1920s. Thereafter the Digest continued to e extensive coverage of health issues related to smoking and also published articles ; with ways and methods to stop smoking. Between approximately the 1880s and Dr. John Harvey Kellogg's Good Health Magazine repeatedly published articles that d on various diseases as well as the possibility of premature death in relation to
o	consumption. A number of Good Health articles likewise warned of the "addictive" of smoking.
Ohioans also had access to local publications, such as Horizons, a monthly ition in the 1960s of the Ohio Tuberculosis and Health Association (now the Ohio This magazine kept its readers informed of program activities directed against
0	consumption throughout the state. In I960, for example, Horizons reported on a a, Ohio, store window display, sponsored by the local TB chapter, that included a
1	skull, x-ray film of a diseased lung, and cigarettes. To take a second example,
3ns in 1963 focused on a Trumbull County fair exhibit on emphysema that displayed a
F.) Backs, Vamphltls, and Articles. These items, dating back to the nineteenth century eyond, exist in great abundance- Anti-smoking organizations produced them, as did med ministers, public health officials, and well-known figures like the auto [acturer Heniy Ford. Ford’s The Litde White Slaver (1914-1916). for example, arized die thinking of several prominent early twentieth-century anti-smoking ites, among them Thomas Alva Edison and John Wanamaker. Ford distributed the omponent parts of The Litde White Slaver througjh his auto dealerships. The tide ummarizes the widely-held public perception of cigarettes—habit-forming, addictive, ing. (Ford likewise was one of a number of prominent employers who banned ng among his employees.) As a group, these books, pamphlets, and articles tendy reiterated die message that smoking adversely affected health and was also brming (a common phrase was getting "addicted to the cigarette habit") because of isence of nicotine in tobacco. In particular, the Ohio Elementary Course of Study of see page 3 above) encouraged teachers to obtain copies of Ford's pamphlet as useful mentary material for their lessons about the dangers of smoking.
To take another example, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (noted above on page 10) was a : writer and author of the widely-read book Tobaccoism (1922, revised 1937). For I years, Kellogg produced a number of health textbooks, sometimes in co-authorship rofessor Michael V. O'Shea of the University of Wisconsin, which addressed both the issues and habit-forming qualities associated with smoking. Many health texts were ed on those of Kellogg and O'Shea, whose books were widely adopted across the
-LZ-
□g of health education in various states.
Later texts mirrored the fundamental points made by Kellogg and O'Shea while ing presentations to reflect the most recent medical and scientific findings- Among used in Ohio, Making Life Beautiful by John Guy Fowlkes, et aL (1940), stated that :co contains nicotine, which is a narcotic, habit-forming, and poisonous drug." In Health is Fun (1950) by W. E. Burkard, et al., students were taught that "tobacco ; many parts of the body. It makes the heart beat faster....It also harms the throat and ..Tobacco hurts almost every part of the body." In Growing and Changing (1962) by Bauer, et al, the focus was more on lung cancer. "Statistical studies indicate that ten is many smokers as nonsmokers die of lung cancer/’ wrote the author before advising: aking up smoking is now the best way to prevent lung cancer." Such words built on a of awareness about tobacco that dated back some 350 years to die English king James in his Counterblaste To Tobacco (1604) denounced smoking as "a custome >me to the eye, hatefull to the Nose, harmefull to the braine, dangerous to the Lungs, the blacke stinking fume thereof, neerest resembling the horrible Stigian smoke of die t is bottomlesse."
G.) Medical and Medical-Related Research and Writing. An abundance of information 1 from medical-related research and writing reached the American people, ienth- and early twentieth-century anti-smoking tracts repeatedly described smoking in equivalent to habit-forming and "addictive" while describing possible health problems s heart-related diseases. Between 1920 and 1950, a growing number of publications
After 1950 the number of medical and scientific articles grew exponentially and >j& extensive media coverage, as already noted in regard to Ohio's major newspapers, rchers such as E. Cuyler Hammond and Daniel Horn conducted epidemiological ; concerning the health consequences of smoking. One Hammond-Horn study ed over 187,000 participants and received widespread media coverage in 1954 after an report to the American Medical Association. Other statistical studies, such as Harold i investigation of about 200,000 World War I veterans (completed in die late 1950s),
;d media coverage as well. Newspapers also carried articles in which medical ides and scientists debated the role of smoking in relation to variety of other factors lustrial pollution as possible sources of modern-day health problems.
The rdease of the Report to the Surgeon General, Smoking and Health (1964), i one of the major news stones of the 1960s. On the national level, magazines such C and f'Jewsiypelt gave in-depth coverage to the report, as did televised news programs tional, regional, and local newspapers. Lead headlines across the country read like the it appeared on the front page of the Toledo Blade on January 12,1964: "Cigarette dd Health Peril in U. S., Needing Remedial Action." Characteristic of other Ohio ipers, die Cleveland Plain Dealer carried over thirty stories about tobacco and ig in the week immediately following the public announcement of the Advisory ittee's findings. Such extensive coverage was the norm for major dailies across the
-indium of television quickly emerged as another major source for the dissemination of arion about die possible health consequences of smoking. In 1955, CBS television d in its highly-regarded See It Now program (May 31 and June 7, hosted by Edward row) the medical-scientific debate over possible linkages between cancer and ig. Based on printed transcripts, the CBS television network gave full coverage to n General Leroy Burney’s public announcement in 1957 abouc cigarette smoking source of lung cancer. Even more thorough was television news coverage about the eport to the Surgeon General
Television news programs, as such, served to inform the general public repeatedly he potential health risks associated with smoking. So too with local television Dining. The highly regarded Cleveland Health Museum, the first such museum in the States, was very active in developing exhibits that addressed health issues related to g; and the Museum also engaged in various forms of community outreach that 1 the production of television programs. In 1969 Museum officials took the lead in >ing a ten-part public service television series, in cooperation with the local NBC , on "Smoking and Health." NBC officials estimated that this series, in its first don to other stations in Ohio and elsewhere, would be viewed by as many as 2 people.
[n yet another example of the capacity of television to spread information to large es, the Federal Communications Commission ruled in 1967, in relation its "fairness e," that anti-smoking messages had to be aired on television as a counterbalance to
ld the ALA, could miss the intended point that smoking could be deleterious to al health.
Popular culture sources were also very important in relation to public awareness of ns associated with using tobacco. The mass production of cigarettes, which began in ;0s, quickly resulted in a series of slang expressions that denoted public perceptions, late 1880s Americans were employing the slang term "coffin nail" in relation to :es; and by the 1920s other terms, including "coffin stick11 and "coffin tack," "gasper," Me hearse plumes," and Ford's “little white slaver," among others, had become part mmnn public vocabulary. "Cancer stick" also gained widespread use. The message ed by these commonly-used terms was that cigarettes were not only habit-forming ■Id also shorten life because of potential adverse health effects. Such terms also 1 their way into popular literature such as novels, and into movies, television shows, ler popular culture sources, including music and cartoons. Americans, per se, were itly being reminded of the daimed risks associated with the use of tobacco products.
I have every reason to believe that the body of knowledge derived from the historical ; and materials described in the preceding sections was widely available to all persons, ag union members, living in the State of Ohio.
From a historical perspective, the accumulated evidence demonstrates that the general was widely aware of this information and that this information became a matter of
-101.) The sheer volume of surviving records—and their widespread circulation among ipulace of the United States, regardless of state or region—strongly supports this ration. For example, Reader's Digest had one of the highest subsection circulation >f any popular magazine in January 1950 when it published "How Harmful Are ttes?" by Roger William Riis. This article, according to the editors, generated a large e of reader commentary and "aroused more discussion and approval than any recent ine feature." As a result, the Digest decided to reprint articles from earlier issues on ) stop smoking. Indeed, the American Cancer Society recognized in the 1960s that ; relating to tobacco use in Reader’s Digest had had a “‘profound influence’ in creating awareness of the risks involved in smoking.”
Other examples would include questions from concerned individuals that produced ied responses from various newspaper columnists. "Dear Abby," strongly anti-lg in her opinion column, repeatedly answered questions about die habit-forming of smoking and possible health effects. Her column appeared in various Ohio apers. Local medical doctors also produced columns that addressed smoking-related ms. Persons would not have asked such questions or expressed concerns about ig, nor would the columnists have responded in print, had there been little or no awareness and understanding of the issues being raised.
2.) Public opinion polls conducted by the highly regarded Gallup organization and jollsters serve as another confirmation of high levels of public awareness and sdge. For instance, in June 1954, the Gallup organization asked; "Have you heard or
Ninety percent of die respondents answered yes. As a second example, in June-July iter public announcements of the completed findings of Hammond and Horn (see J above), Gallup pollsters asked: "Did you happen to read or hear about the recent of the American Cancer Society reporting the results of a study on the effects of e. smoking?" Seventy-seven percent of the respondents answered yes. Among those dents who were smokers, 82 percent answered yes. As such, the general populace, okers in particular, indicated that they were aware of the most recent epidemiological slating to smoking and health.
3.) Government involvement came in waves of legislative, administrative, and judicial For instance, some fifteen states adopted laws between the 1890s and 1920s that in ray totally prohibited the sale and consumption of cigarettes within their respective .. These statutes, over and above those adopted in numerous states to prohibit g among minors, did not arise in a vacuum of public awareness, knowledge, or i about possible problems associated with smoking.
State departments of education and local education boards and school administrators d teachers to inform and instruct students about the habit-forming nature of g, as well as potential health consequences, and they provided support materials in n of course of study curriculum guides and approved textbooks. In 1960 Senior IK magazine surveyed 10,763 junior and senior high school students and found that ent of them believed in a possible link between smoking and lung cancer. This conducted nationally, can serve as a demonstration that health education teachers
Certainly that has been the case with teachers in Ohio. In the 1930s, the State ment of Education began developing standardized "Every Pupil" scholarship tests for y of fields, including health education. These tests were administered in virtually chool throughout the state. In 1957 the health education and hygiene test, geared for , 8th, and 9th grades, asked students to indicate (true or false) whether "Both alcohol otine are narcotics." In regard to fill-in-the-blank questions, students were to
i to die following sentence: "Several scientists tell us that excessive_may
mg cancer." The state examiners would not have asked these types of questions hey assumed, as they did correctly, that Ohio's teachers were informing their s, among them many future union members, about claimed health risks related to
In the same year of 1957, the findings of the federally-sponsored Study Group on ig and Health helped influence Surgeon General Leroy Burney’s decision to issue a 1 warning about smoking and lung cancer (see page 8 above). When asked within a rs of his announcement whether a warning label should be printed on cigarette ;s, Burney indicated that information about the possible health consequences of g was already thoroughly disseminated to the general public Stated Bumey: "Our n is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of die press, nd TV." So too with the 1964 Report to the Surgeon General. This document 3 comprehensive media coverage and generated widespread public discussion and
-Ly-
4.) Newspapers and other media sources assumed awareness and knowledge on the f the general public. As with Reader's Digest and other magazines, they would refer to ttes as coffin nails and cancer sticks, among other slang expression, which the)- could ive done had they not assumed that general populace understood that these terms had with cigarettes. They likewise carried a stream of "how to" articles in regard to quitting ng. Such articles took for granted that persons wanted to learn about methods to help their habit When considered in the light of medical columns and other forms of aper coverage, the public was demonstrating concern about smoking, which would ve been the case had the public lacked awareness and knowledge about the alleged tive" qualities of smoking or possible health consequences that could, in turn, result in cure death.
To summarize, persons living in die State of Ohio and the United States more Qy could not have avoided coming into contact with materials and information about -called "addictive" nature of smoking or possible health consequences, the latter in n to cancer, heart, and respiratory diseases among other problems. Every person who td public schools, spoke with others about smoking, read newspapers, magazines,
, listened to radio and/or watched television could not have escaped receiving that ive and persistent message. Built on a legacy of writings and anti-smoking entary dating back to the early seventeenth century, such knowledge was not a wefl-.cret, but rather was conscandy circulating and recirculating through society. Thus, the
-iu-
3 and claimed health risks associated with smoking. Historical evidence is not only mt but overwhelming in support of this conclusion.
Same Materials) In the process of forming my opinions, I have reviewed a wide of historical sources. These sources indude the following: Books, pamphlets, and , some dating to the early 1600s, that focus on the subject of tobacco use, option, and possible health consequences; modem books and artides, induding 1 and medical-related studies and religious materials that address the subject of d use, consumption, and possible health consequences; U. S. government and Ohio id local records and documents pertaining to tobacco use, consumption, and possible ronsequences; state laws and statutes, induding those of Ohio, regarding the on and prohibition of tobacco sales and consumption; court decisions pertaining to ohibitory laws regarding tobacco sales and consumption; extant records of various loking organizations, induding among others the National and International AntU te leagues; educational materials, induding those of Ohio, relating to state laws and i, curriculum mandates and guides, textbook sdection procedures and adoption lists as selected textbooks, teacher training and certification requirements, and other onal materials; national and Ohio-based union records; national and Ohio-based ; of the American Cancer Sodety, American Heart Association, and American Lung ition; national, regional, and local newspapers, induding, but not limited to, the New imes. the Akron Beacon journal, the Cincinnati Enquirer, the Cleveland Plain Dealer,
ies, including but not limited to, Readers Digest, life, Timc> NeV’fWeek, U- 5- News rlH Report. Consumers Report. Todies' Home Journal. Senior Scholastic. and Good Uflpayme: television programs and commentary addressing the debate over smoking sible health consequences and anti-smoking television commercials among other n sources; national, regional, and local polling and survey information; miscellaneous laterials from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including, but not limited to, i exhibits; and popular culture sources, including slang expressions, fiction, cartoons, music, and television shows among other popular culture materials, kfy research is ongoing and not yet completed, and I am assuming there will be the nity to submit additional historical documents that are rdevant to this case. A Kst of nts collected to date in preparation for this report is attached, n addition, I have received copies of over 100 depositions relating to this case, and I t begun the process of evaluating them in relation to the awareness issues that I have ced to consider.
have also reviewed the documents produced by the plaintiffs in this case as well as itiffs’ amended complaint. I may also review or refer to other documents marked as in this proceeding.
vly opinions and conclusions are based on my research and review of these historical is as they pertain to this case and on my academic training and experience as a lonal historian specializing in the field of United States history.
ing historical materials related to the preparation of this report
I	have been deposed one rime as an expert witness but have not testified at trial die past four years.
\ names Kirby Martin y
1*7 j 1*^3
Date
195026:18:148:22;	2	577:21	*ccommodrt*<
149:14:150:5.6,11.25;	--60 26:24; 158:17; 222:18,	txomnwdrtfcn
151:23:227:9	2 5516:5710:91:20.23	^ 249:2,4	aCCOmpU*ft 17:;
1»50*31:25;113:3;	50*40:24; 43:17; 114:11;	reeling 2)3:1
168:22; 178:13; 183:4;	**** 134:16; 176:4;	™2”r!
205:10:225:14	221-13,263-12	225:20:236:24	**01X1177.24,1
—	™51“:,3i“2;1*:	^mSSSotM.	ttSSSSaa
—	3?3S^**	^“5*,;a,35: 6	3SS5K
mifittMUMot	-is;ji2:20i;’
8.12; 133:13; 183:23; 189:25;	20^f*ar 148:22; 150:21,	6223:20,21	159J*	*
191:17; 196:3,13; 198:5.	24; 151:11,12,14; 152:19;	60158:15	•CCUMtlon 136:
3; 15; 201:4,16; 202:1	15315	60-yMr 218:19	■CCUMtOfy 72:1
B; 18S7 27:12,14,19:103:3,	212:21	60* 43:17; 61:21; 100:13;	aequlwee 204:1
7,14; 104:20i 24; 133:14;	200208:10	168:1; 176:4; 218:2; 221:6	across 110:24; 1
1:10; 134:12; 201:19,25:	200,000 28:7; 202:21	625ll4:l6	134:8:161:5,14,:
202:14,16	20*221:7	6th 66:25	162:11,19; 163:1!
185828:4,5:202:20	20th 14:6,7; 25:18; 26:16;	-
1960113:14,20	48:10,16; 255:8	"Jf
1860* 24:11; 29:11; 32:1;	21 40:13; 234:1; 239:24;	_1__21V8-214 112.;
23:2 55:13=63:22; 166:21;	241:3	70 26 24* 94 3:128 21
167:2:168:3:178:13;	21-p*B* 238:23	224:14
184:3	21*176:18	act 171:6; 172:24
1962 28:14,15,22; 203:6	22 39:18,19; 101:2; 123:3	7*04.*	action 267:18
1963184:3	22-page 23823	action* 10:19; 13
1964 29:3; 32:14; 122:23;	22nd 265:3	28:19,19; 29:13M
--adiw^M>M
*********	8	-grgwg
186529:20,23; 167:4;	26171:21	SS-jmw
204:10	27th 267:21	60*99:10	„.
10; 1966205:2	233187:3	8440:14	SffSfiS'
1967 29:24; J0:8; 206:2	2:42187:7	88157:23	159:2:162:17:20=
196836:14,16	--204:18,19; 2ft:li
1970148:22:149:14;	3	JP	adliaiy 9:10; 18:
150:3,6,11,25; 151:23	----20^5; 24:11,16; 3
1:12 1970* 63:23; 217:18	%„»-■*« ?.*».,•*.	9 2253	27:8,25:38:4,18;
1977 30:12; 206:6	5,7,223-17,	49:17; 51:10; 56:1
*» •»*»*..	ipwhi	5!S£
ne ?'^i1^8:23n84:18:	30122:25; 123:6; 136:1;	9858:13:113:22	147:16; 148:16; 1!
158:14,19; 170:10	9:054:3	159*,25; 169:1,2
1887184:18	30* 221:7	--178:1; 189^,9; IS
1	1988 30:21; 158:5; 159:5.	3354267525	A	200:8,19; 205:7,3
2	13:160:5:169:8,10,24;	*77™',	A	218:10; 242:2
170:2; 175:19; 176:22,23;	*>*■“	--Adam* 114:151
178:17,21; 180:5,9,19;	A-f-*-fH-* 57:8	135:4	’
3:SS244:17__AJ«43;45:22,25;91:21;	add43:14;93:18:
A	92:1	178:5:191:24
*	8b|* l«t41;lM29s	*dd*d 65:20
110:2	--4&19;»20;55;13,18;	addtetod 178:11,
24- 1996 38.3,75.22,24,	40128'24'158-14 16‘	56.18; 60:25:77:24;	179:19:221:6
24- 171:21; 179:4; 222:14;	"rviuill	109=18:111:13,21;
257:23	116:15; 124:17; 132:11;
1888 6:22; 53:7; 58:14,	„17922	146:11; 203:19; 217:22;
57:22 20; 59:13,19;64:15;	47222:14	226:25
^ 1	4A5 244:20	okuiu* i	mz*7, aA.14,
r mmcuMr.6	alluring 166:3	«■
affiliated 44:6; 253:23	almost 90:17; 93:*	231:11:232:11	20; 261:12,15; 265
affiliates 260:2	121:17,24; 160:8,11;	announcing 183:23	approximations
; afraid 257:19	179:22; 190:6; 217:21;	annual 9:13, 15	arbitrarily 144:11
17:14 afternoon 34:5	answered 133:20; 204.-6	arbitrary 145:9
aftwwaid 77:16	alon* 12:18	*n*w»rtng 216:9	archival 84:20; 85
:7; afterwards 9421	along 43:11; 50:2; 156:3;	antecedent 147:15	archive 16:12; 18:
•gab *15; 10:8; 20:2;	2.U:1?2_l^^?-i>	Antt-Tuberculosls	34:21; 35:15;!36:3,
27:12,14 21*30:10;	•lFMd)f20,.18;25,7;	146:24	44*12,62,8
36:16; 40:16;'50:13:	37:13,23; 47:13; 53:20;	antfcigaretta 110:19	archives 8:14; 12:
55:25; 60:2; 78:25; 84:13;	--	antfclpaled 234:21	ifJflJJlSi
97:15:106:20:127:24;	antlelpdtton 65:1; 26331
t 128:18; 130:17; 144:1;	’	Antioch 128:2: 135-5	10719
M; 149:19; 153:23; IQS;	245:11^250:1	antigmoldno 204 22:	area 16:16,19:61:
‘.8 164:3; 170:5; 178:10!	alternative. 219:4	-^moMng 204.22,	64:8; 74:18; 75:2; 7
191:7; 192:4;205:15;	alt hough 5:11; 296;	,	irri_	81*; 115:21; 118:4
207:2,8,16; 209:2.20:	37:4:42:2; 107:17;	wiUtoftatto 166.25,	128:19; 146:18; 14J
210:3; 211:25; 212:5.23;	117:14; 147:25; 222:18;	1709	163:2; 169:14; 240:
213:22; 214-8; 215:18;	264:15:265:2	anybody 21.19; 51:18;	241:2,23
216:4; 221:11,15:222:2;	altogether 92:14	67:l6;6B.-9	areae 9^110:6,8,
10	223:6; 224:3; 226:8,14;	always 42:10:60:9;	anymore 117:9	22:8,24:79:6,22;«
15; 2Z7:13; 232:2; 236:6;	153:25 171:22; 256:25;	anyone 67:19:68:3;	84:22; 10031; 148:
243:10:246:19:247:21:	257 14-259:12	73:22; 75:7,19:76:13;	170:14; 220:3; S3:
U3, 249:17; 251:18	AMA 103:2; 104:20-	200:1; 248:8; 259:10	241:5, % 243:23; 2t
againat 50:22; 108:20;	201:19	’	anyone’s 109:12	arena 170:24
anfclvalent 218:17	anyway 5:9; 173:3	Arents 57:8,11,1'
tTiiolVfi:lM&7	amenable 265:5	anywhere 224:15	58:4,7:111:7,17,2
14	lnnnruVA?S	amendment 49:19	^otoglw 22:16; 69:20;	«rgue 13115
Z2; anenev 252-ii	amendments 49#	96:4	argued 49:12
America 184:17; 186:21;	WT* 228:1^	arguing 49:16; 1*
4	188*11* 217:13:255:6	13,15; 251:1,5,17:252:8	25
5; ago 4:23; 5:5; 6:23; 7:24;	Anwriea’a 2ifri6	appear 26:20; 36&;	argument 162:18;
10; 11:23; 41:13; 120:14;	37:21:50:13; 123:15;	163:24; 254:15; 25<
2:3, 158:14; 167:11; 170:11;	c «	131:4; 204:25; 231:3;	256:2
!™;15:195:,°’	%££«&nlh%	SISK
13 "JTsoSl ft-?2TO*13:	146^ 167:14; 171:21;	appeared 30:7; 31:5;	erm 182:24
» Si-i?5’.JS«S	180:1; 186:6; 197:6;	53:13; 37:16; 107:15;	s,™* ,4.6,11:2
25; 17’ 208:23‘209:3 4 8'	230:1,3;233-II, 1 Si	77i20; 102:24; 106:
,20; 216:14; 246:2; 255-22;	256:19	appearing 4:12,15;	120:24; 135:23; 14<
2,3,	26413 21	Americans 222:15;	102:23	168:24; 177:25; 171
4	nnriu.wM.nt Til i-	249:2	appears 89:21,22;	182:8; 192:5; 221:1
5:12, JfJTs	among 82:10; 156:19.21;	149:5.6,6	222:17
13,	____________________157.25; 158:11; 181:20,	applied 205:25	arrangement 73.2
Ak. iei.Q	208:22;229:17;233:22	apply 62:13	arrangements^
ahead 56:13.16; 161:22;	appoint 28:2»	arrajr85:U; 112:1
2:25; 187:22; 227:10; 257:16	uln'VjlutklV	Whlbnent 217.23;	arrived 77.19
!. 10; aimed 250:12,17:251:17	147 1^1	218:11 . ,	article 118:23; 16!
12, air33-4; 156-8	15*.*.	approach83:7;86:13;	183:22;200:4;202:
;	' *	102:7:154:1	artteke 37-.14,20;
A1^4812:5512:	"PP^hee 37:12	116:14,15,16; 121
ST 23 2,34.2,4,	appropriate 8:3,14:18;	122:25:123:14,18;
2'iliSSi*	82* 22.83:2:86*.17;	135:17:146:12,20;
alcohol 1393,5,7;	191.21,194.1	165.-9; 245:16	10,12; 160:24; 162
217:24; 218:18,24;	anecdotal 120:11;	-.--------------------164:10,12; 166:8; I
252:14; 259:22	164:21	l69;22.183;Bi 19;
aRve 39:8;40:15	anecdote 33-22	191:10; 194:3;210:
elleaetions 7:&10:	annexed 25:10	approonawie;Z3,Z4	215:10,13; 216:21;
avaNablo7:12;9:2,10,	bed 28:18; 93:17; 136:12;
11,17; 12:14,24; 13:22;	198:24; 2(8:7; 254:25;
»23 19:10; 33:15; 36:3; 43:5;	255:8,15; 256:13	n ft^ll V14-1W2V
aSK^S”*’*’	E5ES?1*
«W*d 162:24	bannod 114:23; 185:23,	ISffcltfl 174:16;	254-U1U6 19
. •void 167:3; 177:7	25,2* 186* 1*7:11	178:29; 182:1#; 184:2;	25; 255:3,4,15,1
«Wir»6:7; 19:13; 60:12;	ban* 105:14	200:2; 205:1; 206:16;	4,13,20:257:16
75:18; 119:17,19; 134:18;	Barbara 114:15	210:4,6,8,18:212:2;	hook** 254*15
136:2,6,19,22; 137:8;	b»« 37:23; 38:1,2,9,20,	217:4,226:6; 228:10,15;
138:3; 139:11; 140:5,17;	22,23,24; 130*; 156*	232:16; 245:2,15; 246:4,	21^1^19-Ml
186;18'20* ^232:23	iaS’SooS
13:172:6.8,11,18.18,	B«*«d 97:21; 109:10,19;	^i®’2?2,262,23	195:16,-254:8,10;
' 20; 173:1; 190:25; 192:6,	114:10; 125:3; 126:18;	botovod 113:23; 213:3	2r256:l6
15-8. 10:1|4:5; 235:25; 236:3;	137:12; 140:12; 191;6;	b*iiaver81:3	bonowod 1911=
l58, 241:6; 242:18; 251:3;	207:13; 211:16; 227:24;	MfMW211:3
261:19	233:17; 235:20	lulUuInn	both 77.3,93-18,
bt	, , in	baHawng 139:14	146:21; 172:11;2;
IWinMII 7.5,9.7,	bwJc 37.14; 66:18;	, ,,
11:11,14;46:17;66:11;	132:4; 164:6	1r	™
_ 87:18,24; 95:4; 97:17;	buicaly 18^ 1919	Mnehnwrlt 227.16	bottom 113:19; 1
I; 101:12; 103:20; 104:13;	34:230* 66:13 1+	b«ldw 22:2; 154:20	133* 153:13; 19<
7; 107:7; 112:5,24; 113:2;	68:24;76:6; 78:19; ’	be»t 13:6; 30:10; 53:12;	228:20,21:229:2;
114:7; 115:6; 116:18;	159:12; 193:4; 199:21;	61:12:78:4; 119:12;	Bowling 16:13
117:25; 118:7,10; 124:16;	205:17; 231:5; 262:9	122:7; 123:11; 158*;	boxM 72:20; 73:!
J:5; 129:3; 130:19; 132:4;	baoto 49:19; 248:13	ii?^1-73*	148:18,19,154:6
133:21:134:13,23;	bat 1120	188:5,223-10	brand 245:10,12
8; 136:ll;137:14; 155:18; _______b«ttw 218:16	B
; 171:3; 172:2; 180:5;	BtOCOB 23.2,34.3,4	bewitching 177:20;	bi*k4S20 77 1
4,9, 181:1; 193:16,25; 199:1;	boar 84:13.17; 118:24;	221;8
L: Hi 247*' •
51:6, 235 13,237* 258.10	60:14; 81:6; 108:23;	bteakinall5 5
awafeneu*olabd95:4	boera 85:21	125:1; 146:14; 148:24;	'
!02:1: aw«y 71:22; 179:1; 202:6;	bocamo 6:25; 192:9;	158:3:159:1,11; 200:15;
219:3; 231:4; 243:4	194:5:218:8,9.13,22	253:12	73^1,76.20; 95.18
: axe 83:19	become 6:19; 60:12;	bias 10:19; 217:5	hrfjk, m.i«.-wn
2,2; --67:12:71:23; 178:11;	bla.ee 217:5,9
a n	190:20:19i6; 247:2;	.. io	9^25,107.11
i- D	258:19	big 191.11,254.19	bring 83:1; 167:1!
’ --beoomee 8:24; 36:15;	Wggar254:19	218:4; 219=7; 241?
B 174:8; 245:13,13	68:6; 15925; 174:6 ’	blgge«t246:l4	bringing 93:20
fell tMHHM>d 185:25	boar 252:16,18	ml’.	bring* 1398; 25S
12:1; baek6*15;7:ll,23;	beforehand 94:11 ’	5010,11:74:21:93:3.5;	broad72:23:130
11:7.23; 28:24; 36* 16;	begin 12:12; 26:20;	,	137:5; 241:9
| 39tf; 43:14; 4S34; 46:2,	52:22; 204:25,225:14;	b*ed74*14,25;75.10,	broadcasts 169::
. 10; 57:17;74:5;76:25;	258:7	” ________broaden 1394
q. 81:23; 92:3; 95:19;	boogers 199*12	bBUng 75:3.7	breeder87:22:9(
XS1*-1*9**
*	IlMUMliiSSt	222“^	Bteiwp 34:7,8; 40:20,21;
118:15,20:122:20;	41:7	brought 79:25; 2]
!S5E!«!S«	SHsKiiis	WMiww***** wnwfa®
172:19; 173:4; 174:10;	234:25; 247:20	bufct 22*25
Kll 177:3,7,9,179:2; 181:14;	b^ln. 36:14; 81:24;	lSLioiSiS	burtod 123:17; 20
186:20; 187:15; 188:19;	M:l;91:23;187:5;220:7;	iJJ J f|714,	Burney 27:2}; 20
195:21; 208:9; 211:23;	234=5	******	Bumey’* 104:23;
213:20; 216:8; 217:17;	behalf4:12.15.18;	Bumham 138:7, ]
218:19; 221:22; 222:14;	234:13; 258:16; 259:6,24;	btatont 195:1	139:12; 164:22; 25
225:20; 226:14; 227:17;	262:10	Wind 120:15	22; 254:4; 255:5
229:10; 244:19:249:2:	hrfumhr m-a-	btfaidan iQMO*tQi>iA
causes 4i:zi; iar.n\	cigarette 30:5,4; 133:18;	conecnons yy.n
_ 168:19,20; 169:12,24;	168:19:1705; 173:9;	134:1; 149:5; 173:6;	coHectiV*6l:7
i5i!'5J5fi?SS	i!5;8’l6il83;5:19822;	204:25;205:25;209-.25;	coHector56:21;5
2.	OoNags 28:16; 39
2015 6:206 20:’208:20^	c*u»in9 *75:8	248:9	40:1; 48:24; 128:2,
H213M&&^:	Caution 204.20	Cigarettes 29:16,16;	203:6; 217:19
2JI25; 233:11,15:236:1;	C8B 32:23; J6.23	cofcquj 2»J0(
CotonkU21«:»
. cap 160:4	M.ZIKO,*	180:21; 204:15; 205*	Columbus 12:11, i):6- capabilities 106:24	cantered 24:22; 25:21	220:12	13:16; 14:4,13,22 ’ capacity 228:25; 229:7;	central 8:11	cigar* 179:12	20:25; 21:23; 22:4; 252:7	centurie* 169-.8 •	Cincinnati 23:2	46:8; 52:8, 10,15,1:15, capfeel 40:21; 167:7;	century 25:19; 26:16;	CipoRone 227:16,21,23;
16; 225:3	48:10,16;54:11,12;	^15
■	cr 131:18	5707,25; 110:21; 221:8,	lft
24: card 56:12,18; 111:15	8:255:6,9,10	cllCUhtlnq23319	, 13410
11	card* 1816	certain 7:4; 23:19; 25:19;	column* 134:8
*-21 SIS 17 100-10	33:19; 36:19; 50:21; 74:4;	Cotton 68.12	eombuation 174:
22	cere 7.17; 199:19	863,102*105:14;	circumatance 38:21;	rmi*i,tdrta
career 253:25	119:18; 149:1; 150:12,13;	WM*	®'i
carefully 145:10	151:7; 156:13; 163:15;	circumstance* 6:24;
5	carried 61:4; 108:2;	165:4; 169:16; 170:7;	81:2,193:24
S- 233:4,10	177:20:178:6; 182:19;	cite 114:12	JSKSflS
18; carry 176:4	I 262:18; 263:6	cMlon 190:24	I 26114 ^ ^ ^
>	CA..2W3.22	aty'»«.>2	comm. 71:10.10
ceae 4:13; 7:5,7;8:19;	136~14'145:4* 168:22:	claimed 114:3,223:3,7	comment 123:12;
1210; 21:1* 25:14; 38:3,	174^ 179:14; 190:13;	daim» 7:16; 223:8	139:22; 200:16,20
1	1 iSlfr	201:16; 227:17; 231:11;	ctoHty 92.7,210:22	commentary 83:1
“*»“	elw.fc66:5	commnMorM:
l-W 70:]6-7}:S, 9, Z3;74I5;	Witty 267:5,16	elaaiMld 251:5	8.10
’ ’ 78.6;80:17,22; 89-.19;	change 38:21; 69:6,	dear 11:20;42:23; 51-16;	commented 120:
92:13; 94:22; 96:21,25;	91:17; 162:6; 2003*	56:5;67:25; 71:8; 90:14;	134:12
97:4; 100:1,5,22; 108:10;	221:5;238:5	105:18,118:13; 120:9;	comments 71:12;
111:13; 134:2; 144:22;	Changed 110:4; 196:2	129:13:153:3:163:4;	236* 256:7,10
145:19; 148:25; 150:21;	change. 69:1,13,14,15,	211:7:246:20	Commission 30:3
154:17; 155:14,23,25;	22	Clearly 69:19; 126:23	108:1S
7-’	changing 221:10; 234:20	Cleveland 16:17; 23:4;	committee 28:23;
iS-24-i25l-w-15-	character 250:3,22,25	53:22,23; 54:14; 55:5;	32:13; 48:24; 49:2,
*	2J?iinSJS!?	cherectortetic 47:2	56:23:58:13,22; 59:13;	50:6,13; 108:19;*
*	207:16; 211:12; 214:14;	7^7 .it	61:15; 76:21; 111:4,10;	14
g 215:1; 217* 226:1,9;	charactering 125:11	1,4.17; 122:24; 146:18;	™olBh.219-5
Si 227:11,I^23;228:15;	charge 28:8; 194:9	148:21; 149:12; 150:8,10;
L2ft 234:9; 236:14; 239:11;	charged 167:2	151:2,4,10,23; 153:14;	1
241:12; 242:18; 244:25;	chargee 19116	190:14; 233:9	180:14; 185.15
22> 254:2;257:13;258:1,4,5,	,,	clW-.oo-i,	commonly 178:1:
10.11,13.16,18,20.23;	charter* 99:1,16	C™J”a“	182:9.23
259:1,4,4.4.5,18,19,19;	chart* 133:21	cyp*35:18	communicst* 20
260:4,7,14; 263:18	check 107:18	ClO*ed33:10	21*67:23,25
I’.fj’. cases 195:11:225:3,19;	chemfceb 174:4	closest 128:22	communicated 2
:13; 236:1; 259:21	chewing 179:12	1W:16;	communication 3
catalog 56:12,18; 111:16	Chicago 17:18; 64:7,8,	217:12	Communicationi
4:18; catch 60:8	11;65:8,20	«W»unsel 239:20	community 4414
U5; categories 45:13:66*	chBdren 126* 207:20;	coauthor 184:19	180:19:245:20
99:4; 127* 139:1; 255:13	208:3,10,13,16,24;	coerchra 188:10	rnimanlM -■ 11 '
l:23; category 10:21,23:32.-3;	209-5,13,24; 210.4,12;	coftee 143:18	167:2:19ft 1,19,1!
9813:130:3; 238:17	212:1^214:17:233:13,	coffer* 157:15	195:13; 225* 226
1U* Catholic 40:20:41:5.11	22; 24ft 16; 250:4,13,17;	«*»!„ 126:25; 236:1	228:7
—V”*-__________Chokes	"tm**	oc—Ho.iw.2
7l.lO,M.4tD7.£A	COiiUlCI	74p7»o,	(mi
73:7; 74:15; 75:16; 76:12;	188:20; 189^,11,15	coverage 2331.23.24;	dal* 4:1; 24:10; 2t
' 80:17; 95:8; 96:21; 101:6,	contradtCtkHl 192:20	27:7; 28:13; 29:7,10,21,	27:10,11,19:28:4
21; 118:6; 157:4; 186$;	contrary 139:13:140:20:	24; 30*. 17:31:15,18,24;	29:19; 30:18; 32:1(
1.3,3,	209:23; 214:25; 227:20;	181:17,22,24; 201:7;	32:9,12,21; 37:17; 51:15;	58:19; J9"i, 17; 63
1	215:5	62:25; 107* 12232;	64:18;66:24; 76:3; connections 51:16	contribute 8433	155:16(202:5; 225:9,12;	104:19; 119:11; 15
2-8 eoiwcloiisn*** 208:17	central 16610: 1689-	227:19,19,21; 228:18	15834,25:176:8;
consensus 169:5;	2^1^^	cowwd 29*10; 36:3;	225:13; 241:21; 25
vS£>	eontavverev 168*17*	4*13; 59:1; 65:25; 80*	262:5:264:22
eonsequaneos 44*8.9'	^n2vm7&254 3	87:8; 88:7; 140:16; 155=1;	dated 55:2
^ SSISrf	173:13:223:19; 224:4,11;	date. 14:10; 233<
consequential 250:5	24:23:25:19:26:15
COn*W*r8 2.5 12;	covering 61:21; 119:11	27:21,22; 30* 31
85:19; 132:12; 214:20;	conversation* 96:15	crack 10312	I02^1frtl7 10
!; 2202^^^;”7:J	eonvay 258:22	SlSSf^iu1!'^1,	1«3:106:1.10:1
convoyod 230:17;	SSftSSlfcl-	119:2,15,16; 120:
considered 4835'	231:1?___	7*19:91:16; 92:2; 94:8,
S:!9; H415^10	convinc* 250:16	17; 97^, 9; 101:18;	i^ouU7lb2
„n.kiJnG48 21	convinced 218:13;	109:13; 125:13,14;	fVs 5 16 22:
conaldering 4831	254;15	140:23; 14312; 152:20;	7^,.!a.^r7
conspracies 197:6	convincing 245:11;	153:1; 161:11; 16*18;
conspiracy 195:12	250:2; 255^19	176:10; 181:4; 187*
constant 249:7	cooiad 17*23	192:1; 193:10; 199:4;	145 25,148.24,14
constraints 61:4;	202:15; 30:4.18; 204*	daughter 179:25;
111:15; 159:18,21; 160:3	207:25; 208:1; 21ft25;	Dwld 144:22; 194
ca«vc« 163:7	IliSSSi"* *	«■“»»"
2:13; eorMradingllSM	co|iy71:H;7rei	21*2M1«:7;2»1&
consultants 215:15	corrected 69:10;98.-9	240:7; 242:11; 243:14;
7; consulting 259:6	correctly 89:14; 19031	244:1,12,15,21; 245:6;	73'13:75’10.15*9
consume 47:5; 55:9	cough 231:14	**** l*k20; **
Conaumor 37:22	coughing 231:12,18	259:12,14,17,24;
r7:2; consumption 11:13;	couldn't62:6,22; 84:4;	23:26135:264:7
47:1;48:1,2; 129:4;	109:17; 113:5; 117:25;	day* 1231; 18:11
31ft 130:21;218:23	136:16; 15634;21731;	L ^	50:2; 52.*6; 54:20; J
’• contact 12:8; 122:6	223:12; 231:16; 2559	178:7	123:3;171fc4
1: contacted 7:21; 121:8	CouncH 182:13,16;	r iliirhiiiM-H<f 1	Dayton 61:20
contain 16:14; 56:8;	*84:1,4	deal 19:4; 31:22; <
**• 243:18	Counaol 1931; 21:13;	TItL „	51*35; 157:10; 17C
! eonteinad 121:2; 195:24;	25:5; 87:1; 94:8; 143:23;	™J™»89:14	219:4
’ 238:8; 262:19 v.	154:4; 261:8; 264:20;	CSR 267:4,25	Daalar 23:4; 122:1
2	containing 104:12;	265:5:267:17	eu Wad 152:11; 263*. 9	148:21; 149:12; 13 , 146:12	count 19:3; 47:22; 208:12 culling 18:7,20; 263*	151:3,4,10,24; 1«
contains 187:17	counter 124:20	cumulatlv* 196:19
6.2c. contemplat* 237:16	counterbalance 134:23;	cupa 143:18	dealing 112:14 ’ contemporaneous
136:11:232:7	1 curiously 205:7	d**Rl853
m 2 i(0:5	counterfactuai 199:7	cut 158:20; 174:8;	Itean 260:21
20*2 contemporaneously	country 134* 189:23	187:24; 227:11	darth 5632; 228:
. ' 101:24	count* 196:20	cutting 18:19	deaths 162:24
' content 67:24	County 61:22,24; 2673	Cuylar 26:25; 27:1;	dabate 49*; 110:
contents 172:21	couple 5:6; 68:20,24;	102:14,16,17	170:3,8,9:173:15
context 46:16; 112:16;	73:4; 231:10	-
144:23,25:157:13;	eouraa 9:22:148:17;	J>
162:10; 163:11; 172:3;	160:17; 168:16; 190:23;	_
195:22; 200:1; 201:11;	198:6; 209:19; 210:10;	254:12
237:20,22; 257:17	213:16,25; 215:22;	D 225:3; 267:4,25	debate* 174:11
244:21	D-a-Mi 260:21	dafaadad 29:17:41
•23 designed 250.25	<Hecerdedl2:3	done 35:12,25; 37:9,11;	-
detail 77:23; 78:4; 88:3;	dlecloeed 262:10	41:15; 42:13; 43:25; 52:7.	E 26:25; 102:16,1"
2	89:6; 129:11; 132:10;	tflscloeure 169:14;	9,10,20; 56:12; 59:14;	e-i54:5
165:19; 226:22; 240:5	261:20,22; 262:17,19,20	e-mail 21:7,10,14
IS; detailed 226:24	discount 134:22 21^f(Sfcl(2\ft	eech95:12; 104:1
26:1; details 228:13,14	discounted 126=1*	^ 24I	1052; 119:16; 188
,6; determine 8:13; 12:23;	discovered 103:13	109:5;110:25; 114:13;	238:24:239:2,21,;
17:25;46:20; 109:18;	discovery 96:12,19;	117:24; 119:7; 144:9,13,	242:18
;15: 110:1,6	99:13	19:145:2*148:11,20;	earlier 27:18,36:2
determined 247*	discrete 239:5	149:8,25; 154:11,15:
6:11 develop 27:4; 221:24	discuss 64:11; 79=15;	155:25; 170:2; 176:11,13;	154:1*14
developed 96:21;	14*23; 146* 184:14;	231:16; 234:12; 241:18;
t; J5Sl5-i	241:7; 242:10	242:7; 248:18,19,20;
discussed 8:7 12:1-	259:23; 262:14; 263:20;	202 21 234.12,26
djj^pha 28.12,	264:25	52
flMJAkimruuit ~U 1-t	144:3; 148:13; 154:10;	dormant 185:9
I6l:4; 250:1:258:17	Don. 28=8-202:22.23;
U6VQIM HKD	mttmi iieehin 1 4t 11
. Dimi&oa.	SSSSw	—..........(X&atrtmi
rifewn ” ™ -__________doUble 95-17	110:23; 113:3; 134
!l, JL	discussion 78:2; 79:18;	doubt 256:11	143:17; 183:4,23;
Diehl 167:7	86:10;87:1 13,15;90:19;	down 5:19; 13:17; 18:19;	189:23,25; 258:6
:1 differ 117:15,19	%: 10; 261:8	24:18;42:17; 47:24;	eemed9311
^ differed 80:22	dtoM»tawl5:M;70:5,	53:16; 55:12; 66:14;	Eastern 41:4
difference 171:3,4;	*5:13;«9:23; 150:16;	adoe 238:12
1989,18	109:20,144:2; 179:17	,51:7; 152:11; 157:12,
different 31:12; 37:11;	disease 115:5,8; 150:16;	160:14; 179:1; 185:18;
38:12,13;62:15;80:2;	153:19;208:20:221:25	220:10;22l:l6;222:2;	„ ’
84:6,14; 104*; 108:3;	diseases 124:17; 183:6;	228:20; 237:10	.J . . _____
136:7,146.23,170:14;	221:17	Dr 4.22; 6.18, 20:13;
172:15; 182:3; 188:8;	dlsmlsssd 170:11	25:13; 44:5; 46:2; 92:3;	188:15
0	235:18,19:262:20	Dispatch 233	100:8,9; 104:23:111:25;	editorship 256:22 differing 255:25	dispersed 9:16	126:4; 143:13; 156:12;	education 9:7,8,1 dHficult 24:13; 31:25;	<Hsi>osad76-4	187:10,202-17; 206:13,	10:24; 30:15; 114:1
-25 34:20:43:18:44:22;	db^ttl* 123-22;	^ 240:16; 243:15;	135*233:21,22,:
48:17;90:21; 108:7; 3 *	244:22; 253:22; 261:6,17;	22;249:6
L1’ 110:12;117:6;125:1;	263:5,16,20; 264:17	educational 246::
128:21; 130.4; 180:11;	““P™” J*1*	draft68:8,13,18,19;	effect 27:25;41:U
235:20; 236:5	disputes 181:25; 20&19	69:2; 71:21,22;96:5;	129:6; 133:17; 139
difficulties 222:3,10;	disputing 180:20	264:5	174:23; 175:25; 19
233:6:235:15	dissemineted 124:14;	drafter 185:16,17	195:21; 233:10; 24
•13: difficulty 179:19	1.?l:2° . ..	drafting66:19; 184:13;
dig 38:18	disseminetlon 125:20;	effective 246:17
** Digest 31:20; 33:25;	l^:!^ 229:19	drafts 67*, 10; 15,16;	«f*BCtS 134:1
,, 34:2; 37:16,16; 106:13	distill 53:15	71:15,20; 72:6; 96:10	effort 32:4; 108: U
i6£. digests 93:22	dMnrtsn l7i:M;	drsmstfcaliy 248 6	11017; 147:8; 205
;5. ’ digging 181:2	22S2^n».»	draw 81:4; 246*. 9	SfflSlJlS
1	rttn	dMnDUMJ 170:25	lwi,loo.H|192
' dilute 146-11-2*2-7	district 114:16; 208:11	either 26:10:38:1!
dilute 136.11:232:7	drink 252:16	64-25-65-5-72-7-7
; diluted 137:15; 140*	dhrided 52:22,18V 12	drinking 157:17,18;	7*1; 80:1; 86:25; 8
■	dimensions 8:2	184:17; 186:4,21; 217:12;	88:17.21; 94:20; 1;
’ direct 194:8	doctor 44.-6,91.12	166:11; 168:10; 18
l7.	dlrectsd 211:9:225*;	docmne 29:25; 32:16;	drive 186:3,6	190:23; 201:22; 24
,a 226:19	205:25	*OW53:9	252:5
’ direction 48:13; 267:14	**164:14	stab orals 18:17
*■'»<*■«*
9:73.5.170:21	documents 8-10.13.17	during 6:10,13:16;	olsmont 103-20; 1
director 167:14	^9J7^18212V	25:1831:4:47:23; 48:16;	•tom«**tary 2433
*	exhau*tlve26*	F+fre 15:11	fee 73:18,20
174.17,179:13,206.17,	j—«-■- .««-
23; 207:4; 228:14; 248:8;	ExhMt 25:4,8,12; 46:6;	'	™"w'5
250:12:252:11	58:19; 95:21;96:13;96:6;	tact47:22; 53^70:2;	feel 42:13; 179:1
5:8; evening 33:13:36:23	100:24:101:25:129:16:	J1?JJ}2S}JSS	252:10
.«M,2!>:23:«i:<;
101:24; lift 19; 201:4	234:3; 238:8; 239:6,24;	219:20; 241:22; 264:2	1*1151.25
Everett 30:22; 159:5;	241:3,3,8; 242:5; 243:18	lector 114-21-11511-	tal 175:1
194:13	exhWtc 263:13,15	125:8; 126:15;’l28:23,	talow 102:14
: every 33:15; 47:7;	extat 1099; 192:14;	130:10,22,131:2,8,10.	tamale* 158:16
104:19; 105:2; 122:5;	246:17	24,25:132:1,2,5,14;	fence 164:4
124:3,3; 150:20,20;	existed 162:25	250:6	few 23:8; 32:7; 6;
153:21;232:15;233:23;	.yi.t.nr . ri r im .j	tactoied 119:2	111-Q'131*17'15
’ 23M2.a2tt5.ft2a	r^”*"7-14	(«cl0f« 114:18:115:1.2.	TO* Ss
20,22; 245:18; 255:22	«tW»253.12	15; 126:13,19,22; 1279;	23*19:244 23:2
14:2 everybody 205:13	expand 59:12:222:12	170:18; 174:2; 193:18,19	fte|d 17:2;53:18;
everyone 48:4; 126:25;	expect 23:20:45:3;	fact* 1409: 237:4	59:20; 64:4; 102:5
194:17; 237:3:263:2	240:6,9; 241:11; 243:19;	tactual 69:17; 240:14	140:18:169:2; 211
>:7 everything 19:19,20;	264:18	faculty 55:6; 218:9	255:17; 259:22
65:25; 85:20; 98:25;	expedite 265:4	tailed 34:10; 1959	Fife 15:11,17,22
107:23; 108:10; 174:3;	eXpedWou* 23:10	Mr 24:15; 52:24; 111:11;	20:21;22:14;43:1
0.	185:17; 202:13; 248:19	experience 200'19-	181:5:211:20:222:2ft	61:5; 63:1,7; 649
evidence 110:6; 140:12;	256-19 ’	239:13,15:242:5	68:21,69:3,9:70:
’1’,t 1!^:21^«250:3	Experimentation 248:11	*|"ninded 82:6; 837
evidencing 169:23	f>lr-mind«Jn«** 86:12	l5:11
evolved 9:1; 10:9,14;	^^119^ 2(h6 25 3	Mr* 47:13; 78:23; 89:16;
!21:7 176:21; 2079; 218:21	expert 19:24,20:6,25-3,	195.17; 211:3; 243:24	fight204:14
exect 14:10; 20:14; «	Wmeee 29:25:32:15;	fighting 110:10
24:10(55:16	*b22;66:5,8; 95:8; 98:5;	205:24; 2229,228:22	figure 47:18; 108
j. exactly 23:11,12;	fell 41:4; 96:12	file 139,10; 73:6,
139:17; 148:3,5; 154:13;	116-2,9; 130:2,154.16,	fc||» 165:23:213:6:	187:16,21:258:2!
156:I,1;167:19;243:2;	214:8; 217:1	filM 107:16
EXAMINATION 4:20;	234:19; 242:15,20; 243:2;
88:22; 143:11;267:12	MttSiMttlilttlft
2	examine 17034	259:6	i4;250:2l	rT*:’
1:25 examined 4:6; 224:9,	expert** 214:14; 242:20	fantfarlty 235:23	SimSimS
234:3.	mperttae 79:20; 87:11;	femNy 49:14; 539; 78:2;	104:20; 109:24; U
examiner 79^ 88:24	88:2,10; 102:5; 115:22;	126:12	201:20; 202:1052'
examining 233:21	1169; 163:2; 216:11; ,	famous 207:10	262*
M; example 60:12; 69:5;	241:23:243:23	far 6:16; 19:18; 24:12;	finafaed 59:18
87:17; 89:9; 90:4:91:8;	expert* 99:25:100:3;	74:15; 106:15; 149:22;	fawtcM 189:4
96:22; 102* 113:12;	136:18	152:12; 170:1; 172:16;	ffadftl2.15 1*3
6	2: !127-2S? 132 20;	«PW" *3:72:23;	lS l7‘2033^ 10
196:13:228:17.25;	«ptel» 91:3:129:10;	farther 47*23
238:14; 239:2,22; 240:22;	132:7
247+^’ icAtfi	____ *	wVtllon 23*1v5 145*9»	Ivl3il65fi7i21i
•Xp°^J 231:5	147:7:159:15:241:21	180:7; 190:21; 192
«tP°w,r*229:12	Me 50:11	196:11; 209:22; 21
n 231:10; 235:17.21;	288:7 .	21;4l* 17*17	226.2!. 23li.ll.2i
238:15,19:239:3	«p«*«ed 238:13	father’* 41:10	Sfijff*
excellent 155:6	extenalv* 7:24; 30:17;	favor 5022; 250:11
n-	32:9,20; 37:17:122:21;	tamwMvIe-i	130:17,136.5; 182
mSS217-25813	126:8; 159:12; 2259,12,	fiminge 2(0:14;:
,, .r ttl-ly242.17.258.13	17;226:21;227:18;	taxed 6915,22,24,25,	215:4
“52S.........S-&»S“
■	formally 28:17:137:17,	™ *”■
>74> 140:5,19	Gf+B-»-s54:3	H4+t-s 191:13
format 90:25	gsln2l6:Z3	hsbh 128:20; 17*
5:2; ’ formation 183:23	Gallup 133:15,23:134:5,	Gotcha 15122	mrf*’180:13’ ^
K “ss	ss:2^	asfsfr11
’ fanning 214:25:215:23	governmental 28:19	HaWte 255:1,8,1
5.	fonm 5118; 229:13	governments 166:12	256:13
^ forth 37:22; 160:16;	^6^4/4	governor 50:16	habftuation 180:
,:4; 231:15; 241:8,16; 264:18;	' lori,	govern* 171:8	182:7; 221:5
267:8	O™***1*	Ml 13:4
fortifying 234:19	gathered 17.22,18.25,	gntdar,	half 54:12,20; 55
fortunate 81:10	goring 8113	graduate 42:15; 81:23;
forum 119:23; 120:1	guv* 17:3; 35* 903:	»25; 92:11,24; 137:23;
forward 6:6; 35:8; 59:12;	91:8; 135:1,4; 153:17;	hallmarfc* 81:19
159:13:175:18	156:2; 193:20	paduated39:17	y
10:7; fora«ntad24:2	G^tte 155:13	Graham 182:22; 200:3
w found 12:24;42:2;3;	General 27:23; 28:24;	granted 15:3	172:20; 196:14,1(
; 5(13; 105:19; 106 21;	29:5; 32:14; 97:21; 148:1;	graphic 231:12; 232:2	199:19:201:10.1:
SO* 113:22; 126:10; 160:24;	172:22; 175:2; 191:23;	grass-roots 216:1	hand 15:20; 67:2;
9; 207:18	206-1* 22*2*^17-	gravitate 155:4	handling 7:16; 2A
foundation 109:7;	grea* 19:4; 42:2,9; 47:2,	hands 189:16
| 215:17; 216:3	gjJJjWJW*	19; 51:24; 81:2; 171:20;	handwritten 65<
:1* foundational 84:2	180:1	263:16
four 67:20; 111:17; 129*;	122:22; 123:19; 159:4* 6;	Ql»atar28:ll	happen 96:11; 13
22; 155:10; 2115	173:19; 178:17; 180:6;	Green 16:14	1891; 19915
fouryear 27:17	196:4; 203:12,13,24;	Gries 54:2,14.22:56:3,	happened 12:9; 5
>5:8; fourth 221:16; 222:2	204:2; 222:16; 235:24	7.8,21; 57:10;76:23;	68:17;71:18;96:1
ftains 42:8;4715 5518;	generaBzs 121:20	111:6,14,18	176*199:13,14;
:1ft 67:l;102:24;158:2;	General* 10:13:23:13;	grind 83:19	happening 49:8
162:1; 227:4; 243:17	31:16; 56:3:99:18; 104:2;	ground 5:7; 223:19;	happen* 62:6; 87
*} Frank 18SU8,20; 190:12;	l2l:24' 176:21	251:21	113:6
’ 196:2,5; 198:4; 199:16	g®r»f*ted 27:6	ground* 128:11	happenstance 1
frankly 32:1-35-24	B*nerically43:7	group 72:15,16:75:10	hard 43:16; 160:1
Fridav4-7	gentleimn 79:2; 80:2;	groups 50:21; 110:10.	14; 202:2; 222:22;
Sms	8714,25	20:215:25	hardly 248:10
®	George 57:8; 134:5	grow 39:14; 186:23	Harold 28:8; 167:
9	Trog* 252:15	germane 116:7; 127:17,	growing 236:23	HARRIS 267:2
121	22	guard 197:23	Harrison 13:15; 1
get* 43:18; 108:23;	guew 9:17,23; 13:6;	22:22; 74:21; 260:
2204,234:6 248 4	220:10	29:8; 33:12; 36:1; 38:8;	har*her 247:7
TFOnt-and 170:13	gist 155:20,21	43:13; 45:6; 48.* 63:24;	hasn't 35:24; 188
fruits 17:20	given 14:16; 37:10; 55:3;	64:14; 78:12;81:8;83:13;	haven't 30:1133
full 12:21; 149* 17;	69:15:93:22; 105:23;	93:13; 95:10:98:10;	35-17*4Mft431
223:22:225:6	111:17; 120:19; 134:24;	99:10; 108:1; 110:12;	94:13; 165:5; 171::
fulMlma 92:24	236:201	ISr1,1	I7*1;!**!*1*
f.iik.1-?! ii itiic	256:7;264:21	122:20; 127:1,5; 136:24;	202:4:222:18
fully 171:13; 173:25	. 196:10	147:20; 149:15; 156:24;
Frton 34:7; <0:20	Srt.,12;2;17*,7;17.	JSrtSJ.2042
“	228:17	ssksb?
»	186:21; 188:4; 190c6;	194:1
37.23.38:19,22	global 195*; 225:21	191-9:192:4:193:7;	h*d 122:19; 233
Fundamentally 38:14	goal 219:7	197:22; 208:12; 218:16;	240:15; 254:17
*	fundsd 215:24;248.-4	go*» 11:7; 36:16; 100:8;	226:11; 227:12; 232:10;	hoarf*d30:15
*t:7; funding 216:23	122:20; 148:23; 212:23;	^ 242:13; 244:5;	headlne*248:4
.. *___-1- i - nn. < *	246^2*2:10:244:6.7:	....
7*-VF»	T* n fa	‘M. UI’O	ihW C IO	:/^I3
,SZt9l‘t‘f4Z‘tZ‘ZZ	!lZ>I‘€IH)6k>l ‘6*8^	:/ c/1'
I'SfOlSCI	tZtT‘01‘01 *=61*1	IWlKSfeWttfM	Jczt/ci
ElkKS€tI	‘Zlttl-'fZ'ZZ'SI^m	!H9CteCS$ll0l99C	‘OFafcrSifcl'Zl^ toot
E«I%E*BI	*6l7.rSItI‘3I‘8^9I	tt*tVz:re$Z*C*a	:srtl‘6t‘lW.:iZ:69 'n'oz-Q
Il'OItttl	tt'KI^'WI^I'S	‘iZX-UWfZ'Kin	J0Z>i:89%4«t:» Xii&u
MZV-61'Ql	'Z'l^I^I'orit^lkK	Si:/.ll MfauMiAsouM	'■H'9:f9‘-SZ'i9:f:09 ^1=01
n'vai'Li	•m'viiin'zi'im-iz	eottBwXmwji	sviwsiss^zs cra>
WZl$E*£l	SM9-UH4HWH	, ««
ivsz'tz'iz	si;zsz	Kzz&ov&xv-ez
t'S’^TlZI	6Kmo^»I|	•V9Z-V9Z'iV~6X'i-Ll (Z 61 ‘
ET^€Z‘i-6II	0717 Auttdojdun	-0l:9I -S-M ^M)l -8l:6
ItK'OI^U	^WBPWI	-91 'L-9-8V-i	‘CilUW
l'nyLVl	dul	^UdffWWH-p,	W«:SE:,K:S:^
El-ate H	£yatl UOfr—Jduq	9:6tz«|q«H||U*p|	UK'OlSK^BtZiOZ
^Lt®S!	£ fWWW**1!	sr^si «MP(	‘9r4€Z^Z:6!Z^ClZ -6 091 >'
tl ^	yZ-Y9Z'ZV-09Z	«IM
«t^«wwto|	-.-jJJgi'jgr	uruftiwi %i:i9i k)I6«:«
1k*wS>!	«C£K«o«»H	*Si»rW*l:««H	„ :««■:«: >iZI W
Mof^TK	WBMOrSI*!	HIIZHWTHIH	SS!5SS!?J5I! "
r-5^/5	fcWWfcWttfcl	*Z:£K*VZK V9£Z	il SOI<1-101 II001
SJliJ	*S‘I-ZSI‘IZftZttytZX	.iV$Zl‘.r.t7Z'M-L\Z‘n	v , Js-^8l-re il:9z. ‘Ol‘€*61
5E$“	wwiwjohbw	^siw’owt^w
wa?!	--*«
ViS&mi	:KtiK»raw«M	:inti:{iw^Ki	t r-a aX‘7Wi‘ii	«toz>i;^i*P«*ui
*‘0Z‘*l‘tt	SI	!B«t!li:iSlfSl«I	£rzaiunu :s:0si:
;i'«^8!C«8	'Zl'ZlWl %4£Z*Zi6l	STKl-Stll-I^OI	Z4ZI-U
*€l ‘01 *6=98	WfatW-ai^MCl	i:86SZ^8S08-68Z.	K29I spaipunq WllSoi:
v'zi'viTi	'izai^yu-izzu	*«*nwte&vra	6iwz	„
,Z*8TtI‘n	:*l>!as«£|3»dui|	:Ci:fi€ift*«€«M	!Cl*9t u*unij
I'E'EOtt	iVyi MINUJUI|	SZ £lWS:8tt	UOtpDH
♦eieJzztz	smJtmpauiuii	si'otsszsrzszsi	zisiz^ntisz „/t«f:
tX&lfl	«K7jSaflWM	*II:I«J«<KS5IW	‘GZ^VSI^uoimioh 9WI11
X^‘IZ‘8t	*WW55i:iK!««K	w:w
WZSL-Ll	frOOZ«OWU|	!u*8l‘i«€eiK‘Sl	feTOfi para«l
ElKfe*	'QVttZ'iTLiZ'MtZ	J]
C‘9I*9‘I:Z£	6=€K«IO«fl|	‘mZ-SZ^lOiZ'WeZZ
.:89:H 'l:£9	i :i9Z'4m%'yW	'LViVLKZ'il'VLZZ	2 9 *>****<>*
!£Z‘IZ‘IS9	:z.^9Z^19S2;S31ZZZSZ	\Z'L'Z-9ZZHSZZ
1VW9*K	*12*91 £1 S SUnoq
>^9^sz‘sz	fcrii^im^rsi^iz	ztsw*>H	HSS
*i;i9*ii‘€t	^i^iziszwzvfioe^i	iv^z^vtoH , , ,
:W‘0Z’6:6S	XVteBMl'ianZVW,	»ZflCtt‘ti:S««fa	ZI«6ISMJ0I|
«^Z*tZ‘0Z	^:wz«tYt:€ZZ!€l:lZZ	^IZOZ^Z'CZ^t ^	7VW*«UOU
‘OI'^YI	%t:Z0S!SI*ti:(0Z	!iz:*6l!lM<Sl	^
!£Z-8I*£r8	%i:€0Z^Z0Z^Z‘8I	^061 !lZ=98I	«£I 2lSf £5? I ^‘LZ
Vi'Vfi'n	'9V\V-66\'$H6\'VIJS\	m:90r‘,
t-LVtl'Ql	In ‘6:961 ‘i-Z6l ;K;I6I	'ynLVYVWU'Ol	'^}:V*V!g:s
CI'tf'itK	izz’dz^rzittwiii	‘6‘8:Wi;SZ‘il‘or^€iI	-i WUl nr/nrXr
'i;iii^i9ii:iz‘ii:sa	Jsz^ii^uiioz^i	#	wi-woi
Jl'i '9 '£:sy	*P\LVVY9l'i:-l9l	m,€l'ilW+VQ9liZZ	%:S8 f| tW %i|»doq
isitrii	*1:191 :po9i:ft:ki	'ei^vtsi-tz'i V991	z=9K rit?:
K*tzte9>	:w»w:sw	:tI>I‘II,9‘6,I‘i:S9I	‘CZWlUitB^^Sadoq
:SI‘€W:iWI:I;96l	‘^‘5-WI	i|:9tZ	( .
Wr&'iZ	X&iVG&V-iX&l	‘1^9 l!«Z4€Z‘6:i9I	tJ90Z^88I ^S9I	K:£
»4«*w:ir	*rm%r-6zi%t:ai	«*=«
Z ‘til 'LI >1	-K:9El KZI !9l:€ZI	‘Z^SIk»:$Sl4X<0i:CSI	tz:9z ^i:€l Armuoh
X‘ZI'8>t	iimi:iz*9l>i:izi	^T'WSI^Z'tZ^mi	£z*-6IZ inuou 0Z:«W!IZ
H'tViM	J£z'8iwik>i<n	■iv-6n-{z'if>i'iztyi	,rM7.vrccinKlu :iz*s
Jsi^iiJziiiJzz'oznt	:iz*£i>w»i:6‘s*€^€i	‘6'y-izz
incarnation 69:6	inform 114:2	into 8:4; 10:3; 17:2; 38:3;
include 149:20; 150:15;	informal 154:22	47:24; 51:6; 55:5; 57:17;
l»18;18l:2	lnf0nwll0»7:ll;U:2;
15’ included 24:1; 113:14;	26:20; 34:12; 42:4,10;	96:19:108:14:114:11:
115:4;2«:8	47:1 lj 53:16(66:10;	115:10; 119:2; 125^
n hehidliui (b’i' n>io>	81*13-8£5-fl7'21*	126:17; 132:10; 135:14;	' ’ , ^ 4
22; including 68.4,232.19;	155:14; 156:14; 157:3,15;	23,123:7,11,12,1
? 1 . .,	12^-2^12414 lost-	164:4; 169:7; 170:19;	16,17; 124:11; 125
,1, incorporated 69:18	J23-23, 1 24.14,19,21,	176:5; 178* 187:19;	126:3,19:127:1,1,
>18: increased 158:1	206:23; 227:9; 240:5;	128:16,19:129:1,]
I'll' Increasingly 135:14	194?4; ljftlft l3’
incredbly 221:24	207:18; 209:23; 212:9,25;	144:15,18; 145:19,
1,6, indeed 92.22:23-24*	213:9; 214:1,23; 215:10,	invariably 256:6	149:7; 150:5,7,10.
172:21' 188:24 ' ’	22; 21621; 224:15; 229:1,	InVMt 260:10	25; 151:14; 152:16;
,12,	7,15,19; 230:21,23,25;	invested 93:7	13,23; 154:4,20r 2J,
*' h2^Tl4»l	232251263:23	bwaatigal* 18:2; 66:12;	}”:22; 156:12; iV
1*. indaK 50:10,149:1	Initial 12:7; 69:6; 204:16;	135:24; 258:9	158:6,7,10; 159:6,
1; Indexed 144:18; 154:23	261:20:262:12	hmitlnf rin IT	160:11,13,23:162
ta*».so*	in*u*<S83.2S2o*3,ft JZSEruL
indexing 155:6	228:8
24* MhniUM	innut7l>?	aiweallllBiil 212.20	25,25,25; 1703), 1,
|V *	input 71.2	Involve 8:12; 244:24;	171:4; 172:25; 174s
*	indict* 32:8; 51:17;	Inquiry 218:5	258:12	19,23:175:6,10,2!
' ’	iniide 239:16; 240:15	Involved 27:14; 57:15;	176:1,1; 177:13,15
>86,	Inspiration 40:17	94:1:126:5; 184:16;	178:1,4,11,16; 18*
24; „	in*1anc*6:8;9:5,12;	190:20; 218:8; 254:4;	181:17,18; 183:21;
4,	ii,	23:1; 32:20:48:20; 55:1;	258:13,20	20; 186:22; 187:1,3
^ Slftll-SS-	60:11:62-1f>20;^:7;	involvement 145:21;
, 10B.7, lf»3. 18,224.24,	102:12; 104:11:106:13-	21ft:*	6,22,25,193.1,2,1
2M:11;2*:2; 2373.M	nosTllS;!ifik	SJL, a-,* 2W.8	*»*****>.»
I, U, Mle8tl80149:16;	11* 12; 170; 10; .M; 18,	196:5,18; 197:1,24
1	SI :19; 166:2; 168:8;	200:24; 233:9 *	198:11; 199:15; 200
193:12; 210:11; 213^,	instances 10*23	154:12,1^2^:25	201:11,14; 202:4,8
U6 214:14; 216:22	14*21	Invulnerable 210:5,13	206:16,24,25; 207:
i,	' individual 28:7; 100-*	Inst^d i4o-2	Ironworker* 73:9:259 4	208:3; 209:11,20; 2
,22, 120^,136:14; 253:9	in«thirtJnn	Irretovant 89:12	1:5:212
6.8. individuals 15:1; 17:9;	inetlhitlon* 5*20	l» 4:1,2,11,14,22; 5:2,4,
8, 28:10; 34:13; 495,11;	10,13, IB, 19; 6:4; 7:6,10;	228=
y 50:22; 71:7; 72:7; 75:13;	hwtnwl 242:12,243.11	9:6,9,17,18; 10:3; 11:4;	^Inifwi, i
I; 126:5; 144:8; 196:10;	In ttfUCted 63:8	13:5,6,15,24; 14:17;	SJlJSSJ/Jl*
0, 200:21; 255:7	Instruction 237:1	15:14; 16:17; 17:13,14,
14* 5fH.mi6	Inatmctional 233:14	JSJSaiiJaK’o*	240:15:241:2,17;2
’ Indulgent 189:2	Instructions 16:23	n	23,23;243* 17,24
Induatry55:22:75:11,	Intend45:14; 165:20;	14 W?19 1CT0 1	245:10:246:11,20;
16; 109:2; 118:4,9, II, 21;	190:20; 238:7; 239:5,25;	sqio-ww 72 w-	247:19,22;248:10,
7 119:6.9,17,22:120:18;	241:6:243:22 M t	249:6,14; 250:2,5, ‘
I;' 121:14; 122:3,15; 123:7,	Intended 9:19; 187:19;	14^2 19 20: 15	17,22,24:253:6,7,
,5. 12.16.21:124:3,20;	230:4:232:4	14-*1^38* 19 2*	254:19,25:25524,;
!■ Sm-^iSit*	Intending 19:24:44:18	3*1,7, HX 21; 40^ 19;
166-2.9-168:8:182:12.	intend* 20:6; 263:22	41:17:42:12.19:43:2,15;
Intent 251:23
8, 192:12,25; 194:7; 198:17,	intarchangaably 177:17	146:5; 163:24; 170:2
16, 20; 200:12,23; 201:3.7.	Interest 185:4; 226:1	JV-' SI'iS'	174:18; 189:12; 198
2I’ W*i?S4l?i?24	!"*•"«»■<* 73; 5721;	56:1,14; 57:6,7; 58:19,	JESSE
,:2,	122:21; 180:25; 267:18	20;6l:15;62:21;63:l,3,
il:7,	intereatlng 136:3	22;68:15,25; 69:7; 7122;	»; 207:4; 214:18
i4* 210j?aS'l8:M4215:	•"!■«**• 21624	72:15.19:73:25:75:3.22;	l»U019:16; 49:1,1
*	"ltc'a it it	bitenul iQltii	76:6;79:3,15:80:10,12;	59:12;85:21;88:2,2
n”	14,17’, 19,Jersey 227:16; 228:3	z»!l3	195:17:197:20; 19
:	J»*» 1«:17; 217:18; 22ft6	Karen 267:4,25	SSSJsS-
,	207.4,209:3* 211.17,23t	20i206»22»212i8i-
;	212:11:213:6,22:217:1;	KUtoBli, 26ftl7	239* 12.21.23; 2
);	218:1,1,22; 220:5,10,11,	S ~ *	18,19.25, 241:12,
22; 221:22; 222:8,9,23:	Jo"178:4	175:3:258:25	242:1.25:248:24;:
22,	223:12,16,24; 224:4,6;	John 138:7,12	KENNARD 4:17,17;	19,20,24,25; 253:
M7;	225:3,12,13,14:226*	Jonee 68:13,18:693:	2011:70:12,21:71:2,15:	24; 26025; 261:18
15:4;	228:3; 230:12:231:15,17;	70:8; 73:13; 75:10,15;	72:3; 76:17;77U4; 68:17,	8,22
21;	232:13:234:24:236:5;	93:3.5; 258:17; 259:12,	22; 90:15,16; 96:1,6,16.	knowUdge 17:1;
17;	237* 238:21:39:8:	14,17,24; 260:3,22;	16	75:14; 97:21; I14:J
S:7	240:10,13:242:3,17,23,	261:25; 264:6 •	topt 107:19; 130:17;	121:13; 124:16; 13
.	23; 243:10,16,16; 244:3:	Jonph 30:15	172:7; 222:18	165:15; 170:25; 17
Ul	Journal 23:2; 34:3,4;	K*8*ltr 194:13	172:2.22.25:176:
9,22>	61:17	toy 23:20; 24:23; 25:19;	180:8,15; 189:21;
l8;	Journalist 121:4	6;196:18;198:7:Z
j*	253:12; 254:2; 255:6,16,	Joumsls 162:12; 169:22;	313,6,12,17,22; 32: lft	knnwliflnnrtta 1
*	17; 256:11; 257:14,15;	1*13	agJSsUfcW
**	Journey 20:15; 21:25	105:3:106:1,10:118:16;
:2,3,	264:11,14:265:13	judgmsnt 130:11;	119:2,11,15.16:120:24;	known 182.12,18
,8,	it'll 100:23	169:17; 228*. 16; 231:4	121:12,25:122:12:	know* 205:13
2:15,	»’« 5:21:6:15; 17:18;	Judgments 219:14	123:23; 144* 10,24;	KOETHE 4:14,14
1.20,	19:10,12:20:7;29:19;	July 27 13 22:29:19;	145:1,6,14,25:147* 20;	21:8:8,19:11:22;; 30:21; 34:23; 35:1; 42:23;	53:6:5S: 12; 64:10; 65:5;	148:4,24; 149:2.2; 151*	15* 19:17; 20:7; 3
21;	43:16.17; 44:22; 48:17;	108:6 134-11-202:16	154*155:16.22:156:7;	52:19; 70:l4;73:l‘
>;	54:2.4:58:1:61:23:75:2;	jun«fr2I-14-6.7 Ifr	201:1.3:248:22	76:l6;77:19;88:r
20,	90:14; 95:1; 107:23;	26-19-27-13- 29-19- '	toy-dalsd 26:18	94:15; 97* 101:1:
14;	109:17;111:19;120:9;	102:12; 104:’ll;118:19;	keyword 151:10,14,20,	109* 125:10; 147
1,12,	125:1,12; 128:16,19,20,	119:20; 196:13; 201:4,16,	22; 152* 153:14	152:14,22; 161:7;
20,23:129:13:130:15; Q-2ft4i0	Innnids *619 21-	175:22; 180:22; 19
,21,	131:10,19,25:138:5,6,9,	° ,	t»K^6	193* 199:2; 201:3
8;	9,22; 139:23; 144:7,25;	jUfti^T 113*21	W14.153.	203:2.16; 204:3; 2
7:24;	145:2,7,9:148:24;	Juiy 5:14; 241:7	Wd 43-20; 127:6, 236:23	210:21; 211*17,:
3,17;	149:15,16,17:152:2;	Juat 5* 10.13:6:12;	Wd*252:l6,17	212:5:213:20,23;
158:3:160*8.8.13.14.	7:23; 13:22; 18:17; 19:17;	kind 18:12,18:28:20;	215:16; 216:2; 239
4,25;	14; 161* 10; 166:22;	23:7; 26:11; 37:4; 38:22;	38:19:43:18:57:20:65:4;	241:10; 243:20; 24
5.18,	170:13; 171:22; 173:11;	3ft5;40:22;4l:17;42:23:	71:25:73:21:87:20:	245:4; 246:19:249
21:1,	178:20; 180:11; 182:23;	43:7; 48:4; 56:2; 59*	99:11; 114* 124:18;	250:14; 251:18; 26
1,17;	184:19:185*189:22;	62:7;64:15;67:16;69:15;	160*178:7,15,17;	23; 265:7,12
6:18;	190:7; 192:20; 193:4;	72:13; 78:15;82:25; 87:3;	180:14; 189:11; 194:1ft	Kftttttt’t77-ff
4;	196:19; 197:18; 198:24;	90:10,14,22:91:3:92:7,	202:2,11; 205:5; 217:8;
1,3,	199:3.6,12,17:202:1;	14,21; 94:13.18:96:11:	219:21; 23*23; 236:6,18;
;	211:4:216:3,4,10; 219:8;	102*103:25:106:22;	243*245*248:13;
5:	22135; 225:15;226:8;	107:10; 108:11; 111:14,	252:1<M1; 256:2:262:20	*****206:13
239:15; 240:14; 241:1ft	21; 113:16; 116* 117:7;	kind* 12:14; 163.23:19.	-
8;	242:14,15,16:246:23;	119:15; 121:15:124:22;	23; 29:22:32:10; 36:19:	I*
,21.	247:5;253:5,14;256:17;	127:4,7,14; 131:11;	43:10; 54:21;62:24;	_
l;	265:2	132:22; 135:1,13; 139:22;	65:16:69:12,12;78:10;
5:	Hem 79:14; 10317;	143=13,20,25; 144:11;	112:19:135:16,17; 165:4;	, ,
186:24	145* 24,25:147:25;	177:18,21; 182:20; 183*	t*«der 184:2
Hams 37:14:55:19;	200:18; 224:25; 258*	tab*! 29:14,15; 32
3i	166:20; 186:24; 238:12	Khway 134:15	83:22; 167:3; 204:
23;	to 87:20; 123:22; 170:21;	1S1?- 164i21^i6514	MWY 4:5; 143:1,4;	______
A	172:21; 176:25; 192:13;	176^: 17&22:17*11	267:7	tabeta 204:15; 20-
*	EKJwSS*	know 14*156:25;	H"1**9
;	216:24:249:9	190:24; 191:24; 194:24;	194:11:257:5:262:4,12	tack 37:1,109:7,2
1.20,	toed 177:24; 203:24;	195:22; 196:12:205:16;	know 5:25; 6:12; 16:2;	2X8:16 213:19:2143	210:22:211*216*	34:24.25; 35:2; 4025;	tady96:6
14,	--222:11,12:223:12,18,24;	50:12;60:3;63:14;73:17;	tadylke 128:23
24;	¥	224:2.3:226:10:228:17;	75:4; 79* 87:4; 89:13.16;	tand-xwji
,.22: 81:15; 84:14; 87:4,7;	222:2; 246:8,10; 256:16	153:24; 164:10; 186:19;	122:2; 177:15; 129
v 88:19; 93:20; 94:18;	link 113:24	190:7; 192:13; 216:15;	137:5; 165:4; 173:;
Z 95:19; 100:20; 101:20;	link* 1221	218:15:221:13:223:17,	195:18; 198:18; 20
;	list8:20,24;26:8;30:11;	20; 23*12; 234:1.4; 249:1	201# llj205^
j|, 111:25,112:1;118.2,12;	7815-11425	lookad 30:11; 31:11;	236:10; 258.12; 26
’ 120* 125:17; 12630;	'	32:23:35:13,14,16,17;	267:11
129:24; 135:1:149:23;	“15WZ* ®*34*	36:1,2; 37:18; 55:11,24;	madne** 262:16
’ 150:1; 156:18; 160:20;	.i t ^ ... n	56:1;6&21;84:17;98:18;	magazine37:14;-
'	166:20; 172:3; 176:14;	%	104:12,14; 112:15;	55lWl
*	178:22; 197:19,25:198:3;	116:14; 118:23; 131:13;	magazine* 27 8; 207:12:222:11:226:10;	fc«ng3&4	152:17,18,24; 164*
229:10:230:12,12:	Urtt8:25	179:2; 188:1,2,7:190:11:
251:13:257:5	literally 49:6; 207:9	213:1; 225:15:233:24;
Uf* 24:10; 31:18; 34:19;	literature 54:10,25;	240:21; 254:2	main lyi82.20; 25
35:18; 36:22; 38:12; 40:2;	162:12,20; 166.1,9;	looking 11:5; 133:16.21,	73:6; 21!
57:10,18;66:1;76:25;	176:20; 180:18; 207:14;	24 4 20:2521'29:23:	maintained 107:2
fc	39:1; 44:21; 50:5:62:24:	218:11
19:233:18	81:6; 82:4;85:18.25;	maintaining 7:14
12, ,i7,ri«-i7 IT^IQ	6.20;26211	103:7,8,18,107:6;	8710:88:9
50:5;	llttto 9:3; 22-6; 43:20;	109:15; 114:17; 117:2;	major 10:20; 12:2
:5;	46:6:51:22; 56:16:62:5;	122:12; 127:18; 139:2;	26:19:29:3; 30:16;
■	81:16;90:21:93:21:99:5;	160:12; l6l:25; 167:11;	11;41:3;©:4;79:1
! !?£ 5	108:11:115:14; 131:4;	229:16,235:2	88:12; 100:12; 124
2	. ™	143:25; 152:15; 158:3;	looks 25:7; 124:10; 255:4	154:25; 155:5; 166
tovel42:6; 129:2; 134:13;	171* 183:3; 188:24;	|ooee60-U 11-643	170:23; 196:20; 19
' 146:13; 168:10; 173:19	189:3; 193:23; 202:2;	^LTll4l6	217:2? 23
.. leveled 156:20; 158:1	217:14; 239:20; 245:5;	“T..	main 24 2S-41-5-
" level* 11:10:66:11;	249* 11; 250:4; 252:15	41:20; 54:13’; 65^
112:23,113:2:124:15:	live 39:16	W141 1615.144.12,	71:25;91:18;93^;
132:3; 147:5; 235:13	lived 39:12.17,19	106-24; 116:7; 127
3	lability 228:4	Hv« 163:22; 246:6	129:12; 130:11; 13
** tbwrlaiw 109:20	living 39:10; 167:6;	20*1*239*245:10;
Ibrarie* 53:19	232:20	248:23
flbmry 10:18; 13:3,5;	loading 248:14	lot* 116:1; 131:12; 159:8;
52:11; 93:24; 56:15,24;	lobbying 51:18; 108:8;	170:14;238:15	220*24-2H0-9-2<12
57:7; 58:14; 59:13; 108:6	109:12,15:110:17,20,24;	k>lld224:7	238:17; 239:4' 5:2
»; life 39:13.23:76:7;	166:14; 167:10,13;	lousv 88-19	242* 246:5, i9
£	O200^’246:1^	^:)5’25 , . ,	lOVOftMte 218:17	fl»k«77*90:2t
>	™	local 16:3.4:42:4,6;	low 49-13-114-25	130:3; 138:4
*	liko 5:7,25:7; 26:6,9;	43:10:60:14; 107:12;	»W 4SR15, U4.25	m«Mnn 19H11 31:19:41:19; 42:13;	146:13,13.19:147:1,2;	bw*f 6:15:123:13;	iSSRSSmo 43:14; 44:20; 45:5; 61:14,	166:12;225:18;233:8,11;	l62;H .
® 17,24:^:2,22:67:1;	238:16,18:263:23,24	>1199:19	______
73:10; 80:19; 81:20; 89:2,	located 8:14; 17:17;	luilod 199:16:200:1
20;90:10;91:13; 120:23;	63:19	lulling 197:8,9 10	manage 22:2
1®* 124:10; 128:11,24;	locatinoS'lO 17	lunch 77-15- 87*1*	managamsnt 22:
1	177:1,19; 186:23; 188:15;	k>ng9:13; 10:25; 11:2;	15410	^2^641&78U 196:10:198:25:202:12;	39:12.16; 55:4; 63:13,21;	luncheon 141:3
8:15; 208:15; 233:16; 236:1;	67:4; 77:6,13:95:12;	lung 27:4; 28:3,12;	|(W?il4V1^17
4:11; 237:25; 250:18; 252:20,	101:2,138:22,167:11;	34:H;69:7; 113-24;	212i4’w:21M
22; 254:3; 255:7; 263:7.15 173:6; 177:25; 181:15,15;	115:5; 116:10; 118:19;
fc6.8L M»d41 24-42-1 71-7-	182* 221:24:225:15:	119:22; 133:19; 136:2;	^
2	SSSiT!*
1:» 219:22	kmgar 72.-6; 256:12	201:6,- 230:3; 231:24	Hair* 2187
j Hnliliood 28:11; 44:23	tongwt 95:16	~	marked 25:1,4,9
Utaly 27:4,4; 112:21;	bok 8:4,21.22; 10:2,7,	M	™*33:9:2l7:
10.	152:5; 214:16	18.21; 15:19;2315,22;	--MARTIN 4:5,22;«
' * IhJ mii. mm	29:20:32&36£:38:15:	_________I 20:13;25:13;46:2;
■	6	RMM 222:14,18, 20;	T^ri.SJ.
41:21; 52:16,18; 54:8;	91:12; 169:17; 170*	249:2	159:18:160:1,13;
*	69:10,19; 71:6;72:23;	medical whl«d 48:25	30-19-5218:86:16:	201-12,13,205.1i 2.25; 74:4:77:11,23:78:4,15; ws*	901? S 1421-	21; 226:18; 227:3,
*
a SSS,:	"Kes,2™*
M:2J; 95:19:96:7,25:100:20;	^'21^,7	237:13,16,21; 23J
0,22; ioi:20; 102:7; 105:17;	™™*0,65**®7*	mfcllim** 129:17	Morrta iZ7-7
*4* 107:10; 110:12; 111:25;	99:2,17	mining 14:1;82:3	m-.tcift.isi i
12; 112:1; 113:16; 118:2,12;	member 44:13; 55*	minora 47:4.17; 48:5,22;	5£?i.»-9 1033
4.25; 1203; 125:1,17; 126:20;	218:10	109:5; 110:4; 210:19:	6V19-7*16:909
»* 127:12; 128:19; 129:24;	mambai* 232:20	212:3:213:2,10	itiM. 24 176^T
W, 132:19; 135:1,4; 137:20;	immonmd. 65:4; 73:1	minute 178:23; 222:12
3-	ijSiSfJSl?	mentioned 37:15,19;	minute* 48:19; 50* 8;	229:11,20:231:1;
*	149:23; 150:1,155.11,	40:4; 56:25:83:3; 122:25;	91:18:99:2,16; 244:10;	imuMh 128-7
4	156:18; 160:20; 164:17;	126*133:22:138:23,25;	""T*12?! 2:14; 166:17,20; 169:16;	146:9; 148:19; 151:16;	_*L.*m7	moBon 149:8 :25; 171:10; 172:3; 176:8,14;	154* 158:22; 191:14;	. . /	moua* 182:21; 2<
176:22; 180:4; 183:17;	217:15;253:17;264:5	V^T*1	mouth 185:1; 242
191:4; 197:19,25; 1983;	mantor 83:25	mova 135:14; 15!
I6' 202:2.12:207:12; 2M:22;	mew 187:20	njacommunlcata	176:l4;202:4
111	;6; 226:10! 2522»:iO	mM*8g» 125:5; 136:12;	moved 55:5; 218:
230:12,12; 237:7; 250:16;	ijTiln ^'l6,1?’ 152:23	movement 186:3
k« 251:14:253:16; 254:2;	j	mfcrepreaent 147:7	mov«2Q2rf
257:5,6;258:18; 267:7,9,	^!!SK2Sm9:7	"«^-»0:22»2
*	’ 13 ,-,#-.1^10.	63:7; 65:l6;71:l6f72:3;	movWifl »:23;2J
mean 10:4 5;31:13;	^255^7 25*9	73:2; 230:4; 232:4	MR 4:9.14,17,21
?'	irfw-IJJilfcm:*	21;8:8,19; 11:22;
*	66:25;69:24; 73:17,20;	ITHtnOd 23.17,82.16,	207-24	15-6:19*17 21-2C 80:7;81:5; 82:1; 84:3;	1457; 150:13; 179:21.23;	__________1^1^2115:2^
5; 90:11;92:5; 103:17;	185:14,15; 262:16
109:16; 117:19; 120:1,3;	methodologiee 106:23	miMion 11:6	21-71-2.1*723*
8; 124:3; 131:11; 135:15,25;	methodology 35:5;	ml—t^a 105:11	19;76cl6,17;77;l
3	137:1,25:147:7,25;	38:10:79:16,25:80:5,6,	miataton 32:24; 36:15;	88:17,17,21,22;!
148:4,23:149:16,17;	15; 81:17,18; 82:17:86:9;	51:4;2Z8;7	16; 91:16; 92:2,22
>1:13 152:2; 153:11; 155:3;	88:13; 117:13; 118*	miaundantandlng	15,17; 96* 16; 9!
0:14. JSEJJUIfSTMl:	137:25	153:15	9*20; 101:13,1*
;33:1;	n»lhod*81:l	mbc 65:20; 79:1	13; 125:10.13, H
i4°:7.	mice 200:6	mMng 61:18; 205:11	143:12; 147:24; 1!
fL 197:12,17.18,21; 199:20; mlcrofichee 24:4	mock88:22	iSSI^Sti^S
205* 209:17;215:9;	miera<ilm24*17;25:21	modem 51:1; 135:14
V	222:23; 226:22:227:11;	mfcrofllmlltg 24:9	modMftd47:6	187:9 19* 191*1
*	2ft « 108 22	moment 4:23; 8:23;	14; 193* 10; 199 S:4; 248:25,252:22; 255.23,	mid.’60s 114:11	32:11; 39* 41:13; 48:12;	201:23; 202:15; 2<
*	22*.™-*.,,.	mkt-'SO* 159:2	86:18; 120:14; 195:19	16,18; 204:3,9; 2
:	nrid-IBBOs 126-7	moiwnte 23:7,8	207:23.25:208:1;
7 25- 181:24;247:17	manWUS 126.7	_____________,	25-211-6l13.17 ’
J25’ meaningless 86:5	mkMWO. 32:3:3*7	JgJjggj
MS maana 5:25; 137:20;	mtdaOe 47:19	month 53* 123 1 2.3:	22,23,24; 214:5,
:20; 197:20:199:10	mkk*a 94:24; 212:19;	215:16,20; 216^,
meant 39:18;70:2	234:2	1^1^2 21 7412	234:12; 237* 23!
^*22. meesurabto 164*15	might7:3,l4;9:2,llt 12,	'	24(fc7;24l:10f2A
2,12;	15; 12:23; 23:20; 28:1;	month* 6:23; 7:23;	243:14,20; 244:1,
maaaUIV 134:14; 238:9	33:12; 34:22; 38:18; 45:9-	11:23:30:12; 171:22	13,15,21; 245* <
mtnummnt* 193:21	52:3:63:22,23; 78:11,15; moral 128:9	246:19,22:247:9;
mechanical 71:12	79:7,8,9:81*83:11;	more 7:24:9:1,4; 12:15;	21,23:2503,14,:
40:2; mftdl* 28:12:30:6,17;	84:5; 85:12; 88:18; 90*	18:4;24:12;26:7;27:3,4;	251:18.24; 261:5,
... narrow 151:7	18*19; 191:10; 227:18	nor 267:17.18	251:10.11; 253:U
’ nation 46:19,21; 47:12	nwflpifuri 12:23; 22:5,	normal 67‘20:169" 1‘	254:5,13.15; 255:
% national 27-7- 29-7-	12,20,22; 23:22; 24:4;	256:12; 257*, 17;
25:22; 27:8,10;60:1,3,	_	261:18; 262:22;M
:1?: 145‘1‘15421 2l'l73’18l	*4,18,20,24; 61 9; 62:10,	normally 80:11
% 1961V 2191-2476	13; 63:10:86:1; 106:7,18;	Not 6:7; 8:23; 9:17; 10.4;	notation 1^22; 2
117:5; 134* 135:18;	12:3; 16:24; 17:5; 19:7,13;
9.	nationally 26:21	136:15; 145:5,16,22;	20:14,19; 21:6.11,15;
,23; natUIO 5:17; 8:6; 12:18;	146:1,2,13,19:150*;	23:12; 24:8; 26:1; 32:2,6,	NOTED265:20
11,	14:24; 21:3; 50:24; 58:2;	151:7; 164:9; 181:13;	24; 33:16; 35:21,25;	not** 13:20; 18:1 1; 69:17; 71:13; 79:5; 87:12;	182:25; 189:23; 196:23;	36:14,17; 37:3; 39:19;	72:1,1; 187:18; 26 -6:22;	202:6; 230:20,21; 233:2,	40:3; 41; 10,15; 45:17;	17;264:8
4,8; 258:7	46:15; 48:4,12; 49:2,5;	noteworthy 55:6;
j «	NaWBWaelt 31:19; 37:20	51:2,4,9,15,15,20,20,	227:22; 228:2
wartayil	nowaworthineaa 198:12	24; 52:7; 54*, 11; 55:8,	nothing 72:11,13
nawaworthy228:10	23;56:1,10,14,19:58:7,	90:11; 111:22; 131
l4.	31:21; 52:2,2;73:11:82:9;	^ 128;, i,n,.,*	9; 59:5,16; 62:7; 63:3,21;	200:23
!:5, 87:18; 89:15; 99:6;	^7671,^21	64:19:65:1*71:17; 729,
7* 130:22; 131:2; 145:25;	25.17,67.11,22031	l>73:ll-76i77*10.25:	n°t,C^168'315,
k*. 163:20; 171:5:173:18;	nicotine 1405; 176:18,	notion 144:24
25; 236:16; 240:4; 257:19	24; 180:5,9,20,21;	82,'9' 83 "9 12:86:3.9 13.	November 58:20;
nocoaaaiy 13:22; 146:4;	*>* 6*23,25; 68
M9; 2615	90:20,21:91:10,12;	94:24;95:22; 171:;
naceaaiMa 264:2,2	nh>e 94:9; 148:18,19;	93:15,16; 945.11; 97:16,	200:5
K* need6:10;25:17;43:2;	7, .	17;98:15;99:5; 100:2,6,	Now7:20;9:25; 13
49:13; 52:18; 85:1.1;	19; 101:3,5,7; 102:2;	18:17; 23:6; 25:2.1
*10! 122:9; 123:8; 197:14;	^21:6,11 15. 20;	104:3; 105:6,17,18;	37:8; 39:20:44:18;
*	201:12,12; 240:19;	*	106:17,17,20; 107:16. a	15:46:10; 52:13;* 263:14; 265:4	108:7.12; 109:8,17:	60:5; 66:1:75:20; 1 naedad 14:16,17;	S?i?2JSS^	H2:13.21;113:10;	78:25; 86:7.10.16;
l: 120:22; 254:16	”5:20,21; 116:2,5,9;	91:17; 95:11,20; 9<
, noaathn 149-6	U^T.96.	n8:13; 119:17; 120:11;	98:3:99:19,24; 101
*	122:16; 123:13; 124:6;	102:19; 103:25; 10
12.	neighborhood 9312	75:12; 76:2,5,11:78:19,	125:6; 126:2; 127:12;	108:4; 111:3; H8:; :12; neither 267:16	19l80:7;81:22;86:18;	128:5,16,19,23:129:19;	125:6:126:16:132 t; network 225:18	91:20,20.23,25; 95:16;	130:1,2,15,21; 131:1,10,	140:24; 148:12,17
*	networks 32:25	19,2S; 132:13.135:11,13,	156:12; 162:14; 16 Neubarger 166*22	S.l'S.S *	1* 136:19,22; 138:5,6.9;	170:20; 174:14; 17
7:®'	i	139:16:140:1,5.14,21;	176:16; 178:1; 179
17.	Neubergera 191.14	120*,8; W2:6; 126:1,14;	144:2.11; 1459; 146:3;	1855; 188:25; 190
!1; never 35:1,2; 40:13;	128:8:140:10,12,21;	149:19:152:13:153:20;	192:2,9:195:4,14,
9.21; 42:13:50:13; 72:15; 73:4;	143:16.21; 146:4; 148:16;	w*	157:2.	207:^^20.20;
l5:7,	150:^7jl52:12; 153:10,	3; 159:14.16; 160:11,21;	212:23:213:16:22:
221:24; 246:3; 252:12;	10; 156:23; 159:15; 160:6;	161:18; 1629,22,25-	2299-2309-234-1
S; 257:10,18,18; 258:13;	161:19; 162:3,«««	KMJmJiSi*
ii	165:21; 166:5,23; 168:11;	243:3.16;244:7;2-
17,	navartheieaa 5:20;	23; 167:19; 168:11; 170:3;	169:19.25:170:6; 171:5,	249:8.12:250:24;;
1.15; 116:13	JZVi ii ii* U*	14.24; 172:8; 173:10,11,	252:15; 253:17; 2513: New 57:7; 111:7,9;	!« w	*7.25; 174:9.10,11,12,	255:14; 256:20; 25' 144:13,14,17.19:145:23;	JJf „	20,20,22;175:15;177:I5;	2593 154:11,12.15.19; 155:4,	J”5® I5:	178:2,18,20; 179:23;	nowheie 50:12 9; 177:16.16; 188:14;	JJJ-JfXi’,5,.	185:18; 192:17,23:	number 14-21-17 196:17; 212:20; 225:21;	193:12; 194:25:195:4;	22:4: *7-14-47-14
- 227:16:228:3:254:8.18;	24; 197:25;	5*^60:17; 6316
25614	199:13.17,25:200:20;	SiSiSSfelS
_ IWM 31:18; 32:3,$	S5 iSfcai?»	SSSJKfS”1
vssgg&k*	ztirMsL	sssssst
s® SEiSra”’1*	SSfSSSS"*	—«-»=w
....	IImiiS^XST	mmtm,f79.l2!
,;15.’ IWWajailer995	237:18; 238:4; 244:4,15;	222:9,21; 224:18; 226:3;	130:18; 136:1; 158:
3; newtlaltafa 99:6	245:22,22; 246:24; 250:2;	227:18:22&7.10.12.14*	247:21;248:5,14
' 55:1,10,11,20; *5:1,11,	15*16.16.16,20,24;	24.25,25; 256:2,4,10,	11; 134:20; 135:6.
•5; 13,13,15,17,17; 57*	159:2,8,14,18,24; 160*	16,20:257:17,19,20,22;	137:4,22; 138:11;
12,12,19,20; 58:2,13,	10,12,17,24,25:162:1,	258:6.16:259:7,22.24;	25; 140:14,22; 143
11; H, 19.23; 59:19,20,25;	8,16,17,23.24; 163:2,7,	260:20:261:20.22.22;	145:13; I47d>,24;
18, 60:13,17,19,22; 61:1,3,	11,24; 164:5,12,21;	262:5.9,14,16,18.25;
3,6,11,15,20,25:62:4,	165:4,6.22,24:166:5.10;	263:21; 264:17;267:1.2.	J51:« 152*9:1
,q.6; 19,21,23,25; 63^64:14,	14,17,19,22; 167* 10,	6,10,11,15,21	J»^56:1M7
I ‘ 16,17,17,18,25:65:1,4,	13; 168* 16,23; 169:4,6,	off11:20; 23:7; 30:10;
12,13,14,15; 66*11,	10,11,14,22,25; 17(h3,	33:4;45:20,21; 50:15;	J }“:Jj
15;67*11.15.21;68:l6.	12,14,18,%25; 171:5,	122:19; 133:21; 140:25;	^7,
20,24:69:5.6.12,12,12;	7.21; 172^,6,9,11,12,	156:20; 158:1,17; 175:1;
70:4,7:71:5,6,9,11,11,	18,19,20,21,22,22;	179:10; 187:24; 197:23;	i™i6 20
12.14,20;72:1,7,10.20,	173:1.4,23.24.24:174:3,	227:ll;244:l6; 260:11;	S"**,
23; 73:4,15,21; 74:7,13,	7; 175:12; 176:4,6,6,18,	261:5,8,11	174^M7*5 14!? I™?”’* I-mw	oW#r 49S; 66^24l:18-	177:2,14; 178:22; 20;	23,25; 243:19; 264:19	181:5,16; 182:11; i' r o n w m.	oflwad 90:10; 124:19	186:14; 188.-6,13;
11,1^19,20,80.1,8,11,	16,18,19,21*181.7,21, „	194-V195-18:196
” 16:81:2,7.1*82:5.7,15;	182:1,2.7,20.21.2*	°““5®‘*Kh2“	5*Sg; *25
*'12! 83:6,14,21:84:5.6.7.8.	183:5,7,7,8,9,23; 184:7.	offiCM64:21	21120 21 21210
8.9.12,16:85:2,15,15.	12,14,21,22,22,24;	offcUl3:7	213:23; 215:8; 216
22 17,19,25:86:2,2,8,16;	185:4,21; 186:2,9,15;	offMt 134:23; 137:14;	221:13:222:1,25;;
87:12,14,15,17,20,24,	187:1,7,25:188:10;	224*10,20:226:
25:88:1,8:89:6,7,12,14;	189:11,12,25:190:1,2,	often 68* 122* 123:17-	227:2,10:228:19;;
fclO; 90:4,9.19:91:17,19.25;	12,17,23,25:191:5,8,	144:1V 237.1?	234:1,8,17,23; 23
92:11,18,25:93:12,14,	17,22,23,25,25:192:6,	oh 60-21 24-70-1*85:6:	237:12; 238:6, 22;!
22;94:3,24;95:20,21;	11,12,25,25:193:4,9, 1«>7	244:2,7,22; 245:1;
l(y 96:14,25:97:1,6,11,20;	18,19:194:1,4.5,15,18,	247:10; 248:17; 24
P 98:1,13,22:99:1,2.3.3,	19,21:195:5,12,13;	250:21:251:13,15
*	7,11,11,14,16,16;	196:2,13,17,18,21,22;	2533.17; 254:1; 2 100:21; 101:14,22,23;	197:4,5,18,22.22:198:6.	256*; 258:15; 259
: 102:5:103:12,13,16,22,	7,9.12,19.19:199:20;	Ohto^*14;lfcl7,l$	261:4,10; 262:24;;
25; 104:1,9,11,20; 105:2,	200:2,5.8,16.17,1822;	12:11,1^22; 16:12; 22:7;	jgj.jj
7; 21,24,25; 107:20; 108:1,	201:1,2,11; 202:2,3,11,	39:10,14,17,1^42*;
15. 5,6,10,11,18:109:4,6.7,	II; 203:6,6,20:205:1,2,	44* 12,13; 46:18,20s	21212:246*li
,24, 21,23:110:7,15,21,22;	2,5,9,18:206:7; 207:14,	47:1,11,11; 48:6,7 15;	’
21,	111:13,14,15,23,23;	22; 208:5,10,21; 209:18,	53* 55:4; 60:2a 24;	OH*M212:18
18,	112:3,7,7,8,17,17,19,	19:210*10,13,19,20;	6l:l4;«4:10;73*	omlt78:l
.2,9, 19,23,23,25,25; 113:2,	211:12:212:4,13,25;	107:13:108:10:114:13;	on 4:12,15.17; 7:!
6, 5,8,9,19,23,25; 114:6,9,	213:2,5,6,10,11,14,16,	128:2:138:7,15; 139:12;	10:19; 11:22; 12:2,
:1,6, 15,17:115:1,6,17,21;	25; 214*9,19,24; 215:2,	157:15:223:24; 224:21:	15:19; 16:3.15:17
>:2,8, 116:1,9,18; 117:4,10;	9.16,18,22,23; 216:10,	232:2<* 233:12;236:23,	19:1; 20* 15; 21:4
; 118:8:119:2.7,16,17;	11,16,-217:1,8,12,13.	24; 25*25;263:23	9.12,22:23:3,4,1
8:11, 120:7; 121:5,25; 122:3.	14,16,24; 218:3.7,9.14,	ok«y 5:22; 6:2,13,17,18;	9; 28:24; 29* 15;*
4,	11,19,22,23; 123:1.2,3.	16,17,20,22,22, % 25;	7:20; 92S\ 10:10,13c 11:4.	l4;31:l6;32:l,ll
,16; 6,7,14,15,18,18,20,22;	219:1,6,7,20:220:3,4,	19; 12:7; 14:12; 15:21;	8,9,13; 34:5,16; 3
»; 124*13,14,15,17,18,	23:221:2,5,6,14.17;	19:16; 20:11; 26:3,15;	23:37:22; 38:3; 41
,14, 18.18,21.25:125:7,20,	222:21; 223* 14; 224:16,	37:7,25; 38:5; 41:12;	42.-6; 45:24; 46:10,
12,	25:126:2,4,8,12,21:	25;225:11,21,25;226:3,	44:16;49:22; 52:4,13:	48:8; 49:4,18; 50:1
4.	127:9, U; 128:4,7,9.12,	6.14; 227:7.16,17; 228:4,	53=1.10:55:20,25; 56:25;	56:19; 57:25; 58*
,15. 14,19; 129:2,3.17,19,	6,9,13,14,17,21,25,25;	58:1,11; 99* 4,7,10,17;	66:2; 67:3,4,24; 6l
10, 20,22,24:130:1,2,13,	229:4,11,13,17,19,23,	62*64:1,20:66:15;	24;70* 12,20; 71
23; 19:131*5,12:132:3,3,	24:230:1,15.15,17;	67:14;68:22;69:1:70:3,6; 72:5; 76:4; 78:21
3; 11.25; 133:2,9.13,18,	231:6,8,10,10.11.17,	71:25;72:25;73:12,20;	80:16; 81:16; 82:2!
,22; 19.19.20,24:134:1,1,2,	24;232:8,16,20,25;	74:6, 13,20; 7535:76:12,	13; 85:13; 86:7; 87
5; 11,13.16,18:135*16,	233* 17,23.23; 234:2,6,	25; 77:2,12,17;78:14,25;	19; 88* 25; 89:22
21; 17,20,25; 136:6,15,19,	21,25:235:6,11.13,14,	79:21,24; 80:14; 81:15;	92* 12;93:1;95:4
22; 22; 137:10,14,15,25;	22,24,25; 236:6,15,16,	82:15;83:l6,2l;86:19,	12; 97:21; 98:2; 10
*	138:1,3.3.16:139:1,5;	19.21:237:20,23:238:12,	23; 87:5;89:25; 90:3; 91:1, 24; 102* 21; 103: 3. 140:5,17; 143:1.15,18;	14,15.16,17; 2395.5,9,	4,6,15;92:10,22; 93:6,	104:3; 105:8,14; 1'
1,3,	144:4.11.12.15,16.19,	14,17:240*15,16;	19:94:4,7; 98:16; 99:14;	107:24; 108:2; 109 1; 24,24,25:145:2,7,10,	241:6,16,23; 242* 15,	100:16,20:101*102:4,	12,19,19:110:14.
one-third 111:15	22.23:90:18; 91:2,10,12;	13;94:l4;96ft963,15; 157ft 164:4; 169*
l: ones 51-21* 55-23* Qfrifr	93:3; 94ft 14,21; 95:14,	1033,15; 106:6; 115:15; 173:8; 174:11,12,1
U 21114 15	14:96:11,16:97:11,12;	118:4,4; 121:4; 123:18;	20; 175:18; 176:5, t
11: nnn.nifVr. in	98:5;99:17; 105:7,24;	133:7; 134:20.21,24; 178:10.10,14; 198
9-j. one*«6ftI0	107:19; 108:19; 109:3;	138:11; 139:1; 147:10;	218:18; 231:18; 23i
13i	110:10; 111:18; 114:20,	148:14; 149:4,24,25;	243:8; 257:11
l; 16*23; 170ft 174:17;	24; 115:3,14,14; 119:8,	158:24; 160:3,3; 161:16;	overall 13-23-64-1
5,	175:8; 218:17; 219:5:	16; 120:2,21; 121ft	162:15; 166:8; 177:18,21; .121; 223:8; 237:13; 243:6	122:2,16,16; 123:5.9,16;	179:10; 180:6; 183* 9;	°V«t>*erlng 248: 3,23; only 5:21:29:8; 33:1;	124:20; 126:2; 127ft	194:4.20; 195:16; 196:24;	Werheeid 39:7 r.8, 35:16; 46:15; 67:10; 95:5;	128:5,24:129:19:130:20;	19*24; 216:11; 217:6;	overrated 196.-6 4:1, 99:7:107:25:111:13; l7’^1^3,3,6,	219:4; 222:11; 224:22;	ovorrMMrching 0; 125:22; 131:21; 151ft *	225:19; 227:21; 230:2;	overview 22 111 :11, 152:18; 159=22; 172:8;	139:22:148:4,18,19;	231:7,8; 237:14; 242:19;	23	’ 20; 177:16; 188:22; 189:8;	149:2; 150:3,5; 151:25;	249*19* 251:20:254*2.23:
Mii 191:18; 199:13; 205:8;	152:!?; 154:21; 155:10,	^ 25L20, «4.2,23,	own 40:6; 42:15; 5;
15,	218:23; 227:18	10; 156:13,15,20,22,23.	2SJ7 ' ’	23;6l:4;73*81ft
:I0; onto 91:20	24; 157:7,18,18; 158:1,	“V	86:16; 88:10; 123:2
oimi 189-il	14; 160:10,13,21,24;	150:12; Mfcl* 144
°**>t .. .	161:16; 162:2,12,21;	83 2; 86:11,15; 106:16;	158:7; 209:21; 248:
°P«Hninctod83:7	163.6,7,7,19,22; 164:13:	126:23; 127:20; 135:7;	263:18
f. opons 194.-9	165:3,4,5,12; 166:8,11;	140:18; 153:20; 159:3;	-
1:23; operation 22:3	168:10:169:5,11.17;	176:12; 220:19; 222:23	n
I; opinion 84:22:113:1:	170:6:173:11,11; 175:20;	Otherwise 7:12; 137:11;	F
M>:6; 125:4,24; 127:18; 132:16;	177:1; 1782; 17*7,7,19;	154:2 :
133:12; 134:21; 140:15;	181:19; 182:1; 183:19;	ought 25:3; 246:12	PJI 141:1,4; 143:2,
156:23; 163:5; 168:24;	our 4:10; 20ft 31:18;	187:3,8:244:17,20
5:9, 173:10; 175:16; 195:23;	J4,1W:3; 190:24; i91:18;	261:12,15; 265:18,
198:25; 209:11; 211:10,	145.19; 170:10; 172:19;	peck29:l6
3,	15; 212:7; 214:14,25;	185:14,15; 216:25; 221:4;	pack* 29-16; 204 2
221:15; 231:8; 240:17.22,	22:202* 205:2,12;	249:2
t, 10, 23; 243:19;246:21,24;	206:25; 207:12,17; -	niIti.«.|i.« u,,	p«9*95:15,17; 11!
6.	248:15:249:20,22,25;	208:23:209:3,4,8,16;	124:9; 132:19.25; 1 2:3, 251:20; 253:4; 257:20	211:4,9:212:3; 213:10;	5.1164^7,17^7,	196:17; 221:13; 223
opinion* 12:2; 53:11	215:10,25:216:14,21;	20,21; 225:2; 228:1
'10 64:5; 65:22; 95:9; 97:4,12;	17; 50:10; 51:22,- ’
5; 100:22; 124:11; 125:8;	^ in	61:4; 63:10; 64:10; 67:7;	^ ^7.10; 248.4
*4:7; 154:16:207:15:215:23; gJ;JJ gj*110.	79:1.85:,4; 99:6; 101:7,	P?J? 101:2,117:4
'.13; 229:4;234:20;236:13; 8.9 11	23; 108:8; 111:22,113:6;	22°?
>.10, 238:7;239:6,14; 240:19; 2W2 is	114:25; 118:19; 119:5;	p*H 259:14,24; 26i
!:10, 241:17,23,25;242:6.20;	2S16 ^ 22 24124 24	122:15; 123:6; 130ft	22;26l:l
5; 244:25; 256:1; 264:18	240.16^,22,^,24,	1J1;lg. 1J6:18.15*25;	p.jnted 200:6
1.9; opportunity 32:6; 45:10;	19; 2493-2517* 253A	156:8; 165:19; 170:6;	painting 182:21; 2C
124:24:265:8,13	1^21^2^,1^5:22;	171:21; 178:20; 179:4;	14
oppose 109:3	256:12:257:15,20.20:	™ ,	pamphtot 54:10,2‘
7’ opposed 62:20; 83:14;	258:21:259:6,9,22,	^	177:12; 178:3:233:1
r 166:10:205:5,19:206:2;	261:18; 262:2,20; 264:3,	pamphlets 54:6,7;
I ^O:l«;255:20	13	10,12,20; 56:1; 65:]
7; oppodng 168ft 224:16	order 1731; 216:24	246:i&2^2^11	P*»r24:12.14;62
; option 242:13:257:6	Oregon 126:9	263:6,8,9 ’ ’	63:22; 144:16; 149:S
; or 5:14; 6:5, il;7:24;	organization 133:16	out-of-office 59:14	150:22; 151 ft 21; 1!
8:21:9:1:10:12:11:14,16,	organization* 51:2,9,	Otrtcom* 267-19	paper* 13:1; 23ft J
; 25; 12:2,3,18; 16:3,4,8;	11)216:1	QUKQ"1* 267;19	44:15; 60:15:61:13
17:6; 20:24; 21:3,13;	oroente. 68:2:72:21	G*™"* 243.23	62:7; 144:20; 146:25
26:10; 28:19; 29:19;30:4, .,-A - .	OUt*elU2:13; 130:7,7,	152:17,18,24; 154:;
11; 31:12,13:55ft 36:20;	0?™** 65.14,159:14	12; 258:14	155:11
38:11,16,17,18,22;	ort*ntsd245:Il	outside 58:17; 59:20;	pafagmh 68:1; 20
*	40:12:41:7; 42:1ft 48:9,	original 24:12:96:25;	61:15; 88:2:114:17;	221:16;2223; 2232
11; 49:7; 50:2,22,24;	109:23; 110:3	163:2; 165:23; 169:14;	2243; 225:2,7; 226:
*! 52:3,6,12; 53:19,19;	Other 6:5; 7:7; 11:5,21,	213:6, 14; 214*215:7,	228:20; 232:13,24;;
7:4; 54:4; 55ft 16,21; 56:7;	25:13*9.10:15*16:8;	18; 216:4,10; 217:1;	oeieqwh* 124 1C
58:17; 59:18,21; 62:14;	19:10; 20:17; 21:13;	239:16; 257:16; 259:21	* Y'Y
V	pemape 7:16; 28:18;	poe»g86:24
29:19,24; 33:21; 48:* JJJJ107>21'	pedNon 82:14:136:19.	233:13
,4 74:18; 84:8; 86:4; 114:20;	21,3; 137:12; 138:14;	presume 179:9;:
1489; 158:15; 170:12;	places 16:20; 243:16	1*9:13; 140:2,7,20;	presuming 128:1
196:19; 202:4	Plain 234; 122:24;	181:17,23; 191:25; 201:3;	pretending 88:2:
: period 10:25; 11:2;	148:21; 14*11,12; 150*.	205:4;206:25; 207:6;	Prattv 2*16: S7-
39:23:47:7.23; 55:14;	10; 151:2,10,23:153:15;	230:15:242:1	78^89:12:137:
66:15,19; 107:6; 108:24;	190:14	poiMw 138*; 166:23;	164:6; 170:11; 17!
I	112:3; 123:1; 148:22;	Plaint 151:4	205:22; 213:1* 214:4	200:11; 21*8; 231
3	150:3,21,24; 151:11,12,	pMntNTa 9*25	pot—«> Ion 94:5; 187:16	246:1
Bi . .	plaintHb 4:12,24; 7:10;	oossMHty 124:16:	pitwnt 206:19
m 157:22,23; 169:6; 181:21;	*:20; 98:4,11,1*100:4;	Em721 *	D«wta«671i-
J; 182:2; 198:5; 199:22,25:	M0:lV;241:13;261:21,
S3:7; 218:1* 224:18; 2279	24 262:1 26*7	22,213.13
0-11- narMirKT-o	24,262:1,263.7	509; 84:22; 85:16; 86:6,	previously 143:!
Kll. periodic 157.-9	plan 13:23; 56:16; 85:7	24; 102:21,25:1049;	___.
i	periodical* 157:7;	^77:8	105* 113=23; 126:22;
U 160:24:162:12,21	ptans 64:12	130:13; 134:22; 172:7;
x£, P»ri0d.157:9	phy 91:12; 115:10;	197:24; 21*1* 24; 228:3;
12. P^ry 231:23	125:1*155:14	S^Mr 12:1-20-24	primary 12:4,6,«
3,25; person 70.12; 89:9;	p|eass20-.2; 213:21	pass** 12.1,20:24	22 A 5*25:60:2;
0.23. 92:21; 1219; 138:4;	p^nio	potential 113:4; 171:1;	S£.%:11 \&%
170:6; 225:16; 246:10;	183:5; 191:21; 193:25;
M:7- 260:20	197:2; 220:11,16; 222:3,	'
i	1 ririnn'i nju	34:18,25;36:24;42:15;	7-235'14'247’l	236.24
i; persona114L14 187.25	46:14; 68:7; 70:11; 83:3:	M”r	principal 22:17
personal 40:7; 130:12;	84:4,11,14; 86:25; 87:7,	powerlfc* 18.11	principally 24:5
158:7; 174*; 175:11,15;	14,17; 92:8; 95:3; 97:22;	powerful 200:11; 291:19	nrtm;fau «u.a
209; 11,21; 210:3,18,23;	98:10; 105« 110:7;	practices 134:19
211:1,10,14;212:7;	114:5; 115:11; 120:7;	preodiy 247:2	*
124:6; 126:14; 158:12,23;	preceding 232:18	P£?2!’,!Lf
244:24; 246:21,24;	159:2,11; 162:4; 163:4; .—J1..	prior 58:17; 5*1,
248:15:24*1*21,24;	l66& 18:170:5; 173:24;	9 „	14; 154:11,13,14
251:20:253:15	174:7; 183:14; 184:24;	piadecaaaor 51:7	16*7; 188:7; 192:
personaRtias 194:12	185:11; 193:1; 196:22; I pm Mtfminid 83	probably 6:16; 2!
*	personalty 255:18	205:101223:11:230:4,18;	86:14	42:1;48:24; 529, persona 121:9-128:4-	232:4,5,7; 233:2,3,8;	pradfcated 145:20,21	55:18; 57:1; 63:18
:20; 146:21; 232:19' '	234:23; 240:16; 243:4;	prelace 160:20	24; 66:17; 67:19; 1
perspective 167:16;	24801; 257:20; 260:12	pratandn5:18
174:15; 218:4; 21*8	Rotated 132:19	prefer 24&16	KK'mESmJ
pertaining 191:1; 192:14	25525	52:20; 133:14; 185:7;	265-3
J-«n.l«:l7	pofcto.	162:24
panaslm 133:24	|mml»«lg:12	prabl»nl3t:lf;l
*	KKSfsm
138:12	ST.,?	—«8»U(lJ*Mf	188:1; 241112,13,
£ 5T£r2”*	£•••».»*	pra^rad 59:18:64:25;
6	££.*12	£££*4 (2:1: lA-ta tA- - __________25315	97:18; 114:3; 129:
7	SSTm'w	pollsters 133:23	preparing 64:5; 65:22;	130:20; 134:18; 1 70.5,8,2023	pollution 174:2	66:4;94:20,21;95:8,20;	190:22:196:21:1 phrase 1789; 208:2	poorly 163:7	97:11,12; 207:15; 214:13	218:23:21*6
; phrasing 125:17	popular 34:8; 37:21;	praaant 213:1* 214:3;	procedure 7*3
Physicians 28:17; 203:7	40:23:223:14	263:2	proceed 91:20; 1
tl4 pick 63:10; 120:23;	population 158:18;	praieBtatlon 44:7;	nroeees 12:12:2
5- ** 1349; 154:1,25; 194:18	24*3,4	21*11	49**50tltu.i
1:14, picked 153:3:185:20	pornography 255:12	piaientadone 106:1*	85:15; 8*17; 106;
11*19,23; 120:1; 124:4,	- 111:12; 128:15; 15
r 15; 125:4,23; 127:18;	SSSfiSi«,R 415 18	160:7; 185:18; 189
, 130:19; 132:16; 133:12,	1*15,20:2; 25.17,56.1,2, H4.15.18	221:11; 226:23; 23
■,g 20; 134:13,20,23; 136:11;	63:15; 73:16; 75:1; 77:9;	radio 43:15,15.18,21,	reenable 246’*
19 137:14,16; 140:8; 170:24;	80=5,8,9:88:16,19,23;	23,25; 44:17,22,24; 86:1;	“ * V
180:4,25; 181:20; 182:24;	90:13,15,17,20; 97:7;	89:23; 117:7; 230:24;	J
*	183:9:192:19:193:16.25;	101:14,16; 104* 109:7;	263:25	iSv 208 22 195:20,25:198:9:199:1;	118:13; 121:11; 125:17, 175:1 „ '
*	203:25; 213:18; 214:3:	20; 131:22; 143:22;	rabed 31:23; 47:8
219:1; 220:23:229:12,15,	147:14; 154:4; 161:7;	nm 123:21	70:19!
19; 231:10; 232:11	164:7; 165:14; 169:11,13;	random 155:24	138:18:161:18:16
public** 198:19	177:8:181:11,16,17;	randomly 20B10	201:10; 206:10; 20
= . publication. 54:6,6;	186:17; 187:15; 191:8;	214:10,21; 216:18
£* 99:17; 102:23; 103:6;	193:8; 199:8,12; 205:16;	”11,5711,12,	219:25:231:21
***’ 104:12,15; 213:1	206:21; 207:3; 209:10;	ncnlM 192:22
publlcE»d 181:8	210:4,17,22,24:211:22,	recalling 60:5; 16
' nnhlkh^i-7«u..a.	25; 212:9; 213:13; 214:6;	rare 57:19	-----
pubBeh 215.4,254.18,	n.nrfy 178:4	ZZESi-*-
<,U’ NbHebed 89-18:12610-	rile 75:3; 93:7,8; 260*;
■	192:3,7,10; 254:6,9,13: ’	2^1l-24ZU15	2612 c*	receive 73:4; 228:
*	255:16:256:14,17,21	^ H17	156:19,21; 157:25
publfther 185:23; 256:8	24I1Z 2S119Z52S 12.	™**1*M;««731;	30:17; 72:16; 222:3
pubfehing 255:20	249:12,251.19:252.5,12,	173:20; ,87:20:190:8;	230:20.23,24; 234
»:4, puffed 24&9	nim,.lnn.r!-nn--	2?°	237:5
3.4; pul 84-5-10714	rating 114:18	receiving 190:13;
RDft 267:25	229:14,15
t10 EurDO*eil6 6Sa2.	51!: 263:1	reech 122:17	recent 97:21; 133:
' 14;8^1%iin:B;	»*■"<*3**	SSJSfaS
7; 226:14:243:25	que*»lona7:4;S:4.11;	129:23:204:1
PUrPOfOt 00 2 i 10 ID	ll:8»ll,19t22,2S; 12:6;	mchw 178:6	___L_ai__ *
211:12 " ’ ’	15:20; 18:1; 28:24; 66:12;	reaching 129:18; 133:5	r>c*<rt*y 133:17; 1
oureue 12-3-93-20-	78:11,14,17,20; 79:1,8;	7iw*w 45:23:91:3
ss? 3,5M*	sssa**	ss*7*2**
SSSTfcSSffi1^	127:14.16; 132:4; 147:3;	„	«cip*nt 230:15
215:7,19;2l6:5,lo! 15;	152:16; 160:20; 163:1;	8210-9715 109-ir ’	231:6
217:2	173:5; 17S:3:184:22;	13117^17 i4 V34 v	****** W
,21. pul 9:23; 13:6; 17:1;	136:14:138:23; 156:14,	»*»__
' ’ 34:16; 4th5; 42:17; 59:8;	214.19; 223.14; 235:18;	18; 163:19; 165:5; 166:13,	"“"Wiendation
85:13; 90:24:91:13:	239:12; 241:14,15; 244*,	16; 172:9; 178:4,14;	219:14
96:19:99:6; 144:23;	23; 247:11; 252:20*. 258*;	191:9; 194:20,21; 211:23;	recommended 45
2:19 160:4:171:6; 179:1;	261:18; 265:17	213:20; 223:13,13; 224:2,	reconvened 143:2
12:1 182:17; 187:19; 18*9;	quick 145:8	6:230:20:232:15:248:7;	record 410:19:17
quicl»r 152:16	250:17:252:2,14	45:20,22.25; 92:8;
218:15; 221:11:231:25:	ouiekh* i	reader 33:25	143:9; 144:16; 154:
241:8,13,16:263:1,9;	quickly 33.2,154.25,	n il _ . .. —	244-17 20-261-6.1
’ ’ ■ ’ ’	199:20:223:18; 263:1-	HSeoers 31:19; »35;	244.17,20; 261:6,1
267:9	2M-2T 26*14	34:1:37:16,16; 106:13	15; 263:2; 264:12,1
puts 230:14	267:15
‘ putting 29:14; 34:13:	quit 40:17; 179:3; 222:15,	j4:i;8i;2S; Bl:3; 138:3;	recorded 267:12
52:13:147:19:148:3;	21:236:5	214:10;227:25	records 107:19,2<
204:14; 231:5; 237:10;	10*	«•«* 244:14	106:12; 109:10,19,
7 —-sse****
Q	I«*y*2*9:17:«k2S
--2»SS»	43117,17:48:19; 51:16;	reduced 74:6; 256
m- qualifications 31:6;	rtviQ-247-0- 7W-in	54:8; 80:10; 89:5;90:23;	reduction 158:20
2572	B5-l.StB!*a*-.‘°	»10(Knasn*HH	™d»*W20*»
quaWed 240:10	quitting 179:1* 222.3.	108:21,23; 109:21; 115:2;
10:235:15	1«1-I77-7IH1 *	liW»16{ 10034
M:5: ™	■’•qu*** 15:3; 192:12;	resigning 257:11	riu[wMt) .; { -f
35:13 70:10,11,15; 71ft 75.23,	•m.-j	---■— ~j.?i	revwwea 36.4,71
3	78:5,16; 79.12; 81; 14;	17 2S4 21	W****7: ^
87:2,17; 89:5,6,20; 90:7,	5221	resolwsd 29:17.254.21	1; 163:19,210:14;
12:91:5,7; 114:14;	requeetlng 21:23	resource* 104:14; 106:3	235:8:262:2
*	121:16,18; 122:14; 127:5;	lvqUM*S 21:18; 263:3	respect 11:11,15:26:21;	reviewers 219:20 ” 128:18; 134:14; 138:23;	requirements 233:20;	29:25; 31:7; 33:18; 42:5;	revtawtno7:3;8:l
139:17,19; 146:16; 148:2,	236:21	44:16,24; 45:2; 46:11;	95-2; 1887-254-1
:12; 6; 153:16,21; 167:11;	rescinded 188:20	revision 184 18
195:4.14; 196:16; 201:24,	15: ©ft 65* 66:11;	’
25;202:14;204:19;	9	72:13:79:24;SS*97:17.	rwl.lt201:1
227:13,25;228;l6;	Smil4 l^'l	1* 107:3; 112:24; 113:4;	Reynold. 4:15,11
236:22; 253:20; 260:7	SSgSg223.ll.	Jgg1®?..1"?? 17.	258;!, 23
renumbered236:25	15,18,25;23:17;24:15,	,i^rvi’V	rW67:ll
U1. .M.WIUI	ItSZS&Tg	mSiSSmST
remind* 148:17	197:1.2; 226:1; 228:4;	right 5:3:10:3; 11
; removal 125:25	?0 15 ^4^4 25:	23*20:235:13	13:13; 14:12:15:7
remove 71:10; 194:15	42:16,19; 43:25;’44:17;	resp*e»sd44:4,6	II212frir
>■9; ramovad 191:19	45:1.6,15:46:3,8,9.11;	respond 208:3; 241:24	J1.21,25.^26.17
S; render 86:4; 169:16	iSSSK
If* rendered 98:6	iiii4ii^7 10 13;’	*	S«:l 1; 5Shll;60:5
1,23; repeat90:17; 101:16,20;	6l!7;62!l3;W6’H;64:4,
; 161:10; 207:23	12; 66:3; 72:20; 75:17;
24: repetition 249:7	76:22;79:16,24;80:4,6,	JS’llSilM M:
■	.	it u 11! iin iM 1	79:10,10,10;80a
*	rephrase 6:1;7:22;	12,14,j2i:|4,19; 122:3,8;	82:20;83:9.24,24 88:20,101:21; 120:9;	11,12,17,17,19,24,	123'17; 131:22; 154ft	u-on-a 24*01*17
'11	S-nlili'SSi
5:11; 252:5:257:5	*417,21,21^4.853.5,	2l6ft 25; 236:17.19:	99:19; 100:11,20;
r^rt 10:12; 11*; 2*3;	252,23	16,18,24; 103:1,1
26:11; 27:25; 28:23; 29:^,	97-13 22:98:1- 1016.11	reipOB*— 30:3.4; 95:5;	25; 104:5,21; 106:
; 6,13; 30:22,23; 32:14,16,	208:17:236:15	107:2:108:4; 115:
46:52«2^M24 5918	104:10; 105:3,22; 106:22;	responsfeWy 117:»;	"f**7’!1™2;
it66%814 l6-67*a: ’	107:11; 108:5; 109:16;	228*	^1^.7,11; 124M
^4;7ftl7;7i :^6,7^	110:23; 112:4,10; 115:18;	responses 228:5	^5 g 126^6;
;	91:11; 94:20; 95:1,2,20,	»*I46:21	143:19; 147:13; 1<
21:96:18:99:21; 101:1.3;	JgJ	restrict 47:15,16; 110:16	150:9; 151:1,5,1?
21: 2SSwSSSS	r~t**d46:25
■	?5 24flW15 159:5:6! 6;	155:24:157:5:158:24;	restricting 109:4	If 173-19-17817-180-6;	159:13:162:4,8; 167:14;	r**trieHon* 105*	Jii J^Z’i
_ 13,24:204:2;206:13;	U	re*uMl5:8;96:14; 182:4;	1S3 I7* 185^ 183
I3* 208:21:220:3:222:16;	*	256:20	SSLVSw”
3' 229:11; 230:6; 235:24,25;	«	™*U,tod ®=l!155:24	20*22; 210:7; 21
2-24-	MwSKh”	rewriting 124:15	216:8^17; 220:4,1
*	mijm-sa
210:8,10; 211:16; 212:24;	61^; 104:20; 133:25;	^.15 18; 2M:1
■18: reported 27.18	213:5,6,9,14,17,25;	186:15; 203:1	235:3,5; 238:3,4,
reporter 5:19; 120:5;	214ft 12,24; 215:2,22;	resummartze 155:21	24l:2,4;244:7.2-
10 123:6	217:25; 237:13,15; 242:6;	main 19:7	246:23; 2 W22; 2
*	reporters 122:6	243*; 258:7; 25*24;	™trin*d6 l9 25-100-4-	”3:3,17; 259:7 9l reporting 133:25	260:2:263:20,22	SSsS»i» *’	rin8254:^258:2
reports 9:13,15; 50£;	re*—relied 13931;	mtahierTiizis	rising 156:22
98:5:99:25:134:16;	140:6; 169:7; 181:21	______.___- I"	risk 34:14; 198:2
7	173:22; 182:19; 183:20;	reseereher 35:1:42:12 IT	246:14
190:16; 228:1; 243:2;	researchers 43:12;	. .jlvlZ ^	risk* 129:19,20,
F:6; 258:21:264:5	65:17; 83:10; 117:22;	returning 189:12	171:1; 172:7; 198
nacisllaries8:I5	mt-m-	revenue 157:13,16	220:11.10.20:22
caving 108:18	science82:15; 167:9;	islsrltan llj .10	22;41:7
saw 73:4; 176:19; 177:11	169:1	»elf-intere*t 215:5	sheer 24:13:43:3
,5; ssy 5:19; 10:22; 14:6;	Scientific 82:16; *7:23;	Mil 198 24	Shew 178:4
, ZS8SS8S?	S»
34:19; 35:1.7,18; 36:22;	181:2; 182:20; 215:12,13;	•••Hi 21:2;67:15;72^,	*Wpped203
38:13; 40:2:41:13:42:10;	218:5	20; 74:12	«hoe« 231:6
, 44:18; 50:1,23; 55*6;	scientificftnedicel	Senior 113:13.20,21;	short 45:20; 54:7;
’ 57:10,18,24; 63:18;	176:2; 180:19	132:20	shorl-circuit 152
64:14; 66:17,18,23;	scientist 170:6	senee 41:20; 47:14; 683; shorthand 145:2
scientists 200:21:215:4 ^	shortly 56:22; 23:
72:15;74:17:75:2;85:7;	.rr.nhnnlr. wr it it	127:24; 137:25; 138:6;	,eo
87:2,19;88:24; 90:16;	■CWpbOOlM 146.12,15,	154:22; 164:16,19;
93:11:94:14; 95:10;	17,18	169:16; 170:3,7:194:25;
98:17,25;99:2; 105:6,23;	*c™*n 24:17; 167:1;	211:10:220:18
107:20:110:12,13;	191:15	eent 17:23; 19:1.14,19,	Sl'SSi?
J 111:12; 112:12:113:11;	SCroMing 24:17	22; 21:18; 68:13,17; 69:2;	m «
“• U*2S; 120:5,6; 121:23;	SS31:17;33:15;35:18;	71:15:95:25:96:1.6;
125:1; 128* 129:1,25;	48:1; 49*; 56:14;78:20;	128:3; 264.-6,9
1303,21,23:131:1.9;	117:3	sentence 220:7,21;	,
2:1, 135:23:136:8; 139:16;	eeereh 39:2; 84:13; 86:3;	223:1; 225:24; 231:5;	shouidnl 57:24; -
140:10,11,11.18; 144:17;	102:20; 1(0:5; 106:25:	232:3	show 224:15; 235
149:2; 150:14:157:16,22;	116:16,24:149:24; 151:6,	sentencee 68:1; 164:5	showed 67:18,17
158.17,160:6; 162:4;	8,14,20,22:152:7;	ssosfsts 7(h2^ 240*17	208:16; 213:2
163:2,15; 165:12; 169:15;	153:14; 157:24; 161:21;	showing 147:1; Ii
172:5,17,19:173:1.23;	163:11; 165:22; 166:1;	166:9; 176:17; 214
__. 174:7; 175:24; 176:22;	181-6	sequence 46:4,21;	ism’ios
178:2,7,20; 182:5;	scorches 317	47:12; 52:13; 53:10	JUlSlfil
183:10; 184:3; 186:22,23;	series 30:6,1* 31:12,	shows 40:23; 161
- 187:20; 188:25; 189:13;	“"Chlng 183.5,225.21	20^103:25; 127:13;	sic 54:3; 133=16; 2
190:4; 192:5; 193:15;	second 11:18; 27:11;	231:24; 254:8,10; 255:22;	217:12;239;24
„ 194:20; 199:15; 200:15;	53:25; 57:1; 64:13; 65:14;	256:5,6,18,19; 257:14,	side 110:18; 183:1
® 202:2:204:7:205:21;	76:6; 81:8;p:7; 112:2;	,7	side's 242:20
206:9;213:22;214*	serious84:1; 124:17;	sign93'17
216:18; 220:6,22; 226:17:	221:17,25	*ta!Ld50-i*<K-'
227"V 7-	11; 143:22; 205:2; 220:22; , . ,	signed 50.15,95.j
*■ 2S;wmiS:3 20-	222:1:225^226:11; 34:15:257:10	96:18
242:17,25:244:4:245:25;	231:20:232:13; 236:18;	serve 113:25; 246:11;	signer 30:23
[:in 246:23,24:251:10,10;	262:6,13,17,19	254-7	significance 60:2
>:10; 252:24; 253:1:254:16;	secondary 81 ‘25i 13I	I slgnHlciwt 235:12
. 255:21; 256:25; 257:14,	168:4; 236:24	service 50:7; 231:10;	slonina 2652.4
Secondly 1W*>	232:11	X2«l:U.l!*
saying 31:6:49:13:59:1:	saetiom 232:18	services 73:22; 106:15;	n6:22; 117:14,16
72:13:90:14; 104:3;	see 23:23; 25:6; 45:8;	206:7	•kmtv VinW-l
'	50:17; 55:24; 60:15;	~ton 50:5; 87:8; 116:7
115:12,19:120:20;	62:24:88:24:101:3;	sessions 87:9	241-22
103:12; 105:10; 132:5;	set 146:17,18; 149:7:	since 27* 39:19;
!»;S	jyg	189:71262:B’,3; 267:8	59:12;67:5;7
164:2; 165:7; 175:17;	iSSlSn-WMt	am262^264:18	81:16; 130:12; 138:
•	,97:1:206:18:216:17;	SiJ,	•"J""****	iSSSiS ; 237:2,3:238:4	228:22; 229:2; 230:18;	seWemsnts 218:20	SlStfW
5; says739; 127:1; 159:7;	232:21;240:12;241:11;	seven6:22;7:23:11:23
; 190:15; 200:17; 220:11;	250:18	wwtl 25:25; 84:5;
S	2M:7;226:18; 22*25;	-*,206:10	1<7:5;171:12; 17321;
*	Stehoam267:4,25	HtSLw*	' achoMy 29*24	235:®; 247* '	M*aallM:W	T*”??.1”?1.’
•cholar, 82:10	saaand 126:14; 134:16	data 160:14
-a.™
64:19:65:18:72:11,13;	shspe49:7	n u. Wu
oj.iUf OU.A1, o/ .^T oo.17j	*	Ruffama Ijfl.o
89:11,19; 90; 14,20; 91:7,	86:8,25; 87:20; 92:12,17;	156:7; 157:19; 159:14;
>*17 11;92:20; 93:12; 94:13,	98:18; 100:21; 106:12, 14,	160:1ft 169:4; 17732;	aqaniaMUi
24; 96:13; 98:8,9,12;	18; 108:1; 109:22; 110:17;	184:21; 1862; 19125;	«tabWng«:25
9Sh6,10; 100:24; 102:3;	113ft 121:8; 122:4:	194:15; 196:18; 197:18,	Stack 149:15; 15C
103:11; 104:10; 105:5;	125:6,6; 124:25:126:22;	22,22; 201:1; 212:13.25;	151:16.24; 152ft
106:14,15,17; 107:4,14,	127:2; 131:14; 134:24;	218:3,17,22:245:13:	stags 185:8
24; 110:1,16; 112:11;	136:17; 13*19,144:16;	255-6	*t«i 2*2Q-242:
113:10; 115:6; 116:21;	1455; 150:17; 152:18;	sorts 136:15; 138:1;	_____
20; 119:5:120:9,18:121:14;	153:17,25; 164:15; 165:3;	195:12
123:10; 125:16; 126:16;	167:17; 168:21; 169:4;	source 85-9-13frl5 15	?I._____
127:7:128:9:130:3,14.	173:24; 176:4;!»:»;	^^^5^5713:
57.1- 18; 131:7,18,135.15.19,	184:20; 185:7; 186:20;
179:4, 24; 138:U 14,139:7 9	187:12; 191ft 193:19,20,	Stari55:12
l0:19; 47-4 » 9 «	20; 199:16; 200:21;	S^Si wS-	•«»* H4:19,24; 1
6,16; JT:i125I!fJJ,1®:9,22’	204:22; 207:13; 218:23;	iSr71^*V.7	14; 117:4; 180:12
151.20,22, 152.1a	220*2 lO-221 *2V222*9	in 1 f tn
20,21,22; 230:2; 234:12;	tOUthaastarn 16:13	n4:20; 231:14
14: 17 18^159:11 22 2^	235:23; 236:1,2; 238:9;	•P^*5615	Starting 249:16
160:16,16; 162:9;’163:24;	J	*ta»e 9:14; 10:17,
1,24; 165:20,167:4,15:170:1, !	S*H	11:1; 13:1,2,4,5,'
1	7,17; 172:10,13,24; ,	«pMk 42:19; 229:12	13,14; 22:7; 38:13
1:3, 174:7.14:177:15,24:	t ^2^7-2^18.262 14	•Peking 23:13:51:5;	44:6,12,13:46:15
179.14,23; 180:2; 183:3.	ll;52:2,ll:6l:2;
!5; 7; 184:10; 186:23; 188:17;	•Omeoooy »3i; I».7 -----‘isirliH in" 1 i	66* 106:5; 114:1
,4:17; 189:1,7,10,14; 191:18;	somehow 148:10;	‘	138:7,15:139:12;
4ft 195:5,10,17:197:3;	194:10,16	fj^,”2,12,5324’	15; 166:11; 168:1(
199:5,13:202:1,8,19;	someone 12:18;38:16;	8; 195:10; 224:22;
Ml; 203:3,10,20; 212:10,12;	82:1; 84:3; 122:7; 123*;	232:20; 233:20; 2?
88:16; zi6:13;2l7:zz;zi»:21;	2$G:T?	TTT	*38:16, IS; 242:5;
2; 219:6,12; 220:3; 221:8,	someplace 253:20	25325:263:23:2*
.18; 25; 222:20; 226:23;	something 6ft 734;	i^lR^211&m5 25:
19’	19:9:31:13; 40:18;41:14;	125 21 1621016J17	Statement 10:12;
58:111	50:2; 56:ll;6l:24; 62:15;	164 1 i »• 17110 12;	25:13:30:24; 31:1
*’ ^ -, ’1«’	67:1; 73:10; 74:17;80:4,	1768:178:18:196‘12:	37:15;39:6;46:5;
w ESSSm-	19; 82:21; 86:20; 87:2;	20016; 201:24;202:14;	71:8;7«:10; 111:1
>*• 5f5^5sit5?fo	89:6:91:13; 105:19;	204-4-220:2	120:19; 137:5; 1*
12>	106:21; 108:2; 120:22; _________________173:20; 177:19;H
!3; 15;258:12;262:22;265:3	123:9:125:16; 128:19,24;	20,22; 190:3,8,1:
J2:l; so-and^o 13:21	134:4; 1398,20; 151:25;	195:18,22; 196:3.
V' *0-CS«ed 29:25:103:21;	154:10; 155:23; 158:22;	-	1964,25; 199:16;
»*! 168:18; 194:6; 220:24;	163:21; 165:4; 171:5;	202:3.14,17; 203
)6:l3. 221:3.9	173:2; 182:12; 189:17;	204:24;205:11;2(
f“:5* social 41:2,8; 83:14;	195:20; 196:21; 206:14;	209:5.9:226:18,3
l2:4- 212:19; 256:19:259:23	211:11; 238:13; 239:19;	228:24;229:22,2-
[. ~C«,l *17:12:22,2*	g1*5"'®18
; 16:17; 26:23; 50:23; 51:8;	25312'254'5	sBaclfics 10-v 164-4	111?'
6I8. 60:21,24; 87:22; 102:13;	«>metime6:21; 14:11;
‘o'’ 103:3; 118:18; 119:20;	24:10; 51:7; 68:14; 97:15	speeulrts 199:13	statements 74:1
' 126:6; 133:25; 167:15;	sometimes 82:16; 84:9;	Speculating 37:5	156:13; 207:13; 2;
’ 170:10; 186:7; 201:5;	113*; 122:6; 144:7;	speculation 25122	Stale* 46:24; 47:;
219:5; 222:13; 230:2;	157:12; 197:13; 200:7	specuMv* 199:3	21; 54:2; 205ft 21
233:12,15.19; 255:7	somewhat 97:23; 117:6,	spelled4021; 54:3,4	stetewWe 48:4
Socratic 90:25	15; 130:4; 228:1	spend 36:25; 41:18;	static 147:6
£ »old 195:16; 204:23	eomewheia 47:18;75:2;	44:20; 45:5;49:23; 50:4;	stating 7:10; 81:3
solutions 218:25	93:11; 183:22; 257:24	54:17; 183:2	statistical 201:1 ]
fcj;* solved 174:21,22	sophisticated 162:18	spendbig 18:14	202:1
3ft Some 5:8.8; 14:5; 15:15;	Wiy 48ft 64:7; 68:21;	spent 52:6; 54:19; 118:3;	Stay 22:13; 116:8
36:4. 16:5.20; 23:3; 25:2; 26:4.	69:21; 70:1,2; 100:16;	154:18; 1833	rtinnnrwhlr-^
:19; 12; 27:8; 28:2,20; 29:15;	113:5,22; 150:% 153:10; gp*wtng 231:15	2^12^
7:20; 30:6; 31:1,22; 32:4; 33:5;	com 176:5	—
; subset 152:18; 153:9	163:16; 171:24; 173:17,	176:16; 223:3; 247:22	193:12; 197:7; 198
J substance 88:8; 90:18;	talked 7:25;?: 19; 37:8,	f18:l6 i; 148:13,14; 190:5; 207:17	40* 68:19,23; 70S. 10.	ternied 202:21
*ub«t«lrtial 180:18;	17;71:4.5:77:15,21.25;	lerminetion 158:3
1817	IJa.	78:5,8,10; 79:2,14:91.-9;	term* 7:18,9:6; 1<
244.12,	117;4; 144:6,22; 145:16;	12:16; 19:23; 20:4;
substantial* 117:14,16,	246:20	M&l^MSlttll;	29:10:31:10.15;3
24-	■ . .. __________Sun^on 27:20.22;	155:19; 167:9; 171:2;	37:7; 38:8; 45:1; 51
“S?""!^79*221	28^4; 29:5,12; 30:22;	184:20; 237:12; 258:1;	56:1,17; 57:9,12;!
*	100:21; 147:11	32:14,17,21:33:5;	2S9#	61:25; 62:4; 67:15;
substantively 160:22	122:22; 123:19; 159:4,5;	taM.ai2.21 2V7ft-i-	14; 79:2; 86:16; 87:
’ subtract 93:18	173:19; 178:17; 180:6;	BOIO-SS-^ 106'22: '	95:20; 97:11; 103:3
suburb 1718	194:14; 196:3; 2(8:12,13.	104:1; 105:21; 108
221"	2^3; 204:2; 205*	111:22; 112:23; 11
successful 219:9	206:12; 222:15; 235:24	116:18,117:10; 12
,2: 5S»a5S.9*»	242:16	JfSfglSK
*	SST*™*	SSffiSST	SgSSS
161:6; 174:2; 189:7;	234:8,238:15; 251.11,	159:2; 162:17; 166
202:10:245:22; 259:22	8UIV8y 130:18.132,21,	253.15	ito-ib-t-w-i v r*
>.21. 226:5	U*ll;l*17	M»28:J*22*3;
:	104:13,106: J;	113-21	22*21,212:11	179:17,25! 180:3:
242:24; 265*. 13	surveys 125:4	Tslmen 231:21,22,22	192:21; 201:2; 213
4:16 suggest 33-20- 66:10-	suscspMWs 208:25;	tap 255:7	215:23; 218:20; 2*
2:4; 155j ' ’ ' '	209:6.14,18,25	tape 44:10; 91:17,20,20,	239:5; 242:21; 255:
suggsslsd 147:18.22;	236:9	25:187:2,2.7	^
162:22.22,23	sustains 233:25	task 99:15; 105:23; 193:5	terttely 127:17
suggesting 59:5;	■ wearing 253:12	tesksd 106:8; 107:14;	Teny 15:11; 17:10
105:18; 163:18; 165:3;	switch 118:3:176:14;	106:25; 112:?, 5,11;	22:14; 43:12; 44:2;
221:9	245:12	116:22; 117:22; 173:4	63:1; 64:9; 68:21; 6
' sum 88:7; 147:17;	switched 67:5; 179:10	tasks 17:2; 52:22	f6*:?64*
S; 19317; 232:25; 251:7,9	«wom 4:6; 143:5	taught 10:24; 217:17
summaries 45:8:48:19;	syndicated 40:24;	tax 157:13,16
il; 92:16; 94.5,20; 95:7,14,	lM:l0	teacher* 114:1
. 15:234:16; 237:5	synopses 234:12	teaching 233:20	243:22	*
>	summarize 78:9; 120:12;	^„tsx 164:5	techniques 62:14	testimony 76:13,:
synthesis 84:5	teenagers 233:13	78:3:87:5; 101:15;
" _rr.T^ ,.	systematic 108:21	telephone 7:1; 20:22	125:11; 132:1; 143:
•	!™h	--television 30:5; 31:24;	144:4; 234:22; 235:
I	sILnlrvtf H tfi*	T	32:2,9,21:33:11,40:23;	263:5; 267:10
__43:15,16:89:22; 117:7;	testimony’s 243:7
Mi-1* mm	- .	227:19; 228:1; 229:1,6;	Texas 53* 248:3;
241.16,242.5	T-e-4-m-e-n 231:22	238:1	4
12; Srir*'28 22 M 6	teble 167:16; 189:10	totovlsk>n*etaed 44:21	textbook 167*
Summit 61 -25 m	tactics 213:19; 214:3	tel 5:11; 10:13:15:25;	textbooks 135:10;
1:13; O J	,	take 4:25; 45:19; 52:5;	17:16; 19:4; 23:11,13;	163:19
Sunday 33:15; 34:5	60:15;79:1;90:15;91:16;	24:25; 25:24; 33:22;	than 18:4,14,15:3
J, 24; «upeivislon 267:14	94:15:98:16:99:19;	51:24; 77:23:79:4; 87:12;	26:7,7.8:53:20:54
8:1; supplemsntsl 261:21	101:19; 122:10; 126:1,17;	89:3:94:10; 109*	59:21 63 6:6510:
! supplementation	127:13; 128:15; 136:7,18;	127:12; 138:2,24; 139:23;	78:17; 111:18; 126;
241:21	140:23; 157:21; 165^1;	166:17; 173:16; 177:10;	127:4; 131:15; 134:
supplemented 87 5	174:9; 175:15; 1763;	180:3; 191:4; 243:1; 247:4	136:8; 138:11; 145:
241:20	198:12.15;243.-6; 244:11;	temperance 49:1;	154:5; 159:18; 160:
nnort 6-9-183:8:	250:10; 256:21; 264:14	110:15	162:14; 183:10; 18!
232^23612:24021 Z*	*■*»" *2,10,1£ 28:20;	ten 78:17; 95:14; 157:21;	194:4; J&7:15; 239:
:	45:23; 46:14; 48:19;	162:2	249:19; 251:20; 2V
h	tend 210:4.12	thank 93:19
’ supposed 82*18	Sl4i:SS5l»S^	136:10; 137:13;	that 5:1.2,4,5.7.1
11	IlifttWllB	-ft	^ 1=681 :SZ OZ 91 X:88I	81 £101
I‘01‘r9>	‘PZtZZ'fl'il'i't'tlt	^n>t‘£9MMU	'n'VVLVLVtVim'n *81>t‘€:
tW'atl	$Z'tt'9ltVW‘-6l‘96i	91'H'Ol	‘£1981 ?0Z'SI >‘Z‘1*81	>*«>oi>
01^1*11*9	:JZ 4LI *91 ‘01 '6'9‘i:9i	'VLn'lVWl'lZ'VVVX	VrtOlS
'El'8‘1901	JOIN'S ‘STLV&	'u^Wvyn'tz'et	,-tz'zz,az8i,tz'zz'6i	'r-ZOViZ
I^SOf-OZ	*91	*8I‘SI‘6,8‘£e9Z‘-6I‘ZI	*81 *Z I *6*8:181 kKH	%Z‘€ I
MlWZ	ZztLl'Zl'0l'L‘SXi	*0I*8>t:Z«!lZ‘6i:i9Z	*Zt‘II *01=081 :£Z*8i:6£t	*6I‘U*SI
‘OZtlZOI	>1 ‘8‘9>‘Z;K:IZ‘9I *8	*l‘a XVK*!*	:K *6I*iI *91 >841	S8I‘«*£
I‘SI>I*€I	'L'i'V&Z'4t'VZ,*\%\	tyl'lW-LLl'lZ'Ll	‘i:86SZ*i
3‘trtWI	*91‘SI >!>!*£! *ZI‘€	‘Sit'S >*««;«‘61	>1 tlYWCWl	JOZ'OI1!
,9ril,6'8	'iZi'SZ'ZZ'XVli-iZ'tZ	'SI ‘€l ‘II '9'9,&'Z‘£J&Z	‘ei'CfZViLlXl'il* *S‘Z:£6>!
6<SZ‘9Vi t	■K^tt,«<M*lll0l,0I	te'9l'il,lV‘KZ-tZ‘lZ	-lZl0Z‘i
V96‘4K‘6l	‘|30f*Z'8I‘»%I‘lI	*0Z‘6:SSZ=£Z‘ZZ*0Z‘0Z	'ZVW.l-K'SZ'&'lZ	'\ZlQZ\
\'\'Yl£'<>Z	‘01 Wt'i'Z&'fZ'ZZ	‘Mtl'OlVSKZ-OZ	'L\'<LZL\'<L\'%'9'9-\L\	'•il'U'Zl
’9l'tl‘9t96	tz‘9rsrsi,6‘8‘z.8z	'ZVZl'QV-teZ'M.'L\%\	;1I 'L\%iY-OL\'<,ZlZZ	'0l'r06
‘i'i'z'z-is	'iz'zz’az'Lity’ii	>i‘ir£>‘z:zsz;sz*iz	‘6i'9il9'€9Vsz‘tt.'zz	'fiT-ea
ll0l'6'VK	VXUZWK'TZ'ZZ'IZ	‘6l‘9l VMSZSZtZ	,8I,5l‘8,t,Z‘IW!:iI	>‘2*1*88:
'StlLZ6liZ	‘Si'LX'Vl'tYSZ^aV-iZ	<8I‘9rorS‘t‘Z‘Z-05Z	‘<>>‘Z:£9I !6I‘81 'LI >1	>*€=£8!SZ
\V6VLV\6	:9I‘SI >I'€l‘ZI‘01'8	Sl'SI'H'II^K	'tlVi'i'ZWlZz'U	*f:98:IZ‘I!
[‘6‘IK)6-CZ	tSZ‘6l*€l‘0rS>WZ	VS9I *1 il tWW	SZWZZ
*S*Z:£Z>Z‘6l‘8*£t:ZZ	‘-6I'ZVLK'iZ'QZ'OZ'Ll	‘€Z‘tZ‘IZ‘6I‘8I‘ir8 ^Z‘a‘11
Z*tZ*K*£I	:SZ‘W>:K^Z‘9*fi>TC	,9\,V.9VZ'\Z'i\‘Z‘WZ	>;€9I ^ tZ “ZZ‘IZ>1	‘8‘Z'lCfl
J*8‘i;iB!n	>Z,CZ‘ZT‘4I‘9I,9‘Z’-6I	!£Z‘8>*K;SZ:EK	‘«I‘OI‘OI,i^9I;IK‘lZ	‘6*8'i‘9's
Z‘Sl‘{l‘{l	!w‘€Z*K<0Z,«,6I,SI	^1*01'6*9-S3	‘Sl‘€:i9l!SZ>Z'0Z*8l	‘6'Z.‘S:i9
Z*81 ‘L\‘91	'II4IT40I‘I:8I:SZ‘ZZ	>Z‘tZ4ZZ*8l‘tI‘Zri,9	>:Q?1 'fZ'll ‘0I‘6Y:6SI	>rzi‘9*?
l‘6‘Z:W;IZ	‘OZ>I>l‘€l,S‘Zt:iI	‘S'ZTtretfVre-OW	:EZ‘0Z‘8l‘lI‘0I> ‘6‘9‘9‘S
iI‘9I‘€lY	^Z‘6l^r9J*€l‘n	!SZ>Z*iI>ri*W€Z	*l:8SI :6Z *81 ‘€1 ‘01 ‘8 ‘L 11* 11*6*
0Z*8r9I>	‘II4II *8:9I ‘L *Z	>Z‘ZZ,OZ‘€l‘ZT*n	‘S:i6i:£Z*€r6'i‘Z:9SI	'IZ‘t:9£3
H'fi'S'iW	TSI>Z>Z *81 >1*01*6	<8<i,t*Z:8CZ:SZ*9I ‘€1 ‘8	JSZTZ‘K'ariI'01'8 'L\L'VZ
[I*8>'l^.	‘£*9:M>Z‘6t1£l‘ll‘8‘9	‘S‘£4€Z SZ‘£1 *91 *Zl ‘i	lViil'K‘ZZ‘il‘iVtil	Yl^l'S
'I^il6i:ii	19‘S‘S>>t‘i:€i:«>Z	‘iy^^UftfSCZSl	^rn'8'8‘9:«I-6I'0l	'IIV9;Ij
S9L'<,\'U	ZZ'Z\'WVZ\'\Z‘VZ	‘ZT‘S ‘S-ttZ'SZ'K'ZZ	‘&Zil‘SZ‘8l‘Sl‘Pl‘Zl	:il‘8‘9:89
£.£Z‘Sl‘Sl	*£I‘SI‘6‘t*Z:Ti:SZ‘K	‘IZ*8I *ZI‘01‘II'flSl^'i'St-DSI	^10 IS
Z'lZ'iTOl	€ZtZ‘6r6I‘41*91‘SI	‘£Z‘IZ‘9I‘L‘9‘i‘tttZ	:SZ‘6l7.I'Ol‘6 8‘9'9‘L	*9l‘ffS9
Z‘IZ‘0Z>1	'1=01:9I ‘Cl *£I %'-6~tZ	kalL-ltZ'lZl6ll9l	‘i^l!CZ‘0Z‘a‘ir9I	^i^ri
iUZ'OZ'il	‘6I‘9l'll'9‘9>'Z:8iSI	>I‘6‘SK)€Z:SZ‘Z«ZZtZ	‘Cl‘Zl‘n'0l‘6,8:8H
t39I*Zl‘II	‘€l*€l‘«I‘0l‘6,8-L-fZ	‘Sl‘or6'9'S‘€ ‘£‘I:8ZZ	^Z‘0Z‘8i‘Si>^i	^Z*Zl
>‘£t*9;W	tril‘6‘i	:sz‘8l‘srizz :«‘8l	:SZ‘£Z*Sr£‘i:9M:ZZ	'€1 >:09
1‘SI‘SI‘SI	*i;«:K:‘Zl‘0I‘Z‘I^3ltL	16:9ZZJ€Z‘ZZ‘9I‘Ii:SZZ	^ViVWCYifVZZ	:0Z*8I‘5
ZtZ*ZZ*8I	&:&9Z%Z:»9Z	IWWS^WZUl'II	‘€I‘0I,6‘8‘SW:9rzi
UViL9^I	;sz‘ft:Z9ZJ«Z:SSZ	‘Ol'OliZZ-lZ'yi'fZZZ	‘i>:0H^Z'0Z‘9I>l	'6^'IZ
’.Ww'-oz	'-oz'fl'fiz-iz-syz	^Z‘8roriZZ:8I‘€l	*lt'I:fi£l!8I‘Z‘t:8£l>Z	-61^8*4'
:i‘S*S*l:S9	■tVWZT-YYZ-tl'ZZyZ	Y>‘IWZJZZ‘0Z‘8r0I	€Z‘OZ OZ‘Zl'9:Lil‘tZ	'i'VZi-tZ
'iVtV6‘L	tein-vwzz.-L'a.	'ew-eiz'-izyvyvu	,oz‘8i‘8i>itr6,8‘i	:oz*6i*^
8I‘8‘9'i>	‘4l9iZ'4VSiZ%-rtZ	'MlZ'-OZ'il'L'y'VLlZ	'i'ZT9il‘n'iZ'0Z ‘61	:fiZ>Z‘fi
z‘irci*zi	toiZXi'Sll&QOfZ	%Z>I*£i‘6:9IZ!«Z	'iVStl'lZ'Ll'Zl'rKt	!CZ'6I‘8I
9:SZ‘62*ZZ	><ZZU:aZZ^Z9ZZ	'It ,£,t:«tZi€Z‘6I*8l	!tZ‘€t	‘It‘tt‘01
I *9* *51 >t	^ZZZlIZ^IZ^r^SlZ	*9l>I‘Cl‘0I‘8‘Z^IZ	‘Zl'Zl'9'9'ZZ£l'6l‘0l	‘%'L'iSt‘i
l‘Z*Z:i9:K	>r€IZ *•01 =ZIZ :0Z; IIZ	'4Z'LV6'Z'lTtlZ	Tm‘ZZ'ZZ'6l'Ll'$l	't'Z'Wit
zm-iz 'OZ	'4V40Z'IZWL'ZZ	-n‘6TllZ-9l'U‘L‘L	‘II ‘01 ‘01 l8‘£:0€I ‘iZ	*0Z*8I‘9I
9-6i -tt *61	‘6=961 k)I48t :ZI "5*881	’MIZ^Z >Z‘ZZ *Sl7l	‘ZZ‘€l‘Zt‘S‘Z‘Z:6Zt 'iZ	-Ll'ZlX
[*i>:8S‘SZ	-iZ'-LSl -£I:(8I -(:I8I	l6'9titfWZ'fZ'L\ti\l6	‘n'\l‘L\‘9l'y\'Z9Z\	‘flt‘l6€
pi‘ii‘or«	‘i’-Goz;si‘9'z-soz-yz\z	-yz oz‘^rsrsi >i	,6‘9*s>'z
C*iI*iI>I	:w>ilfiiw,l;61:i91:8	‘SI‘8‘9"9>‘l:i<K:SZ‘a	*II‘0J‘8‘Z‘ri‘l:ai;6l	'SI ‘SI *Z:ii
e:9£^Z*ZZ	*8 ‘9;S9I ?€i:€9I ;I IWI	‘lZ*6l*8I‘9rSI>l‘H	‘tl'lI^'^ZI^l^'S
i:SS!ZZ‘IZ	^)I '6<Sl:S>;9ST	*0I,S*€*Z*i:9CK:€Z*IZ	>t‘ISZI ^I‘II “Z^ZI	'UttK^l
iyi-yz‘iz	,milLW4IZl9Zil	‘OZ‘8I‘ZI*U>*€:SOZ	^z*zi‘ll‘01,6:€zi	*s:zt^z'€l
t>t‘oi*ot	^‘Msikuw^w	^z'lzti^HKJfi'^coz	^zi *&zzi*£z;izt>z	'yz'iz'
‘OZ'OlWt	!6i:€H>tWI&6€l	%l‘II‘8>‘€:Z(Ki1Z‘9t	‘€Z‘€Z‘6l‘8l>I*««ZI	‘£l‘6*S‘I
itt'fZ'ZZ	■9‘Zl£l‘lZtil‘ll	‘€I‘6‘£>:iOZ^I‘£I*ST	i€Z*8I ‘9‘S*Z‘I:6II	‘€l‘OI*I«
ril'Ol'Ol	^iCl^iZl^l ‘Z.ZZI	,6I*CI‘01*0I*6‘8WK	;€Z*II	TlZWS
C‘K‘OZ‘61	%l^II>z:8lt%I-9II	!w'0Z'8l'Sl‘6^6t	‘€l‘8^tt:SZ:9nitZ‘0Z	;tt'i*Z
:sz-su^11^1-801	:sz OZ'II'OI^I	‘6l‘z:sii:zz‘8l>lliz	GtZ'lZ‘9
24;	19,20,20; 187:1,1,3.6,6,	244:5,16,16,19,19;	there 5:18:6:4.9:11:25;	49:20:51:9.10,19;
18,	7,11,11,23; 188:1,2,5,9,	245:9,12,15.18.19.20,	12:20; 13:21; 14:15:16:4;	61:18:62:3.16,19;
5.14,	10.12,14:189:2.6,9.9.	20.21:246:7.8,9,11,14,	17:7; 1<M, 21; 20:3,15,	21; 64:1; 79:2; 80:2 (;	18,20,23,24; 190:1,2,2,	18,25.25; 247:2,7,7.7,8,	23; 22:17; 23:6,20,23,24-	87:13,25; 88:5; 93
1,12,	12,14,17,18,22,23;	13,17,21; 248:5,7,14,	25:19,23,25; 2613; 281	94:19,19,23; 96:1-.25;	191:2,7,8,12.17.19,20;	21.25; 249:1,10,12,18;	12:29:19,21,22; 50:2,4;	105 3; 119:7,16,11 ,14,	192:7,9,11.12.24,25;	250:1,6,14,19,21,24;	31:17:32:4,8,19,20:	121:12,15; 123:23 14,	193:6.23,25; 194:6,8,9,	251:7,19,19.21,22;	33:7,14; 34:11,12; 35:4;	126:19:146:15,19 4,7,	10,22,23:195:4,5,5,8.	252:2,6,7,15,17,18,18;	37*11 20*38:11 19 20'	160:20.25; 163:13 1,7,9;	10,13,13,15,15,15,24,	253:4,8; 254:2,15,15,17,	3^12,16; 42:2o!25:. 45:8.
S4;	25:196:2,2,3,5.13.16,	17,19,2*23,25.25;	12,13:49:1:51:11,14.25;	I*;}*
14,	17,19,22,22,23; 197:4,	255:2,2,4,8,9,13,15,17,	53:18; 54:10,18:56:10,
17,	5,7,24;198:4,6,9.10.12,	17 19.19.21.24; 256:4,	U, 17; 57:20,22; 58:16 £
7,	13.17,18,19,20,21;	5,6,8,13,14,18,18;	60:4,14,17;61:1,20,22;	Vtf’W2*'25
13,	199 2,16,17:200:2,5,6,	257:8,14,16,16,17,22;	62:1 3 5 24:64*24:65:9 .
1,11.	7,9,12,13,20,22,23;	258:1,8,11.13,16,22;	2069:1*71:9 10; 72 25 ‘	••■*•11*13
4.	201:1,2,5.7,9,11,13,15,	259:4,4,5,7.10.18.18.	735,5 5-75*. 13;79:25* 7:17; 9:10; 11
.24,	19,20,23.24,25; 202:3,	22; 260*3,6,20; 261:5,8,	stfc21 WA'IO. 10 11 li	138:15:18; 16:10,
1.15,	5,7,9,10,17.20,21,22,	10,11,11,14,14,19,19,	14* 86* 15* 89*1'90** 91’2.	24:8; 27:2; 31:20,2 S3,	23,25; 203.1,1,2,5,6,8,	21,22,24,25:262:1,7,	V92:l6:95*lfc97^ 16*	9; 36:5,5; 43*48: 2,	11,12,13,13,14,16,21,	14,16,16,17,19,20,25;	99*4 5 7* 100*12:105*7*	49:5; 50:13; 52:1; 5 15;	23. 24.25; 204:1,2,3,4,7,	263:2,4,7,8,9,10.13,13,	107 25; 108:20 21- ”	62:25; 67:10; 68:3; ,9.	10,11,17,18.19.23,24;	14.25; 264:6,10.12,15,	109-11 18:1109 13 17	72:5,9; 79*; 80:4; !5;	205:1.1.1,4,8,9,10,16,	18,22; 265:1,1,3,4,4,6,	TinVilJSlVl	83"’12;88:22-2! <
i,17,	12,14,18,19,24,24;	10,11,11,14,18	25* 122:3 5 IV123*^. 5	?5.13,14,18,98-2“
207:5,5,10,14,14,17,	1hetr33:3;53:24;82:14;	5SKPSSK
3;	21:208:2,4,9,10,11,15,	107:23; 114:1,2; 128:16;	125:2,16,16; 127:1;	*
0*17	167:15:208:17:246*	128:1; 129:19; 130:1,19;	1^4 14924- 15*
1*5	’ *	thwn 17*; 19:3;23:10,	131:20; 132:22; 133:8;	^1537%^
™	26:1,2; 33:13; 43f: 47:20:	134:20; 135:7; 136:2,17.	,<7161^1720
’ *	^L*,^	50:17;6l:3;62:21;67:l6;	18,22:137:1:144:8:
213.2,6,10 12,	68:2; 69:18; 74:5; 77:3,7;	146:16,17; 147:4; 149:23;
i*	IV'fiJifJfio	94:3,11; 113:23:134*. 7;	153:9; 156:9; 159:9;	2m5 Si 217: !
7	iJ?’ m h	1*6:10; 164:1; 178:25;	160:2; 166:21; 167:5;	jlWI 24 Hl-23
I’	V* 4,i’*, 1	179:1; 195:5:203:15;	168:21,23; 169:10; 170:3.	2^20 2Z 2i2V
M	208:12; 222:21; 234:20;	9; 171:4; 174:1; 176:1,5;
?iV	ItSSmmS-	235:1; 236:22; 243:3,24;	177:21; 178:3; 179:13;	244^ 247
21	246:15; 252:8; 255:23	181:18,22; 183:21; 185:7;	252^ 17 255 9:
Si	JSKSaSSV	th*yVini:20
y	Ml- n y ,	25; 195:1,12; 196:29;	th«yH 62:12,13
197:1,1; 199:19.23:	they're 5:9:9:16;«
*1,	7,8,14,15,17,20,222.1,	200:8.16:201:11; 202:8;	83:2; 128:6,11: IK
3.15,	3.6,12,13.15,17,19.25,	then 8:15:9:8,14; 11:14;	204*6; ^10.16.19.20;	188 4,15; 196:25;: M,2,	25:223:3.6,10.14,24;	13:24; 14:20,21; 17:23;	221:21*222:7 24*223:8:	10
24; .	224:16,21,24;225:1,6,	18:18;21:1,23;22:10;	225*19*227*22:228:24*	iWinii-l-iin-
18,	11,14,16,18,20,20,21,	23:21,24; 29:22; 30:18;	2526^1^
9,	2I;226:1,2,5,7,8,14;	36:14,20; 42:14; 43:13;	237:14 19*238:6 11 15'
2,	227:6,7,9,9,11,13,14,	455:49:5; 50* 52:20,21,	239:23* 240:15* 241:5'	m
10,	16,17,20,23,24:228:7,	22,22:55:4,11; 56:21;	247*19*248*2:250*4:'	thll>811:2; 12*4: MJ.	9,13,13,14,14,15.20.	58:11; 59:11; 61:2; 64:1,	253*21*254*4 7*255:24:	71:11; 81:7; 89:14;
4,	20.21,21.22,24,25;	13:66:1,9,13:68:2,8;	^16 ^259*21*	131:22; 157:19; 16' !:3,	229:6,12,14,14,18,18,	72:22;76:1;77:18,21;	261 *21 *262*4 5 89 12.	171:14; 200^,202: ^	19.20.22,23,23,24;	81:8,16; 82:5,12; 90:17;	13 16.18.18.21'263'5.	239:16; 245:14
230:1,2,4.13.15.15,16,	93:12; 95:19,25; 96:13,	12*265*16 ’	thing* 820; 102;
,20,	18.21,21,24,25; 231:2,	14; 101:17; 110:4; 111:7;	*•	22:17;24:20;32:7:
%	6,6,12,12,13,16,18,20,	115:8; 119:14; 121:11;	23; 50:24; 54:21 ;5J
,19,	21,23,23:232:3,4,12,	125:24:126:16:128:22;	'VS.	63:11; 66:6; 68.6; 7
22,	13,16,17,18.20.25;	129:1; 132*; 133:14;	78:2.6:79:4,11;81
8,9,	233:1.2,3,10,10,11,15,	138:11; 144:20; 149*. 24;	82:10; 83:1; 86:3; 8
15,	17; 234:2,2,4,8,21,24,	150:11,13,18; I5I*,8;	fSfi5129:8; 132:12; 138:
zz^.iu; z4o:i^	wnu 17:4; iuiiu; o/:/u;
thousend 173:21	68:20,24; 111:18; 135:15;	K 15.15,2*24;*
20; 124:20,23; 125:17;	..______.___ _,__144-10.15.14.17 20:	12,15:81:1,4,10,
12; 126:10; 127:6,13; 128:8,	thowentfa 19:% 162:23	245i23.154.il 12,15 19*	23; 82:18^ 2% 83:7,
90:7; 11,18; 129:10; 130:21;	throston 231:13 55?913:177».2i	18,19; 845, lft 23
2; 131:13; 13M2; 134:2,5,	Three 17:5,7.9,11; ’	1,3,4.6,7,7,8,8,
11,1^138:7,21; 139:21;	18:16;20:24;30:12;	218:20:22r24* 225*7 22:	11,13,14,16,17; I
25=	32:25; 33:2; 45:13; 48:10;	SSSSSSn	*»;*W.lft
7; 145:14,19; 146:8,9;	52:12;67:20;68:5;89:1,	T«e lftVJt I* 16,24	21; 88^, 24; 89:6,1
S:20; 148:18,23,24; 149:15,16;	94:11; 124:9; 126:19;	llRC 183.8,13.16,24,	90:11,22,24:91:3,
SI; 150:12,21:151:18;	155:10; 179:7; 184:15;	™:7	92:3,4,5,7,15,15,
; 152:15; 153:23; 154:1,4,	194:12; 211:9; 212:16;	«• 18521,22; 188:8,18;	^ J{%{6 2
*	9,16; 155:14,23; 156:3.	221:l4;226:8;235:l6.21	191:15; 194:22; 195:5,15;
>•* 66:19 ^	?^.6,8,
!’ 1666:	through 14:1:17:25;	tittw 188:16	14:99:1,9, U. 11,
u»u-i7*4 ivnS	18:9;20:14;21:18;23:10,	104:9,25;5:6,7,11;6:1,	100:14,17,21,24,
r 18V1V187-1 6	14; 24:4; 25:22; 26:11;	9:7:4,5,8.12,13,17; 8:2,	101:3,13.22; 102:
1415 17 24-189-U-’ ’	27:15;35:15i38:16;	2,4,5,11,12,13,21,22;	103:12; 104:10,10
190 M 191 16.23 25	42:18; 50:11,14:63:8;	9:1,7,9,16,18:10:1,16,	6.11.23,23; 106:6
Li.’ 194-19' 195'1196'20''	64:l6,21;67:20; 68:4;	17,18,19,22,24; 11:7,	24:107:3,4.4.14,
198:4 200 1 3 4 205-11-	71:19; 72:22;8I:15;86:1;	11,12,12,15.15; 12:3.	108:1,8,16,16,17
14.’ 208:24-209:4’ll’20c '	89:17; 98:10:104:19;	11,13,16,19,22:13:4,6.	22,25:109:3.5.6,
t W- 210-3.7 17 211 12 22:	107:10,22; 111:13,20,21;	9,9,22,24,25,25; 14:4,6,	110:2,5,7.12.13,
21^S; 214:14,25;	112:18,18; 119:14;	7,13,14.17,19.22,22;	111:4.13.21.23:1
*	216*16* 217*6-219:22-	121:15; 122:1; 125:3;	15:18,20; 16^,6,11;	11,12,16,22,24;]
220:5- 221*10; 223-18-	127:14; 129:8; 146*	17:1,2,21,23.25:18:1,2.	7,9,16; 114:2,6,1!
i-6 224:5.11,11,18:226:7,	150:3:151:8,»; 152:10;	3,13,20,20,21; 19:1,3,	24; 1153,14,15,1
l-g 14,14,25; 227:24; 228:17;	153:7,24; 154:19,24;	14,24; 20:6,8; 21:18,23,	116:7,7,15,22,24
■	229:10,22; 231:3; 232:14,	159:23,25; 169:8; 176:22;	24; 22:2,4,6,10,13,14;	2,3,16,19,22; lit ' 15*234*9 23*236*13 20*	180:21:181:2,6; 193:17;	23:8,8,22,22,24:24:2,	22:119:7,10,11,1
237ll3.15720,2i;»; ‘	199:18:202:5,13; 220:5;	Il,ll;25:l,l,3,l6.l6.	22,25:120:12,15;
0; 238:5; 239:13; 240:8,25;	17; 26^,9,10,11,12,20.	12,12,15,17,18,2
■	241:20:242:5:243:8;	Throughout 229:11	21; 27:2,4,5,15,19,25;	122:1,10.11.18,2 ■24* 244:10,25;246:20;	throw 68:1; 71:22	28:21,23,23,23,24,25;	123:2,10,11,13,1
252:21:253:15,15.18,21:	thrust 71-11* 170:23	29:5,13.18,24:30:1,3,4,	22; 124:6,8,17,20
254:16; 256:1; 257:13;	thrust* 1V12	6,10.19; 31:5,7.25; 32:4,	10,21,22,23; 126:
258:9:259:3,19:260:12;	6,8,14,17; 33:4,18,20.	14,25:127:4,5,7,1
10	262:10:264:1,4,14,21;	t"642	20:34:2.10.10,18,19,	16.16:1283,15.2
’ 267*21	thns 4:2; 5:2; 9:1.25;	19,20:35:1.6.9,19,19;	129:1,5,* 10,11,
I; thorouahltf 136 25	10:9.14,25:11:2,9;	36:6,16; 37:4,17; 38*.	17,25:130:4,8,13
23	224*5	12:17; 13:16; 14:5; 16:5;	20; 393,6; 40:17; 41:14,	21,24,131:22,24;
IV fWnunknM.	17:8; 18:15; 19:3; 20:25;	18,19,22,24,24; 42:1,3,	6,8,10,12,16.19,
aTTf8	31:19; 33:16; 34^36:24,	4,5,5.7,9.14,16,16;	133:9,13,17,24; 1
IS	25:37:1,2ft41:19,2ft24;	43:1.2,4,5,8,14,15.16,	16.22,23:135:11,
those 8:17; 9:15; 10:12,	42:8; 43:4,8; 44:18,21;	20,20;44:4,16,18,20,	22,24; 136:10; 137
45:4,5,15,18; 47:15;	24; 4 5:2,3,5,6,8,10,10,	2ft 23; 138:4,19; 1
13:11:15:16.25:16:20;	49:16.23; 50:5; 51:3;	14:46:2,2,4,8,8, lft 11,	7, lft 13,15,21; 14
5,	22:8; 25:24; 273; 31:2,3,	54:17:55:18:56:13:61:4;	19,19,22; 47:5,8.16;	11,15; 143:20; 144
; 21; 36:20; 37:15; 39:2;	66:16; 67:1:68:7; 69:2;	48:12,17,21,23:49:2;	14,21,23:145:17;
4; 43:6,7; 47:4; 49:10; 57:23.	70:21:76:22:77:20;	50:8,9.10,17.20.21;	147:3,7,15,15,18
14; 24; 60:19; 61:3; 65:8;	91:21,25; 93:7; 97:22;	51:12,20,21,25:52:5,15,	148:5, lft 22; 149.!
15’	100:24; 102:24; 103:10;	18,24; 53:2,4,7,9,9,15,	15, lft 150:4,13,1
( ^	104:14; 105:7,9,15;	19,22; 54:1,14,25; 55:7,	151:7; 152:16; 153
201 « « Sill	106:3; 107:6; 108:24;	8.9.12.13.16.18.19,21.	24,24; 154:1.4,5,!
I: w.^7;	Hl:15; 112:4,9:117:24;	23:56:5,6,7,9,12.16.18.	155:1,4.7,8.15,1
M* ;	122:11; 123:18; 131:12;	23; 57:10,11,16,18;	21; 156:3.8,11,12
134:6; 138:22; 146:23;	58:13. 18.18,22; 59*. 13,	157:24:158:5,10.1
,25; iJ	1503.24:154:18:157:10,	17.24:60:1,2,8,8,9,15,	13,19,23; 159:4,2
!:5, ,	23; 158:1; 159:18,20,22,	18,23,25; 61:8; 625,12,	160:4,13,14.15,2
M:	25; 160:3; 161:25; 162:2;	15,17,20.24,25.63:8,9;	161:4,7,9; 162:4,:
1* '	167:11; 169:6; 175:20;	64:2,7.7.8.8,11,11,17,	1633,5,5,16:164
:15J	177:11,25:178:2,3:	18; 65*, 13,15,20; 66:7,	14,17.21; 165:1.2
•	^	180:16; 181:21; 182:2,9;	8,9,11,12,13,18.21,23;	12.12,15,16,2ft 1
i«p|Mpun	K'&z	tt-tnU.Vi&!6l'-6ll II:M>09<I1:K:oQ|	te'TJ
‘HViZ'lZ&l -C-iSl	^I«l: I MSI‘€1^.1	Ltyn'-Ll	*9 VMS?
*1^1 kWZZlUZ^ZI	9l?i:t99l9I*M01	*9I>I=0i
<1-1 vr	fcl^Sl'nStJr-OfiAI	UHOlSlIfcai*^	8=911
:i(?i:ii'OHi	BlijUim	‘L:99'U'Z9'.ii:£i't:zt ^ li!oi:59!6W M<H	_ j11'1
ViiVL-Hl	ZZ=9S>Z:«ZP«Un»	:0Z:€6;S:£Z:0t:ZZP»M»	8^92 =41812^9461
«*>£*=«	6V9ZZ	6LLh\n>\	iemxemm*	U,
8WI >i:il	%:&Z2%WZ^tZ	eS9Z«,I»MI '1VLL :8I>9 JMBafal
W»*«pun	!il:we!irssik)z:itl	ZZ‘6l>*9ZilZ=€9Zni	I^ZI^it^ppoj.	‘n‘I‘l=
witz	;iiwi%:s«kK:in	‘sasz^rs^w^ere	tr*.fepoi	Yrsrs
9ICteI6I	^IW^IW:SZ‘OI	£i:wz:i=0£z	Wfrt'i:
mi ■« 1=091	fcZ'TZ^i^E^IW	‘t&Z -SZ *I:8tZ :il :£€ Z	!0Z>I=Z>Z ^1=9^4=402	*91 ‘SI >1
Z:0£l >=4H	‘Zt-IS ‘f-6t ^if'fVZt	'■6'i£Z%Z'ttZ'-OZ'8l'S9l	>Z *81=902 ^ZStteSil	‘911 YZ
:iti>z;€oi	in^zi vdz'iz'2z	KS6KV9LWW	:«=w^ifiZ^?£i	‘oz'^rsi
isz:96^:65	!CZ=il !ZI=SI itZ=H	‘-6I:W:90Z SZ 61 |»lij	tzzyfi -6'S itI -L'8L'H	‘iZ'i
6-9-L'SZ'ZZ	%:€l -6&SV8 >I=£ UJIH	si>:i9i!sr091 «P««4	*«:9i^i:Ki£W:IZ:€»	TS^K
Hwiuapun	9*ozuouim	KwAitnopuwiui	‘itftzSzi
NlB|SMpun	rtgnouiiu	Si:96I	ZZ9> p®l»f®J*030»q<n	‘S=9£Z:£Z'
uRMMpun	11 ‘6=69 ■j«nnaj*qni,	'L-IZ •noptMUMii	Z.10Z •,o»«to*
VtlZ'ttlZ	SISZ	1:91 Du|(«ahi	sz:i9z^z‘ir0l-l«sz	-*T-c ‘1
u|l«»pun	J8*8:zw:w:e€Z^i:ZZZ	6I=ZI pepMJt	iSl'oi^Z
‘WZ'il'SSZ	■ IZ’9^ ~K'ZZZ ‘{2*661	T’fttf UOtlBHUBil	*Z.lI8<€*S^^:tK	*/ V 'r‘Ta3
B:903-8:OEI	JlZ:«6I^i:«lUi:i6l	W JJJ	^SZZtfFiKE	J,*cr
sc,**..	i*™;*;®;®’"	«*,„£!;	““ss	**■«>.
uonio9un	fcsit-si Z-HZ-£I-€1Z	yit'ci
n nimimm	5wrwi *ei *i:ziI :oz	^ld|J3tu«4	-mSS
“r7jq“"	‘61 >^91^1^191:91	€T=i9Zp«*JO«UW»	>I‘9‘i:90Zi6I‘«>:S0Z	*TI“{rcJ'
*ZI*Z‘1=491 ^*9I>=Z9I	€z:i8Su|U|U)	lUWZ -iZ'fl SiOZ^Z	‘q ‘ctttc;
^inz^SSJfir-Otl	61 ‘SWT *i:£€l P«!«JJ	‘81 Yzozta'Si^ioz	‘cr‘r-0,
EM:wt^)Z	:€ZWV6€|:I=6ZI	rrrt Tft ftmiwwwn	Sz'oz'zi-oozte^sfii
ftuint|-uifi	‘.L-.aV-OViZl-iZ-lU	Zl 618	*V<,6l‘LT.m 'zvm	615 L??J
tin	Vl6*Z06%Z-8L‘4l'U	i«p«pu|	JSZtl^t tZ*Z:i6l	*C7CzV'o
,A|«)MJUn|n	'M'toL'T.r&K-te	zz:««p«j|	!6l‘8ri =0619=981	•*, vr'o
:«pHUan|n	>:*t9=8€9=S Ek>I=0€	il:04	VT=WI 9l*zroi=Z8I	7 *CV*T7‘
Z:/o un	=6Z -Z'ZZ -SZ-il • 11-91	OI^MVit	>1=181 ‘SI09I it ‘rftto-n	;IW^I<:€I«»U|AJ»	-_:i	iSl'Cl‘imi :fl=8il	‘croi<« 8t^K:k)t=6lZ!t=8IZ	tI=I8I -9:09 pJtMAOl	:Cl=iII iIZ=0Il ^‘8=891	‘S-OiZ-SZ^ --J€i:£6l!£I=88l!t=6£I	fwuBna	=€1‘01=191^)1'6 *Z=99I	%?8,
I	■tZ-6U‘YZ'iti\‘ZZ	C770 Ri.iiwwni	^:Wl;SZ‘9t‘Sl >I=Z91	iTzr/nz:/
i__‘IMZI^ITZI ^1=801	SZ-Z8 Bum«10|	;91‘S:I91^,:€{;,:9^SI	‘T^J,
near	>1 *S:£0I !U-66^I=S8	rwz'v&z ******	^IH»l=0Z‘S«H ‘K	VfVi'oi ___.tag	:i=I«>Z‘€Z:i9^-09	&Illii«i|l«|3no»	‘fi«£li«i:i€f!6l,zi:s€l	\,vf%
Or7*0^7	ZVlt‘*Z il'\ 9th	8W&La M3HOJ	=8l:Kl =OZX)tI><ZI !ll	•9‘I IOK*
ziiiez^	oi=K>^ii=«miui	*L>i**rm	.lorsi
‘•9Vi9*i:9t	ZZ IWCZ	6'8=isz:sz:ztz;8l 66l	J15, 1.5 1-021	*ZI=86i:Sl
101:9 »«u»	lS‘C66i£i:£i««pn4	!il‘iI=iH ^»I=SH	5 ^l ®9:611 ;^ 8U	>‘Z‘I=I6I"
Kz-utiz	91'1*6-*W	‘.tv-st'.iz-om*	VrVn‘t7‘Qrmi
£9Ite=S91	8=66 Wfli*	SI^KUZW	,
lZt8:9I=08	Sl=i9Z	>Z=6€z:zi=S8l>l=9iI	L *'Si?S*K SOI >1
!6i:9£«dA|	>=iOZ:tZ‘iriI‘S'IW	-iY-U'Wi wjdoj	;OT,ni
;iioo»«w	SfSSVnS	»“:«:K:K:«,a"ta'	irtSsn.™	.6^,S
6^	‘77J&1 *A;C7T ‘qt:77t	W:6ZZ	totz^li
i£z:si=9€z	V9S^Z‘6*£‘I=SS:£Z
S6z-K)z:az	»^-mUSS5?22l	:«=W^:u:n^d«n	TH :Z.=ZS =ZZ ‘t ‘Z;8> :9I	ZIS
Mil *1*61	MC01-0ZqJi;^“;	ZZ=SOIW	■S‘K»:iw:«:iEte	>^8lS
9-6TZ^qnOJ|	Si«SZ>:iffi	‘9=9€^ZZ!ir€T‘€T:n	‘n:i81^Z
iSVlZttl	SViZZ Sujppai)	>1-9:902 >:SOJ ^102	!TI^!8I‘Sl^osoaqoi
nz'srszi	iz‘6=S9;i‘z^	«i=66i;w=Sii>i=€n	i!	'iraitti
:TTtr‘^joc	V:«:ci _________
US 45; 120# 131:16;	„ „	voluntary 51:1	i o
t 160:16:219:21	TSlSS'iSSS?*5*	VOt* 254:19
MCA iac *n ia/ m ig\,	16'18| 18il0j23'17i	,»	- A	7®'13(7'*Z3i7S^^
*, . USA 185.% 186.1,10;	31:24; 32:8,20,20; 33:2;	votings 246:10	10.11,21,21; MX
19712	34:7,20,20; 35:15; 56:25;	----102:13, % 105:2
use 11:13,17; 22:7;	37:17:40:14,19,22,22;	W	7,20,21:109:11,
K16; 23:18; 38:10; 45:6; 47:1,	44:13.22.22,24; 45:19;	__110:4,7,17; 111:1
i6;48:l,2; 555:62:10;	46:20; 48:17,17; 55:17;	...	114:13,15,17,22
»55; 67:16; 83:6; 110:16;	61:13,13; 66:10; 70:18;	Wy ■d a r 182:22	117:11; 118:7,13
117:13; 126:2,9; 156:3;	76:20;80:13;8620t905;	writod 179:1	15,23:121:13,14
1:25 158:25; 162:14; 172:16,	91:2; 93:10; 95:3.18;	went 4:9; 5:6,25:1; 26:10;	122:3; 125:2; 126
12,16; 16; 199:11; 220:12,15;	97:20,20; 99:4; 110:11;	35:1; 39:5; 46:2; 55:25;	127:19; 128:1,13
221:2,16,20:222:2,6;	112:22; 113:2,2; 114:25;	78:1,3,3,25; 79:5; 92:3,	24; 129:19,21; 13
223:6; 227:15; 245:3,8,	115:6,14; 122:21; 124:15;	7; 100:23.23; 105:5,11.	22; 131:1,2,7; 13
, 17:246:7; 249:10; 253:11	125:1; 126:7,12; 131:3,7,	23; 115:16; 119:15;	133:2; 134:12; 13
UMd 32:12;37:12; 38:11;	19; 132:2; 134:17; 136:3,	122:10:129:10,11,13:	136:2; 139:2,21; 3
I*. 81:12; 82:17; 84:17;	10; 144:25; 1-45:10;	130:24; 132:& 10; 137:5;	143:2; 144:5; 145
,«.o 153:16; 172:3; 175:16;	146:13,25; 147:1; 14*17,	14*20; 148:5; 158:23;	146:16,17; 147:4,
’ 177:12,17:178:2,9;	16*3; 164:4; 165:10,15;	19.24; 1485,12,
214:15:216:22; 218:1;	149:25; 151:10; 1
2)4*16	176.12,164.11,185,8,	177:6; 182:6; 187:14;	i«-7 a* i q*
:13 „	188:23:198:24:199:20:	195:22; 198:21; 200:25;
Usvhll 97.10,220.4	219:12,21;223:1;229:23;	208:2:209:2:210:22;
118 using 18:5; 19:7; 36:11;	232:2; 234:15; 235:25:	211:6; 216:8; 220:2;
■	48:22; 126:11; 151:6;	236:19,22; 252:4; 253:14;	224:3,6; 226:11,13,24;
254:12;265:15	242:12,16:243:11,13;	?^7-l7V2i«
2215; 245:12; 248:12	veterans 28:7	244:8,23; 246:6,13,19;
usual 265:1	vice 255:11	247:10; 249:17; 263:1;
8	Ut”ta>d 8424	Victorian 177:23; 255:6	25; 1815,22; 182
mr	Vktoo 35:18; 45:11	24; 183:3.8.9; 18
?.7J V	VIDEOGRAPHER 4:1;	?Si-1*?* l2io?	15,15,23:185:1.
- 45:21,24:91:19.24; ’	1*1*7*188*1
?’2?; vmu. 161:8:199-3-	140:25; 143:8; 187:1,6;	25; 191:11,17; 19
,112’ 5f£mil&aD4*	244:16,19:261:11,14;	Ww 287,246.14	10,193:9,12,14,
265:16	*«™ 163:19	1955,24; 196:9,1
ygimnnTt-n iff	VIDEOTAPE 9133;	Wimad 135:11	1973; 199:19;20(
23i9; v*®u*n®**7^-16	i«7-s	wamina 29*14 15-	9,10,19; 201:3; 3
Videotaped 5-20	32:15; 135:18,20; 167:3;
1:11, validity 200:22	204:11,14:205:5.12,18	206:3; 217:13,16,
831 9:21913	81:18; 120:7; 121:6;	W-tilng. 135:17
13** !**»; 175:6,7,	wae 4:6; 5:5; 6:21;7:22,	223:10; 224:25; 2;
36.7,11,13,37:4:41:14;	11,12; 15; 201:8; 210:23;	24:8:4,6,11; 10:24; 11:1,	25*22^6:227*5.1
£„ urai mattl	21I:1:24»:11:24»H:	5; 12*13:13:1*5.9.11.
I54;9: varied 95:13; 96:24;	250:24; 252:3; 255:25;	15,24; 15:3,4,7; 16:3,6,	230:17 231:12,1-
10S:7..	257:20 ™	17,20,21,23,24;
i,. varieties 128:4	viewpoint 181:25	233:18; 234:24; 2i
5; variety 10:21:41:1:54:5;	view*219:18;244:24	™	«	236:7,19,19;238
85:2,17,19	vigorous 176:2; 254:12	2441^248^'
i6,:i' :“***£?	sgjssssj-5
I*
8,23; 65:15; 66:4; 70:10; 71:5,5,	«5-22,240:5.11	21,3,25,4ft* 16,17,	6,12,16,19:256:
!5; 7:78:10:99:1.3; 135:12;	virtue49:18; 155:8	257^ 258:4,8.1]
23; 153:19:168:23; 177:21;	vte-Mto 256:22	18; 260*, 17,19,!
182:19; 183:1,8; 186:5;	vl*K 53:9; 64:8	114 it	261:2,13,20,21;:
10; 223:9; 229:12; 238:19;	visited 12:22; 13:2; 16:7,	^^J’faiT	^ ^
*	vwy 222:9.23	vieWng 12:12	13,18;56:2,18,21; 57:1,
vast 85:25; 124:13,21	visits 5319	19,21;60:l,2,4.25;6l:4.
venting 255:25	visual 85:12	16,20,22; 62:1,4.5,24;
*7, veracity 157:1	vlvUhr 236:22	63:7, 19:64:10,11,13
W1-6IW.I ISZWI	’fVll'V-fZ^VZZZZ'M	'Z'MZ'4>\'Z\-afZ'9Y(ZZ <jJZZZ
1'L9X'£W n&ziivi fz	‘L\‘i'Y#i'yz\z >1	'<.zin%\'zx--izi'z-9iz £"5*
01 Site *8:81 :sz‘£i:£t	*Z\ZZ'LIWZ-V-91Z
:II:W%I^l!0r8Sl	-SI ^ *€:9I :SZ *€Z *ZZ *€l	tfl'CZZ ‘IT
€11*1*01 ^:SST",^fJ^;Ss	't'MiM I'SItlH	*9‘Cl 12*2=012 **02
:=I01-IZ=£6	;€z‘€l*8^1 *)! 01 S	fclttSOZ*1=902 =1=502 £tQtIf.
>:uiK‘W>WtZ*8I	ISZWZ^^IKI^JI
IWIWS-JPWWI	‘6^-‘H>l‘9^8:iZ	%I9f1
J£*S	ess*1:91 UM|MM	!n*f
*£*£« ¥Sb!mSS2	kwoiiwiiw—	ssS£i?2[S5{ ?*?***
Sr949|l|M 'LV8tZXZ-Ln-il	tl‘ZVL9ZW+9Z,Zl	TUlilxMlillt] lZ*V*L1
ZI‘S=KZ ‘SW1*r«K!BK	. /^ 8;^9Z!I£‘61 'L\ ‘SI	SSt^l WrJ zQ .!5:8ST
«rzrow ■nXivi'iz'xz'vzfi	srL'vzsz'u'vTwK	:m=2Si
Sl'tt'ZMWfclWZSl	*i:*S2:€=9SZ*=M2	>7 •«! 101 *®
rJ.Q^ '0V64{Z-fl\.9iZZZ	-YKl'VSnmn	‘S^H:
aSlirs?! *fiI«aSK‘I5Sft!ft:8e	fcWCZiH Vl*€Z	sz'u-av
riSrS »:iK;se'^o€z^‘oz	*J;2| 'Kin 'n
•floiv/or 'rtZZ‘ZZ-9ZZ‘XZZ'iZZ	is:ia:i:o€2!6i:sre	-cJvr^riv/c :€z‘9lwl
X?rcJ SKTOttttKZilZ	;IZ^U;6l‘8I‘ir0I90Z	. 4lttCE(!l
Ki*ir*Ci ‘UWZ^UilZ *1=912	‘£1 ‘01 ‘&10Z -Ll-QOZ-K	iV0V^1
Ki^fSI :w:SIZ!8I:80Z!K:«)Z	H661 Hi* Wl	®JgJ ‘9-tZl‘9l
SSIS fcforwzsz'iz^ru	oiiBi-n'zTw	:iz*iz‘c
*S:ft)Z *IZ *0Z *91 lZ:Z0K	!i:»!4:»UWi1	Vsit V^.t‘rTW
Isorrwi t;ioz;si>i>r€i	^ii-atsa^ca
^tiaSi ‘6*9*661 ?12‘02*21=461	Uroi‘92U *1=191	<01 •nSSrSi
li?sfS ^96mtz:s<li6l>l	»09i:n:tfl!««I	*4"'?L9J™ ;I/5! ;9I ‘€l ‘6
'/jmomuk tiwJ'wawi	'n-nvnnVLvzii	?*S;f vuvw
J2SII '■OZ-681'lZ'SWt-Wl	*'4A\%V4»Vim\	‘81 ‘4I;U
fcTOtteOSlfcFttl	*2 ■)» *9I=iH *Z *OZ‘61	-f *******
gjMMIIM Vt9£I%1|KttI	'9l'Sl‘lI=9Mfc,I9£l	‘6I'89!^‘l
tAqawsM !«‘8i‘orKT^€ii	**« *r*m	:n=ig
ItMwqM SZ'tfttlinWlU	‘■6I'St=0€l *1=621 :€=82I	XSggl” *I=0S*i:
ZTc9Z 4\L9VLV9V99V4\'i\	%Z?ZI few ttVI I	S™teSS '''.^
p»2*=€K 'VW'K'WKW	KLU-Sl'vmioz	*»*«*
>lilIZ te*€t«IiKtZ«SI	*21‘6*2*11 ^MI *£11	(‘8I:9Z-
LriiSJ swinssm-w	!oi'6=oii*i>i*z*oi	'^fgSgSg
ill will SMSIiHMTfcl**®*!	‘ST >1 ‘i:€OT ‘iVZOl -iZ	-\VL\ '9\
?iSzi ^‘e'stwiuz'sw	‘tnoisroz'sriras	Zil.fZ'l
iil‘tf«l!8I>i:8«I	■<Z.'n'7Z<i6'LVZ6	6iZIW6fa« ^9laL-
Z-fZ^VL\ ?Mttfr>9ei*£5Kl	i€‘Zl6kF06:Sl‘€l>^8	91:^91 i|6(Ml i:sk^
-IT I€I I^Cl^OTSZI	-KW^ri^U^rSl	n-f9«(«*
-.-I.T.. *VLL\*Vi&.\W\Z\	‘6K»5oe:S	6t<)M !flKl X»«m !li:»:tz«s
«Ki!im{^i-u-ii	%n:u!e^^>w.
*011 **1 *1*01	:€i‘9'ri9^l>l«9
S5SS	•..IIJSRJSK	. ^r* *«S5
.IZ3F90Z	«ci55SS25	«*'*
!li:^fil!« V’W“77*CT C?CT T 7a	^ 19I K 61 II €I-0Z	>:ill tOI^OI !f 15► Ifft
* , 'jiw-ictttS ti I-to	mite re irVitVn	u... 1—..-1.......... 1111
1-6-9L191 -m'm-fz‘01*09	ixn^rlSmi	:sz**i«M^
61'ivui 'U--6L'tl‘WL‘tt--LL	ilWiiriKWW -8I«:i ^S1
«SI?:9SI ^Z‘€:Si50Z:wiii:€i	SZ«IZ 4JZ-98I-trStl	^i:5tZ^‘€‘i:€K ‘^ZOI ^1
ISt^OSt ■n.ZL%VlL^l-0L‘L-69	-8=W^ i:€Sl-OrzSI	'VZK-Sl iiyi m >M6
SHifilf! !SZ‘K4ZlW^i:i9JK	I' .1'l:?T^!:Z01	JOEWI !l=€9l -LV&
‘il'Z 6Zl 'il 8'L‘i-99‘Ol i9'K	.1 }^°® 1 ^	!«WI k>T8€l :|:€9;fi
-6i:5t7Z:€Z 'tZ-U'M:	'.L\-i&\'V9tViVl\\ *t&*UW
iIT.‘Ct:ott !»i:/(!i»cKr:a:i7:K	WI'ilit'JWIlM*	^i:M!ai:i&!T7:»^;/7
—•—-—>	iu:z,	wnung *>/:?,
57:17,1ft 58:5; 59:15;	1*9* 171:25; 1*5:11;	11:10^17; 12:14; 13:3;	16; 80:19; 94-Bi 18
„	60:10,23; 61:8,11; 62:6,	203:22; 209:1; 210:9,16;	14:18,20,20? 15:15,17,	256:4; 258:22
4:13;	Ji®21*1'?7*	18; 17*7^0; l^^l;	wH**. *87:18
;	21:1:23:6,14 15,17,18.	l6:22;64:
3:18; 67.21,23,25.688,70.8,	48:15; 104:15; 111:6;	22,25; 24:1;26:19; 27:10,	7V21M21-1Vv2
m 13,21:72:2,2,13,14;	112:16; 116:8; 162:9;	II, 12; 28:5,14; 29:2,14,
73:2,7,13,13,22; 74:15;	l9l:2; 194:6; 211:4;	i^SSaftufKsfi;	*’
111* 75:16,20:76:12,13,16;	214:19:238:8; 241:23:	2; 32:7,8,12; 36:1,19,21, ‘ - „
[£ll 77:3,6,13;78:20; 79:2,	243:22; 253:8	wrong 52:19; 72:1
925- 24; 80:1,17; 81:15; 83:1,	whhout 20^162:15	40-12.1 i 41-19 19 23.	>2516; 129:13:21
*	K?SSKVi^	177:8:195;21';M8:22’	S5S5?a
S-16	19 21	WITNESS 152:24;	14; 44:20; 45:5; 47:6,7,	UJm’ ’
9; S!*«^5 io i3	211:24;2245;234:3;	20;48:3;49:19.20;50-. 1,	gS^f ......
^ o®'?7 ib lo’iSi	241:17; 243:9; 261:10;	7,9.16,17,17:51:2,24;	Wyndsr 182:21;3
101 *6'lo' 22 24* 103’1*	264:10:265:5,8.11;	53:6; 55:10; 57:9,10, II;	——
>q.ii. 104*13.19 23-106-3.10	267:9, 10,20	62:2,3,18,23,25; 63:2,4,	X
li	li 13 18 lOT-3-T«-17:	whM»'t 169:14; 242:6	18,24;66:10,17,17;	-
*	WHIWMM 241:2S	«*l*«Mfc7£5,20.21;
*	nwittsiiTiii	.HiMi
4	118:6; 119:1,15; 121:12,	Ufomsn's 11015	21;l»:10,18l23;81:22;
15:125:16:126:11:	"“f™'„	82* 83:13,13.107,17,	Y
127:23; 128:2; 129:4,11;	women 128:5,10,15	22;85:19;86:2,4;88:1,	-
130:20; 131:3; 132:4,7,	WOlrtI04:19	23,25:89:16:93:9,10;	VeU7l«l
16; 134:18,19; 138:19:	word 113* 149:5,5,6;	94:12,25,25; 95:10,17;	. .......
*	139:2,4,6; 143:23; 144:9,	153:21; 220:13,15; 221:2,	97:15:96:12,14; 99:3;
2®; 13; 146:2; 147:3; 149:1;	5.17,20; 222:3,6; 223:6;	102:21,25; 104:1,8;
*	151:15; 153:25; 155:1,11,	230:2; 238:24; 239:22;	105:4,19; 106:7,14,14,
2* 17; 156:13,22; 157:4.10;	240:10,20; 246:7; 255:22	17,21,23:107:21,25.25;	21.181.24,257.24
158:10:160:19,20,22;	wording 1493; 200*;	1083:109*21:110:11,	264:23
*	163:4; 164:1; 165:1,2;	204:18,19	20; 112:10,16,21; 113:11;	y»» 188:3.25; 19 »l:* 167:2; 168:14,24; 170:12,	words 7:7; 11:5,21; 13:8;	114:10,18,19,23; 115:13,	217:20;233:10 19; 21; 171:10; 172:5; 177:4,	15:8; 17:15:19:1026:9;	17:116:23; 117:1,2,3,6,	ywm 5:5:40:2,3,
13.17:178:10,18:179:17:	3213; 35:8; 36:9; 66:5-	15,13,16,18; 118:24;	47:7; 124:15; 136:
’ 180:8; 181:13; 182:10,11;	73 8:741-7817-80:3:	11925; 120:23; 122*9;	139:15,24; 149:13
183:4,25; 184:18,19;	85 24 90.13; 103 4	124:5.24,25:125:19,25;	155:10; 156:20; 1!
25 185:2,22; 186:4,9;	121:4; 139* 147:10;	126:12; 127:23; 129:4;	158:4,14,19; 160:
l5.	187:19; 188:9, 16,18,24;	149:4,24,25; 150:12,13;	130:14; 131:9, 14; 134:9;	162:2:170:10:171
14- 189:3,17; 191:12; 193:3;	151-7-158-24 162:16;	135:19,138:1,7; 144:16.	177:17; 179:22; If
4.	194:10.23:195:10; 197:1.	172:16; 175:17:180*	17; 145* 146:3,3;	188:25:189:1:191 1; 2.3; 199:25; 200:5.6,6,	216:11; 217* 2Z7:21:	14730; 149:7; 151*	212:12; 213* 211 53-25- 13,23; 201:1,6,20,21;	249:11:254:23:262:17	152:5; 153:18; 156:11;	226* 245:22; 24S 2.20; ^=18; 203X9,15;	work 12:10; 14:1; 15:16,	^10,^158* 15,20;	251*253* 256: 12; 204.1,23,206*15;	19-16-6:21-21-22:69'	159*160*162*14;	YsHow 128:1
1: 20*4	23-1,3; 24:11:60:1,3:’	Yes 5:4,16,23; 6:
98 51	63:2; 66:2; 71 ;2Q; 72:17;	10:8,15; 11:24; 14
:	74:9,15,22; 819,25;	24; 17:18; 18* 19
5:	I0:14;84:1,5:87:18;	iSKSSflsS *	12;20:23;21*23
3: SmIhm-	92:12,18,18,19:118:6;	JSiSJmSS	19,21,24; 25:15,2
8:	139:4; 144:12,19; 145:19.	*2:19; 3*14; 39*
232-5,9;233-1*20;	22:148*11* 149*7* If Vil*	198.25,199:7,12;200:15,	IS 22:46*1^:50*7
234:19:235:13,15,23;	679	17; 20i9; 205:12; 208:12,
236:4; 237:7.25; 239:19;	18; 209:4,8; 214*	21 ’ SSSiei
240:10; 241:7; 242:17;	215:19;2i6*217:2;
246* 13; 247:13,19;	218:14,15; 220:4; 222:20;	S? 743.10 3
248:12; 250:21; 251:14;	237.25,254.17,259*.	224:2; 227:14.24; 231:12;
252:18; 253:23:254:4.5.	232:3.6; 235:1.18; 236:2,	8073-82:2^24 8
5.	6,8; 255:15,22,22:256:1;	5,7,8,9:237:8,25;	84:25-85*l6.2* 257:1;258:18,22;259:12, S*.*	238:10,12,20,20:240:3,	*7^-8*ii ivs 17; 268; 263:2,20;	17^24*25:252:12	« *	£££££**
!’18’ 264* 25	worker 212:19	246:2,9,10,24:248:15;	SS'SSSS
i; withdrew 52:16; 58:18;	Worksrs 62:2	249:25; 250:11; 251:10;	219*»: 1027ll
^	n * A <*■■« «■ a *n « .	-------* * — ■ a. Aa . nr* ■ a	Idi'I'l, OCCt^l *	1	*	*	*
'IlttlZ&UZtoTOTCtt	ttVlWUWtl '6'6'9'L*9\'Ll'i\'Z\	*2*91 *51
tZtUZ'SZ'K'iVYlZ	■L'LtI%Z-9tl,U-iZI tl *01 *9 'S **€91 fcZ ‘ZZ	-L\‘iVf
■iZ‘9X‘6ilZ‘Lll0V-0lZ	■LV-6ll-Z Lll'-&9ll ‘61 'IT ‘I-T9I kK>I"ZT	-ZZ'IZ'
'&'\Z'6V4XlZ'4l 'YVtJX	!lz:SIi:«r0i:S0It:Wl Wl9V£l'tZ'lZ'6l	'tZ'i-lV
‘\VWtWXX,,4Z'L96\	i€lWI 'V'i&ZZ-tL *«I »®9I 'U ‘0Z *lt	‘Sl'iV
^fcSI^lVtttt	:ii:9«,noA T&l'H'ZZ'.Kl'K'OZ	‘Ol^ll
%Z?6l‘ir-l6V-fZ-06\	Z:£SiVitU.«oA 'i'Ml%Z'Zl'Z\'ZXl	%***Z'
114&1-L881‘9VM	6VLU'Zr-iOl D.noA &lfZ'9,ZZiit'il'Z
*1=981*1*81***1	61411 KS01*"™ ‘ll'tVU'rsTKVK	'ZVlf^A
$m'LWV.Ll.6Ll	£I*9l*9I>lV9t«I	T6£*r
*VV.V-OZ'ZV9Ll	■91'ZVZU^Vil‘U
MViVVUlZZ'S	<9*:Kl!K‘U>i>i>	^'6'9'9'Z
01	VFOH* WJiHlfl	‘61 ‘81 'L
*1^1 -91^91 :i;99t -ZZ	« « « «Jg ;« Yi ‘ft ‘5 Iwi Jew :c	‘n it ‘oi
*tC%i:S9I38s»»I!Ii:C9I	. “T"	‘6*9>9!
fe*9>:Z91!IZ:i9I	‘Srn*-OHSZ*ZI *8«I	‘ZI*i‘9:i
■LV09l‘iZ'n8il	91^ t-HZW 'SI :Wsi‘z:8ttk)l‘6‘6Y	tw^ll
:re ViSI;SI:9SI :9I;WI	-8‘9^1-91	*8I*in
•v,lr4i^VvT ‘9T‘SI>*i:S€m:KI	*it:iZW
^W^ZtH^rSIWI	. *■■& ‘91 ‘€€€1 !6t ‘Zl	Xl'fl'
'lWVL'VZt\%V<Z\	'Zl'S‘LZil‘iZ‘ZZTHl	^VLV
•■Lvgii'vtznit'etzi	,^oct^'u^rsfM	jiz^iv
*Z *1=121 miKKI	.c^wVv, vivr'rr ‘ 11 *Z4SZI =SE *»! *91 SI	*6=51*2*1
*611 *-OZ *8*11 fK^U	*n,-7«r Vr 4t vUt UmiWlUK	Yl€l^I
T.lWlZ'SI‘9=SZI^I	>-Il-€l
SGFHI^ZII^^IU	‘01=1*1 JOZ'imT >61 *91	S^IZ'IZ
iESaOII 39I«0< SS3801	>!<■»!	OZWSZ
!i90I^H)I :Sl'li:€OI	..f‘cV'c/w'tt-i.oCt	>:9:K*W
^szor^^noi	‘iWi^i*sitrs-z<ii	>i**yi
iK*SIW*IlI>!i6	SK’^’CTHSK'Wa
:H<£9tiUZ‘0Z‘8:«6!lZ	tlZ‘a‘9l'tl'i'Z,VlU	k^ZIZ^I
oz^wiw****^!	wa'it1*!*!*	yssi^r
•oi >:i8)9I tol^tZW	6T^:«<3 6l-*ZZ *2:911*2‘02*81^1*11	J^snSl
JmisSz'iwtesi	*>1*11:91*1*11 St	^
*1 %!'«»:«	*01 *01 >**1*1311*2
*nS*lJ*£€i**:Zi	OI^>:iim«It:9I
‘S-L9*'Z-99	>rS=60I*Z*€l‘£80I	.,.“2®
*Z*Z=8S:£*9*:9S	>:^OI ‘IZ‘01 V3:90I	**«*
*rti*ot*€‘t:«*z*i	*z‘6t*om*tz‘si‘«i
yitmiLviibtn	‘01^1^1:017 * 17‘/^c ?7 ‘inaffewrK'si	5II(,«
■SZ 'Viy‘lZ‘LT-6t-L8t	'lz'°z *91 *11*6 *=101
*ivi*vzi'r\i*i	:sz‘e*€z%‘i‘€-iw)i
'li:9ZiIZ<0Z'8l‘Cl‘€:SZ	f t‘l *7 >7 !zz>l<6f81‘il‘il‘€l
^Z=W:€ZtZ *12 *91=12	>7^:cr<i >1 >:an7 ‘9‘i:«i ^‘01‘Jl'SWi
!»'/? ‘ot'ct tr/w ‘61 ‘61 “SI ‘01 ‘6*9 S '^:96
^r6‘£:ZI^‘9;H	i9l'5t:S0Z:iT*i:WZ ‘SZ‘KS6-6I‘0T »6	‘Sl-LfZ -VZ
-9’L'v-9'i'Vtt*lMk	'4r-ioz‘\z‘rzQZ‘i\Qz -zz'iz‘6i'a'Z-U'SZZG	:i«r:ot
€1 worn fKJfi-tE	:8*i‘S;I6^I‘9t‘H
- *1:91 UMopBunoA	‘^l^Z'Cl'tl'n^t *31*8 ‘i‘t-06‘£^8:£Z'8l	‘t:6ZZ:€Z:
r IZ'ZI^IZinBunoil	:€z‘8l‘i:s«l‘8rs:wi ‘8I‘9I*«‘l‘C‘l«8^l‘ZI	,€l*Ol*i:
1 .fo.«7^.v»	-LI ‘€i:t6T 'iZ‘U'6 'i&'Sl'tt ‘01:98^61	^ZZZ:
~~;y	'9‘t*6VlZ'tV6'L46l W9'il V<.*%VV*%Z	*(WKZ^ I*
!il‘ll‘s«8i:s:88l *a*€*Z:atlZ‘li:Z8!(K	:^:iOZ ^91
'cii innoX	^*81 ‘91*91 ‘Sl^LST >1 l8l,SM8:«‘8r8I,9I	-fZ^ZOZ
.-SIIHinoA IZOVZiXLiZ^iiZ	'8:98i^z‘zi‘OrSSl^I Wtm'lZ‘Zl'6'6'9	£l6i:
WtZ lVl.9 LLll^VUlZ U ir9il	'6 WI-SZ‘Zi:t8I ISI'II TLT-61%t*91‘St‘SI‘S	*ZI^8t*-C
flNMinoA *II-i.H.£ZKl-I-9(H	‘VT-ZQl'lZ'Zl'L ‘9;r8I Z'fZ'tlW-U.	'HVBl-i
KWJ , ^•962f:^8	Sil’ZItl'i^*I 08i:9I ^81 ‘£1 *6*€:9i-SZ‘ZZ‘6
,:itl unoA	‘8£‘C:Si^I>l‘€ftr6	^191
iZ?:09Z:it . W«-*W.OI:ZS	'9-tL'lZ'Ll'U‘89'9tL	‘81 ‘81'
:-<u-T<T-u'T 0i:(M.n0A	...
