UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
CASE NO. 98 Civ. 3287 (JBW)
BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD OF NEW JERSEY, et al.,
Plaintiffs,
vs.
PHILIP MORRIS, INCORPORATED, et al.,
.	Defendants.
--------------- -------- -----------/
VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION OF	,
THOMAS V. DiBACCO
Taken before Richard Bursky, Registered Merit Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, pursuant to Notice of Taking Deposition filed by the Plaintiffs in the above cause.
Thursday, June 22, 2000 Suite 1400 222 Lakeview Drive West Palm Beach, Florida 10:17 a.m. - 1:58 p.m.
On Behalf of Plaintiff Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey, Inc.:
DEWEY BALLANTINE, LLP 1301 Avenue of the Americas New York, New York 10019-6092 (212) 259-8000
BY: VINCENT R. FITZPATRICK, JR., ESQ.
PAUL B. CARBERRY, ESQ.
On Behalf of Defendant Philip Morris, Inc.: .....
ARNOLD & PORTER	.
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004-1206
(202) 942-5000
BY: WENDY LEVENSON, ESQ.
On Behalf of Defendant Philip Morris, Inc.:
JOHNSON TYLER & PURVIS, PC 11 DuPont Circle, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 667-6100
BY: JULIA J. TYLER, ESQ.
On Behalf of Defendant Lorillard Tobacco Company:
SHOOK HARDY & BACON, LLP
One Kansas City Place
1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105-211
(816) 474-6550
BY: WILLIAM L. ALLINDER, ESQ.
JAMES R. ARNOLD
On Behalf of Defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company:
COLLIER SHANNON RILL & SCOTT, PLLC 3050 K Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20007 (202) 342-8869
BY: WILLIAM M. BAILEY, ESQ.
ALSO PRESENT:
SANDY RUBIN, Videographer
INDEX
Witness	Direct
THOMAS V. DiBACCO
By Mr. Fitzpatrick	5
EXHIBITS: IDENTIFIED: DiBacco Exhibit 1....... . .................... 13
PROCEEDIN G S
THE VIDEOGRAPHER; We are on the record.
This is the videotape deposition of Thomas DiBacco in the matter of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey et al. versus Philip Morris, Incorporated et al.
Today's date is June 22, 2000. The time is 10:17 a.m. This deposition is being conducted at 222 Lakeview Avenue, West Palm Beach, Florida.	*
The videographer is Sandy Rubin of Legal . Video Services, Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
The court reporter is Richard Bursky of Interim Reporting.
Would counsel please announce their appearances for the record.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Vincent Fitzpatrick of Dewey Ballantine on behalf of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plaintiffs.
MR. CARBERRY: Paul Carberry also of Dewey Ballantine on behalf of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plaintiffs.
MR. ALLINDER: William Allinder of Shook
Hardy & Bacon for Lorillard Tobacco Company.
MS, TYLER; Julia Tyler of Johnson Tyler & Purvis for Philip Morris.
MR. ARNOLD: James Arnold of Shook Hardy & Bacon for Lorillard Tobacco Company.
MS. LEVENSON: Wendy Levenson from Arnold & Porter for Philip Morris, Incorporated.
MR. BAILEY: William Bailey of Collier Shannon Scott on behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Swear in the witness.
Thereupon,
THOMAS V. DiBACCO, being by the undersigned Notary Public first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
.	DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Good morning, Dr. DiBacco.
A	Good morning, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Q	We of.course previously introduced
ourselves, but again for the record, I represent the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plaintiffs and I understand you are proposed to testify as an expert in our litigation and I am going to ask you some questions
about that today. You understand that?
A	Yes, sir.
Q	I would like to start with a few questions
about your background.
Do you have any training in psychology?
A I have no training in psychology.
Q	Have you ever written on the subject or
lectured on the subject of psychology?
A I have not.
Q So would you not claim to have any expertise in the area of psychology?	.
A I have no expertise in the area of psychology.
Q	Let's talk about advertising. Do you have
any expertise in the area of advertising?
A I have no expertise with respect to formal training in advertising.
0	And you understand that there are formal disciplines studying the effect of advertising and advertising images on consumers, correct?
A	Yes, sir.
Q	But you do not possess that discipline
yourself?	.
A	I do not, that is correct.
Q I have noticed in your expert report which we are copying at the moment, that you indicate that you will give testimony. Your testimony will include comments upon polls, is that correct?
A In terms of polls, POLLS,
Q	POLLS.
A That is correct, sir.
Q	And could you tell me which polls and what
the basic subject matter of your testimony will be?
A I have referenced some of those polls in terms of my expert report. I mention, for example, the poll that was conducted on behalf of Blue Cross/Blue Shield which was in 1968, The other polls are Gallup polls, Roper polls, polls that are conducted by nationally known organizations, which have been in the news.
Q Can you tell me approximately how many polls you have reviewed?
A	Well, I have looked at polls, there is a
collection of Roper --excuse me, Gallup polls since 1935 and I have confined my looking at these polls in the period since World War II.
I cannot specify at this moment the actual number, but they are referenced on that production
list.
Q	Okay. I probably should have asked you
that way. Every poll that you have reviewed is referenced on your list?
A Those that I relied upon, that is correct,
sir.
Q	Were there others that you reviewed that
you did not rely upon?
A To the best of my knowledge, no.
Q And what are your conclusions based on your review of those polls?
A	My conclusions based upon the review of
these nationally, national organization polls,
Roper, Gallup and the like, is that the risk of smoking for the last 50 years have been well publicized and are and have become common knowledge with respect to the American people.
Q	Let me digress for a second.
Have you had any training in the study of the methodology of conducting polls?
A No, I have not, sir.
Q	Have you had any training in the study of
interpreting the results of polls?
A I have not had formal study with respect ,
to interpreting the results of polls.
Q	Have you ever written a peer-reviewed
article on the subject of the interpretation and results of polls?
A No, sir. I have used, however, in my peer-review articles results of polls. And those peer-review articles were published in various scholarly publications.
Q But again, you recognize that there is a discipline that people study for years or for a lifetime concerning the methodology of conducting polls and concerning the proper interpretation of polls?	.
A- Yes, and I have been exposed to those as a historian by virtue of the fact that many polls over the course of political history have been wrong and I think my sensitivity to that was raised by virtue of the Literary Digest poll which predicted in 1935 that Alf Langdon would beat Franklin Roosevelt, and that created, of course, a very big issue,
■	'	.	v
additionally the 1948 election in which Tom Dewey was projected to win over Harry Truman.
So I am sensitive to the refinements that have been made with respect to polling as a science.
Q My question was a little different. You do understand that there is a discipline where people spend a lifetime in both, in learning and teaching and in writing on the subject of the proper methodology of conducting polls and the proper manner of interpreting polls?
A Yes, and I know that science has progressed particularly in the last 20 years.
Q And you are not a person who claims to have the expertise in that field that people who have done that study and have written on the subject and have taught on the subject, is that correct?
A That is correct.
Q Could you explain the work that you did in preparation for your testimony in this case? I am not talking about the deposition today but your work in preparation for your testimony at trial.
A I have, as I indicated in my expert report, examined sources of information in the course of the period largely since 1950 that were available widely to the public. Those sources were I believe iterated on page 2 of my expert report.
And I looked at newspapers which were national as well as state, statewide newspapers. I
looked at magazines.
I looked at pamphlets produced by educational institutions and health organizations such as the American Cancer Society, the National Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases Association.
I looked at as well at television, radio, films, I looked at the popular culture as revealed in terms of adages and sayings.
I looked at textbooks, which states mandated to be used in terms of the instruction of children regarding the health risk of tobacco in general and cigarettes.
I looked at laws that states passed relating to the sale, distribution and education about cigarettes.
I looked at religious tracts and documents of the major religions relative to their views in terms of their views with respect to cigarette usage and the health risks therefrom.
These are some of the specific areas that I looked at.
Q	Now, I know from reading your testimony in
the Engle case that there you actually referred to a very large number of newspaper articles and magazine
articles and the like.
Is it your intention to do the same thing in this case?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
-	THE WITNESS: I have produced for you, I
think, 300 and some pages. Newspaper articles are listed with regard to what I have relied upon for my expert report. As to the means by which these will be presented in case, I don't know.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	It is up to the lawyers, I guess.
A	No, I didn't say that. I have -- we
haven't come to that road.	.
Q	Okay.
A And once we come to that road, then I will be able to make some sort of statement. But at this point I do not know that.
Q	Okay. You said you looked at TV, radio
and films. How did you go about doing that?
A. Well, there is a wide collection of films . produced by various entities. I went to the American Cancer Society and found films that they had used. These were referenced in the newspaper
articles that I reviewed. And so I did want to see those films.
I saw other references to films in the newspaper articles such as the See It Now series by Edward R. Murrow in 1959.
I also consulted with a film historian who had knowledge with respect to films and particular public service announcements which were made.
Q I am sorry to interrupt. Could you tell me who that was?
A Yes, Dr. Greg Black at the University of Missouri, Kansas City.
I went to the certain repositories where I found films were available such as the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland or Rockville, Maryland. These were the ways in which these films were looked at.
Q	Did you -let's take, go off for a
minute. I got a copy of your expert report?
MR. FITZPATRICK: So I will ask the court reporter to mark as DiBacco Exhibit l a copy of Dr. DiBacco's report dated January 13, 2000.
(DiBacco Exhibit 1 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	In reviewing -- how did you review radio?
A	The public broadcasting system has
transcripts with respect to programs and they are publicly available.
Q	Is it fair to say that your ability to
review TV, films and radio, given the nature of the median - medium, is far less than your ability to review archival materials, newspapers, magazines and the like?
A It is difficult to say far less. Theire has been a rather significant attempt on the part of archives for the news media, the broadcast media, to revive those. The Vanderbilt archives are testimony to that. I found the Wolfson Center in Miami which is working on that.
So there are growing numbers of archival institutions which are attempting to restore these, but I would say it is less at the moment. But because by the 1960s television was taking such an enormous role in American lives, attempts are being made to restore and to create repositories for this.
Q	Let me see if I understand this
correctly. What you did was you looked at what you
were able to ascertain were TVs or films or transcripts of radio broadcasts that had to do with smoking and health?
A	That's correct.
Q	Did you undertake a review of popular TV
shows or films or radio broadcasts?
A	Yes, I did.
Q Did you review those with an eye to ascertaining the role to which smoking played in films or on TV?
A I reviewed them in terms of the health risk of smoking which they disseminated to the viewer.
Q Okay. Over the years there have been many films, for example, films starring Humphrey Bogart in which there was a great deal of use of smoking cigarettes and the like, fair enough?
A There have been films in which cigarettes have been smoked.
Q	And smoking in a glamorized fashion, would
you agree with that?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I wouldn't characterize in a monolithic way that smoking has been
characterized in that fashion.
I preface my remarks with what we began with earlier today and that is I am not a specialist in psychology. I am not an expert in terms of this field or in the manner of advertising or what something may do to individuals with respect to how they act.
But having looked at films for years and having reviewed them in my research, there is no doubt that smoking is a part of those films. My focus was to look at the extent to which those films disseminated to the individual the health risk of smoking.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Putting aside specific references to the
health risks then, I think what you are saying is that the extent to which non-verbal cues such as smoking by Lauren Bacall, was not part of your analysis?
A That's correct.
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q And the, is it fair to say that the same is true of advertising employing pictures but not
MR; ALLINDER: Objection.
MR. BAILEY: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't know what that means, advertising.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Fair enough.
A Advertising where? I don't know what that means.
Q	Okay. You have seen many cigarette
advertisements that do not claim, they don't say anything about health or smoking other than the mandated warnings, is that right?
MR. ALLINDER: You are talking about, excuse me, you are talking about text now?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q You see, you are aware of advertising by the cigarette companies that, it is really pictorial advertising, contains no text for the most part, other than the mandated warning, that is fair to say?
A	As of March 30, 1972, yes', sir.
Q Yes, sir.
And my question is, in looking at those ads have you tried to reach a conclusion as to whether the picture in the ad, the. particular depictions carried in the ad, contain an implicit or non-verbal message to the effect that cigarette smoking is a healthy endeavor.
A	Well, as I indicated to you earlier, I am
not an expert in that field. And you are asking me to do that and I have not done that for --
Q No, I am not asking you to do that, I just want to know if you did.	.
A	No, I have not. I am not an expert in
that field.
Q Let me then, we have marked your report as Exhibit 1. Could you take a look at that for a moment.
A	I have it.
Q	I want to refer you to page 8.
A ■ Yes, sir.
Q	I am sorry, I think I meant page 10, the
second to last paragraph on the page. I call your attention to the statement, quote, "As with other Americans, Blue Cross and Blue Shield subscribers across the nation were not only aware of the health
risks of smoking as illustrated by the above cited history, but were even more exposed to such risks through publications ranging from newsletters to pamphlets specifically written and printed for their use by Blue Cross and Blue Shield administrations." Do you see that?
A I see that, yes, sir,
Q is it your present intention to testify at trial as to what Blue Cross subscribers were aware of?
A My intention is to testify that in , addition to having been exposed to what all other Americans were exposed to, Blue Cross and Blue Shield disseminated additional information. So my frame of reference is with the general public they were exposed to magazines and newspapers and films, if they were a Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscriber they had one additional means of receiving information. That is the reference that I am making there.
Q , Okay, but I am sort of driving at a slightly different point.
My question is are you going to testify about what Blue Shield subscribers were aware of or
are you going to testify about what they were exposed to?
A X am going to testify to the exposure which these individual subscribers were given with regard to these publications.
Q Okay. So to that extent the statement in your report or at least to the extent it meant to indicate what you would testify to at trial is mistaken in its indication that you would testify as to what Blue Shield subscribers were aware of?
A	Well, no.	.
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think that's quite the case. At this time when I wrote this report, sir, on January 13, 2000, I did not know and I wanted to use sufficiently broad statement in order to incorporate what might be forthcoming with regard to this discovery phase.
I did not know that there would be Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers who would be deposed. Therefore, I understand that there will be more than a hundred such depositions which I hope I am able to look at. I have
looked at some.
So that may provide me with information to talk about the awareness end of it. But at this point my statement there would indicate the exposure that these documents illustrate. What comes from the deponents who are Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers may assist me in terms of dealing with the issue of awareness.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Do you have how many depositions have you read in your life?	,
A	How many depositions?
Q	Depositions, yes.
MR. ALLINDER*. On any subject?
MR. FITZPATRICK: On any subject, any
case .
THE WITNESS: It would be hard to quantity that. I probably have read more in this case thus far than I have in the Engle case.
I have read the depositions of Blue Cross/Blue Shield administrators, I have read several of the depositions of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers. I can't give you a figure but I would suggest it would
probably be a few dozen.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Prior to your -- strike that.
When were you first engaged to work as a consultant or expert on behalf of the tobacco industry?
A	In terms of --
Q	In any case.
A	In any case, in October of 1995.
Q Prior to that time had you ever read a deposition?	„
A Yes, I had.
Q	Can you tell me how many and the
circumstances?
A I had read two or three depositions by virtue of holding the position of dean for faculty affairs at American University which was a contract officer for the university. And there were a couple of suits against the university, and in that, those particular instances I did read depositions and I did provide a deposition or two in that instance.
Q	Is it fair to say that you read those
because you wanted to find out what the people said during the depositions, not for the purpose of
rendering an expert opinion?
A	It was so long ago I really can't put my
finger on why I read those depositions.
Q It is fair to say, without why you read them, it wasn't for the purpose of rendering an expert opinion?
A I don't know at the time what it was for.
I think it was for the purpose of preparing me for my own deposition.
Q So before you were retained by the tobacco companies you had not read depositions with a view toward expressing an expert opinion as to what those depositions revealed about the deponents' state of knowledge?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I can't answer that question. It has been so long ago and those cases are fuzzy in my mind. I can tell you more about my testimony as opposed to the depositions.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q ■ Let me ask it this way: Did you you have testified in two tobacco and health related cases, is that correct?
A I have testified in, in terms of depositions, in terms of trial testimony, is that what we are talking about?
Q	Let me go, just talking about trial. Let
me rephrase it.
You have testified at the Engle trial, is that correct?
A	That is correct.
Q And at the Broin trial?
A I only testified in the Engle trial. I was deposed in the Broin trial.	,
Q So you testified at trial once?
A That is correct.
Q	This --
MR. ALLINDER; And we are talking about tobacco cases at this point in time?
MR. FITZPATRICK; Yes, I am talking about tobacco cases.
MR. ALLINDER: All right.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK;
Q	Have you testified in other cases,
non-tobacco cases?
A	No, sir, other than the two that I
referenced in terms of the faculty affairs
position.
Q Okay. So with the -- other than the degree to which you may have done so in Engle, and I don't want to characterize whether you did or didn't, you have not otherwise testified as an expert interpreting depositions and the extent to which the testimony reveals the state of mind of the deponent, is that correct?
A When I testified -MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: When I testified in the Engle case I asked to see the depositions of members of the family -BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Excuse me, I am sorry to interrupt you,
but I am excluding Engle for the moment.
A	I am sorry.
Q	Okay. Prior to Engle .--
A	Right.
Q Or other than Engle, have you ever given expert testimony about the content of a deposition?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I can't recall with
regard to my faculty affairs position the depositions and their relation to my testimony. BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Okay. You mentioned earlier the television was a popular force by the 1960s, is that right?
A Yes, sir,
Q In fact, it was a popular force in the 1950s as well, wasn't it?
A	That's correct.
Q And remains perhaps the most popular force in our culture today?
A	It is one of them.	.
Q	And in the fifties and sixties there was
a, there was advertising about cigarettes on television, wasn't there?
A	Excuse me, I didn't hear.
Q	There was cigarette advertisements on TV
in the fifties and sixties?
A	There was.
Q Have you reviewed any of those?
A	I have seen them by virtue of my having
gone through newspapers and magazines, television and the like, yes,
Q Without regard to your expertise or lack thereof as to advertising, you would agree as a matter of common sense, would you not, that the advertising of cigarettes in the medium of TV in the fifties and sixties had a powerful impact on the population as a whole?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, you are asking me to assume the role of an advertising expert and I can't do that.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:	„
Q	I am asking more in your role as, you
would consider your expertise, would you not, American history and particularly popular culture as part of American history, fair enough?
A Yes.
Q So I am asking you in that role, I don't want you to give me an expert opinion as to whether people believe the ads or didn't believe the ads, but TV was a powerful medium, you believe that?
. A	It was,	.
Q	Yes. And it did contain a large number of
advertisements for cigarettes in the fifties and sixties?
A	It did.
Q And those advertisements to the best of your knowledge never contained, did they, a warning that cigarettes were harmful to people's health?
A	To the best of my knowledge, they did
provide common sense warnings about health risks.
Q The advertisements by the tobacco companies - - .
A Yes.
Q	-- in the 1950s?
A	Yes.
Q Can you give me an example?
A The Old Golds, not a cough in a carload which suggested by implication that there were coughs in other brands.
Q	Okay, I see. It also suggested by
implication that that particular cigarette was free from those problems health problems, right?
A That is correct.
Q And there also were TV programs, you mentioned Edward R. Murrow before, where there was a great deal of smoking by the participants in those TV programs, is that right?
A Mr. Murrow smoked, there is no doubt that
he smoked. I looked at the See It Now two-part series which dealt with tobacco in 1955 and he didn't smoke on that program because he was only there for the beginning, the middle and the end and was largely done by somebody else.
But there is little doubt that Mr. Murrow
smoked.
Q And Arthur Godfrey smoked on TV?
A	He did smoke. I didn't watch Mr. Godfrey
on TV because he was primarily a radio personality at the time.	v
Q	But he did smoke, I watched him on TV and
he smoked, you would agree with that?
A	He did smoke.
Q	Would you agree with me that TV has its
most powerful impact on children and teenagers?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you are asking me to assume the role that I indicated I could not.
I am not an advertising specialist.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q I am purposely staying away from advertising, I am just asking about the medium. And I think you have written on the subject that TV was
a very powerful influence on the culture, is that correct?
' A	Can you be specific?
Q I believe it is in your history book that you have written that TV was very powerful. And I don't have it here but I hope that refreshes your recollection you have written on the subject that TV has a very powerful influence on the culture, correct?
A	It was very powerful. As to its
relationship to advertising or inducing people to do things, I don't think I wrote on that.
Q	And I am not asking that. I am just
simply asking you whether it, TV, has a disproportionately high influence on children and teenagers?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you are asking me a very general question. I do not have the expertise to deal with that.
If you could be more specific and relate......
to a field that is within my area of expertise,
I might be able to do that, but as a broad statement, that is beyond my expertise.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Okay, I take it that you would not be in a position to dispute the opinion of someone whose field is that expertise that
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
Q -- TV has a very significant impact on children and teenagers?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I would not certainly be able to render a comment on that until I knew what it was.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	I will refer again to page 10 and
referring also to your testimony earlier about the quote that I read you, your testimony is going to be that Blue Cross and Blue Shield subscribers were exposed to information about the health risks of smoking, is that a fair way to characterize what your present intention, is to testify at trial?
A	They were exposed through publications,
yes, that's correct.
Q	Can you tell me what specifically the
health risks that they were exposed to?
A I indicated that earlier with regard to my
expert report there were several I think key milestones with regard to Blue Cross/Blue Shield in terms of --
Q I am sorry, I think perhaps you misunderstand my question, I am asking about the particular health risks.
A I understand.
Q What diseases, for example.
A	Good, okay.
MR. ALLINDER: And you are still asking about Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers in terms of special information that they may have received from the plan?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Well, no, let me rephrase that.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Your opinion is that Blue Cross had, subscribers had some more exposure than the Americans in general?
A	They had one additional layer, that is
correct.
Q	My question is meant to be more general
than that.
Your opinion is that Americans in general were exposed to the health risks of smoking, correct?
A That's correct.
Q I mean, exposed to it, by that I mean that in writings that you reviewed there was discussion of the health risks involved, correct?
A That's correct.
Q What I am asking you now is what health risks are you referring to specifically.
A Well, the health risks to which I am referring are those that are also being referenced in terms of the other media, the health risk with respect to lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, the matters of smoking and pregnancy.
The difference with respect to Blue Cross/Blue Shield was --
Q	I am sorry, I didn't -- that is not my
question. If your counsel wishes to ask you a question about that later, he can.
Are there any other than those?
MR. ALLINDER: I am sorry, can you ask your question again, because I am lost too.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I am asking him what
diseases he believes the American public was, information about which they were exposed to through the periodicals and other materials that he has reviewed.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
THE WITNESS: So we are talking only about the --	.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	I will ask you if Blue Cross knew more, I
will ask you that next.
A	Okay, I am sorry.
Q	But my question now is what are the
diseases that you believe were written about to such an extent that the American people in general were exposed to knowledge of those risks, which specific diseases. You have told me lung cancer, emphysema.
A Heart disease.
Q Heart disease and pregnancy issues,
A	Right.
Q	Are there any others?
A	Yes, cancer of the bladder, pancreas,
neoplasms in the mouth, tumors in the mouth, larynx, esophagus --
Q	Now --	,
A The --
Q I am sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt.
Go ahead.
A Complications with respect to vision and amblyopia-was referenced in terms of that, circulatory ills such as Buerger's disease, cancer of the pancreas.
Q	Let's take pancreas, cancer of the
pancreas. Can you tell me the frequency with which that was discussed in the materials you reviewed?
A It was a topic which was included often in doctors' advice columns of which there were many, as you will note from my exhibit list.
My reading of the materials would suggest that what happened in terms of the health risk is the health risk started out with lung cancer and heart disease and emphysema, the initial 1964 report of the Surgeon General including many others, and what happened as a matter of dissemination is that those which had been mentioned to a lesser degree in the original '64 report-were amplified in subsequent ones, and that included bladder cancer, that included kidney cancer, cancers which were not as directly related to the lungs.
Q	There has been, has there not, far less
dissemination of information about pancreatic cancer, liver cancer and the other diseases that you referred to other than heart, emphysema, lung cancer?
A I think that's a fair statement.
Q And you would not claim, would you, that the great majority of Americans have been exposed to information concerning the risk, the fact that pancreatic cancer is caused by cigarette smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form. .
THE WITNESS: I think that would be a very difficult conclusion for me to agree with because in very recent years, in the last 20 years the information has simply been through doctors' advice columns and what I perceived in terms of the educational literature by the ACS, the national -- the American Lung Association now, the American Heart Association and many other groups is don't smoke and the reason is because there are health risks. They don't delineate them. But -BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	That's really my point, isn't it, that
there are specific diseases that you would not claim , that the public is generally aware are associated with smoking.	,
A I haven't done an analysis of that with respect to the public, I don't know.
Q It is fair to say, isn't it, that this dissemination of information was not done by the tobacco companies, right?
A The dissemination of information was done by public health authorities.
Q	I just asked you whether it was done by
tobacco companies.
A No, it was not.
Q And in fact the tobacco companies made statements to the effect that smoking did not cause cancer, correct?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: My reading of the materials that appeared in the newspapers and the magazines which referenced the tobacco industry position, was that the tobacco industry argued that there was only a statistical correlation which had been proved, that more research needed to be done and that there had not been
the scientific causation of lung cancer determined-BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	You don't recall reading statements
that -well, you do -- strike that..
Do you recall reading statements that, by the tobacco industry, that it had not been established that smoking caused lung cancer? ..
A	I recall reading statements that there had
not been, other than a statistical correlation with regard to the matter of lung cancer. And therefore the matter of scientific causation had not been determined.
Q	Now, you have read a great deal of
information by the Surgeon General about the health risks?
A	By the Surgeons General, yes.
Q	Surgeons General. By the American Cancer
Society?
A	Yes, sir.
Q	By physicians?
A	By individual physicians, yes.
Q	Do you think that the tobacco industry was
being truthful when it stated that it had not been
proven that lung cancer was caused by smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: My position is I do not testify to the truth or the untruth of any of the articles that I read in the newspapers, magazines. That has not been my function. I am not an expert in industry conduct nor am I an expert in terms of public health.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	I am asking you what you believe. You
have read a lot and I think the jury would want to know, do you believe that the industry was being truthful when it stated that it had not been established that smoking causes lung cancer?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form. And you are not asking for an opinion?
MR. FITZPATRICK: I just want to know what he believes.
MR. ALLINDER: His personal belief.
THE WITNESS: First of all, I am not a medical doctor and.I am not schooled in medical science.
I think the tobacco companies made a technical distinction which lasts to this very
day as I read the literature, and I am not a physician, that scientific causation has still not been established.
My personal belief is that that was a technical distinction, as I see it, with regard to the tobacco industry statement. I am not speaking as an expert on the industry conduct of which I am not qualified to do. But that's how I see it personally.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Do you believe that smoking causes lung
cancer?
MR. ALLINDER; Excuse me, same basis as - -
MR. FITZPATRICK: Same basis.
MR. ALLINDER: -- the prior objection.
You are asking for personal belief?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes, personal belief.
But I am including in, the question is in the context that this witness is proffered as an expert on what information has been out for decades about the risks associated with smoking.
MR. ALLINDER: And he is that, he is, as is indicated in his expert report, prepared to
offer opinions regarding the information that was communicated publicly.
And your question, though, is asking him to state his personal belief with respect to the accuracy or the veracity of any of the individual - -
MR. FITZPATRICK: Well, now I am asking him whether he believes that smoking causes lung cancer, simple question.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay. And he has said to you that is not part of his opinion. So you are asking for his personal belief?
MR. FITZPATRICK: I am asking for his personal belief, but I am not -- we don't have to debate this here, Bill.
MR. ALLINDER: That's right.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I am asking it for whatever purpose it may be.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	I would like to know what your personal
belief is, does smoking cause lung cancer?
MR. ALLINDER: I object.
And you may answer.
, THE WITNESS: My personal belief is that .
it is a, one of the causative factors in terras of lung cancer.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q is it a cause of emphysema?
MR. ALLINDER: I am going to maintain my same objection.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I understand.
MR. ALLINDER: Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: Personally I believe the same thing, it is a contributory cause.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:	,
Q Is it a cause of heart disease?
A Again, I would say the same thing personally, I believe it can aggravate and bring about heart disease.
Q And do you believe those -- are you
i
certain in those beliefs?
A	I would not smoke. I think that's the
best indication of my certainty.
Q	You did smoke for a while?
A	I did smoke.
Q	When and for how long and at what ages?
A	I started in 1953, I was 16. I take that
back. When I was about six or seven my friend and I
Billy used to snatch cigarettes off the ground and choke on them, but we did not smoke.
I began■- -
Q You are probably the first guy that ever did that.
A	No, I am not the first guy that ever did
that.
. But I started to smoke regularly when I was 16 in 1953 and I continued to smoke until 1971 when I was 34 .
Q And why did you quit?	.
A	I quit because as a teacher at the time, a
professor, I was having increasing problems with my voice. I had an inability to speak loudly without getting hoarse. I knew the seven warning signs of cancer. And therefore I thought I should smoke stop, even though I felt otherwise in the prime of my 1i f e.
Q	So therefore you quit for health reasons?
A Well, I quit because I did not manifest, other than the hoarseness, what I thought to be debilitating disease at the time, but I, I thought it would be best for me.
And I felt -- I can remember now as I
think about why I chose '71 to do it, the senior class in 1971 voted me the best professor of the university and I had to give a speech at commencement. And I was giving it along with Art Buchwald, And I wanted to be able to attend all of the ceremonies without smoking, and so I said I was going to stop by then, and I did.
Q	Why did you smoke for all those years --
strike that.
During the period of time that you smoked, were you aware of the health risks associated with smoking?
A Absolutely.
Q	So --
A	I was required in my, the same year I
started, to know the seven warning signs of cancer. And my biology teacher, Jack Heritage, who I can see to this very day, was an antismoking person, who would begin every day virtually with the statement about how bad it was to smoke. I was very well aware of it. But at 16 I thought I was invincible and therefore I smoked.
Q	And you continued until you were 30 --
■ A	4 .
Q	4, a professor, highly educated
professor. Why did you continue for that period of time?
A I continued because I enjoyed smoking. It was a choice, personal choice that I made. I thoroughly enjoyed smoking.
Q Did you consider yourself addicted?
A	Well, you know, I never thought about it.
We never talked in those terms in those years. I know there were times when I was ill and I didn't smoke. As a younger man I was exposed to influenza and colds and I had more than my share of that, and I would stop smoking then without any ill effects.
So it's, it's difficult to say whether I was or wasn't the more I think about that because that is a term you didn't think about.
Q Do you think it would have affected the timing of when you stopped had the tobacco industry itself come out publicly and said, smoking causes lung cancer, smoking is addictive, smoking causes emphysema?
A No, because the first doctor I went to indicated that I should stop spoking. So I had marginal high blood pressure and I was applying for
my first job and he said, you know, you should stop smoking.
And I said, how do you know I smoked.
He said, I know.
So I knew that. And I don't think anything that would have been said by anybody else would have changed my view. I knew the risks, I knew I was taking them. And it was a personal choice and I thoroughly enjoyed smoking.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Take a break for a minute.
the VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
(At 11:10 a.m. a 17 minute recess was
taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are on the record.
MR. ALLINDER: Thank you.
Before we begin I would like to note for the record the conversation that Mr. Fitzpatrick and I had during the break.
I pointed out to him that there has not
been a revision to Dr. DiBacco's expert report......
and as is reflected on the first page of his . report he does have an opinion with respect to the common knowledge of the general public of
the information communicated about the health risks of smoking and is expected to testify about that awareness.
And there is a distinction as is pointed out on page 10 of his expert report which Mr. Fitzpatrick was examining the witness about prior to the break concerning the difference if any between the .level of exposure or awareness of information of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscriber population versus the general public.	.
MR. FITZPATRICK: All right. Ahd SO we don't have to waste time questioning the witness on it, it is my understanding that he will testify as to the awareness of the general public and the Blue Shield/Blue Cross subscribers but will not testify that one group is more aware than the other?
MR. ALLINDER: I believe that is the case.
THE WITNESS: That is the case.
MR. FITZPATRICK: He may.testify that Blue Cross had an additional bit of exposure than the general public?
MR. ALLINDER: Yes, I believe that is also
reflected on page 10 of the report.
MR. FITZPATRICK: And he's going to testify, to the extent it is different from that general awareness testimony, to what was common knowledge among the public as a whole?
MR. ALLINDER: That is my expectation.
Is that correct?
THE WITNESS: That is correct.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Okay.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Let's then talk first about common ,
knowledge.
MR. ALLINDER: Before we move on, and let's put aside for the moment that Dr. DiBacco has indicated that he has started to receive and review individual subscriber depositions and it may be that he will have opinions with respect to them and perhaps his report will be revised in the future, but at the present time, no, it is as you have just stated.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Okay.
MR. ALLINDER: Pair enough?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Fair enough.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Fair enough.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK;
Q	Let me ask you, how many depositions of
subscribers have you reviewed to date?
A Maybe 15 to 20.
Q	Do you recall which ones?
A	I can name some.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Maybe I could short circuit it and you guys can give us a list,
MR. ALLINDER: Of what he has already?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Right.	,
MR. ALLINDER: Be happy to. I am not sure that I can do it today.
MR. FITZPATRICK: No, and the names wouldn't mean anything to me anyway so it is not worth to go through it, but if you could give us that.list.
MR. ALLINDER; Be happy to.
Excuse me, and it is our intention to send all of them to him, and at some point in time if you want us to tell you that we have done all of that or less than that, we can certainly do that.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Okay.
Let's go off the record again for a minute.
MR. ALLINDER: I am sorry.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
.	{Discussion off the record.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are on the record.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	From the depositions you have read to date
have you been able to draw any conclusions as to the awareness of those deponents about the health risks associated with smoking?	,
A	In terms of which kind of depositions,
subscribers?
Q Yes, Well, okay. Yes, let's talk about subscribers now.
A	I've read too few of them. I am told that
I	will get a hundred plus. At this point I've only read 15 or 20 so I have not arrived at any conclusion, no, sir. .
Q	Okay. Now, you asked me if I was
referring to those depositions which implies that there were some other depositions. Are those the depositions of Blue Cross employees?
A	Yes, administrators' employees, yes, sir.
Q And have you --do you intend -- and,
Bill, you can answer this too -- to offer testimony on the awareness of Blue Cross employees about the risks associated with smoking? You haven't decided yet?
A I mean, are you asking --Q It is not in the report, and I would like to know if that is going to be part of the testimony.
MR. ALLINDER: In the list of materials that you have I think on the last page or the next to the last page you have a list of those depositions that he has reviewed to date.
And we can ask, of course, Dr. DiBacco for confirmation of this which may be necessary, but I understand that it is his view that Blue Cross/Blue Shield employees, administrators and the like were exposed to the same information as the general public. But he does not intend to say that they had a higher level of
awareness than that of the general population.....
So like the Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers, he does not intend to distinguish them in any sort of qualitative way in terms of the level
of information that they had versus the general public.
Does that answer your question?
MR. FIT2PATRICK: Yes, that does.
MR. ALLINDER: But he will, of course, he will talk about exposure to information and the type of information that they had, just like he indicated with subscribers earlier.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Okay.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:	.
Q Could you tell me what you mean by the term common knowledge?
A	I wish there were a better term but the
way I would define it is that it is, it has become a part of the culture. In other words, something is out there, it is being exposed so much, it is out there and becomes a part of culture from scientific literature to common sayings to movies to educational literature, it has become a part of the society in terms of the individual knowing about it.
And if I had a better word I guess I would call it common awareness as opposed to knowledge because it is really not a word that would have fit,
I think, as well as common awareness, but it has become, in other words, it is the second level.
People are exposed, and then it is more than exposure, it is so much a part, it becomes part of the culture which means that people are aware of it, and it is widespread through the community,
Q	Is it your testimony that all smokers have
been aware of the health risks from 19 -- every person who smoked from 1953 to date has been aware of the health risks associated with smoking?
A I would say that the exposure begins in the period after World War II, even earlier --
Q Please, I am just asking a pretty simple direct question. Is your testimony that everybody, ever smoker, the millions of smokers, that every one of them knew or knows the risks of smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.	.
THE WITNESS: You - -BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	When I say knew, some are dead, right,
that's what I am referring to.
A	Yes. And I, I can't testify that every
smoker in the period since 1953 was aware of the risk. What I can testify to is that the information
that became available was such that it became a part of the common culture.
Q	Can you tell me when you think it became a
part of the common culture?
A	It is a matter of degree in terms of
increasing the common awareness aspect.
I think it began for many individuals in terms of the schoolbooks and the education requirements of states. I think that polls which are referenced in terms of my exhibit list would suggest that by the time of the 1964 first	,
general -- first Surgeon General's report, that it had become part of that common awareness, a very large part.
Q What had become part?
A The knowledge that there are health risks with respect to smoking.
0	Was there common knowledge that in, let's
say, let's take in the mid-1960s, that smoking caused lung cancer?
A	By 1964 there was common knowledge that
smoking caused lung cancer as illustrated by polling data at the time. Individuals had heard of the report, had heard of the Surgeon General's report,
yes, sir.
Q Again, my question is when you say common knowledge or common awareness -A	Yes,
Q -- you don't mean everybody, do you?
A There is no way to do that, no, sir.
Q In fact, it is virtually certain, is it not, that some people didn't know?
A Again, I can't say one way or the other, but it is a reasonable inference that you can't be certain of everybody,	,
Q And that's true in the 1960s, and in the 1970s and in the 1980s and in the 1990s, isn't it?
A Well, the only caveat I would say is that it is true as far as an individual. I think if there were a group of individuals, it would attract attention in terms of the media with regard to a story about that. But I have never seen anything to that effect.
Q	Well, you would agree with me, would you
not, that it is virtually certain that large numbers of people up until today do not fully understand the health risks associated with smoking?
THE WITNESS: I don't know that I could make that sort of statement.
What I can say is my research has indicated that this information relative to the health risks of smoking has become part of our common culture.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Can you make the statement that everyone who is a smoker or potential smoker even today is fully aware of the risks associated with smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you are dealing with individuals and I can't deal with individuals,
I can only deal with, of course, the culture.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q I think you said that this evolved over time, correct?
A That's correct.
Q So that there was a certain degree of awareness in the sixties?
A And in the fifties.
Q	And would you agree there was a greater
awareness in the sixties than in the fifties?
A	Yes.
Q	And a greater degree of awareness in the
seventies than in the sixties?
A	That is a fair inference.
Q	And a greater degree of awareness in the
eighties than the seventies?
A I think it is incremental because the materials relative to the means by which the common culture was being affected with regard to the various ways in which it was being affected became more diverse.
Q Can you tell me what expertise you believe you have to opine on what people are aware of as opposed to what they are exposed to?
A	When action takes place relative to just
the information being out there, when you see stories with regard to individuals taking action as a result of the material that they are being exposed to, that is one criterion for doing it.
Q	Are thfere others?
A	I think there probably are others. That's
the first that comes to mind.
Q Have you conducted interviews of smokers to determine their awareness or lack of awareness of the risks associated with smoking?	.
A	No, I have not.
Q	When you say people taking action, are you
referring to people stopping smoking?
A People writing their doctors with regard to how to stop, asking for more information, individuals attending classes with regard to stop smoking.
Q Many people continue to smoke, right? Millions of people continue to smoke, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Now, in determining the general level of awareness or common knowledge, have you taken into account that millions of Americans continue to smoke?
A	Yes.
Q What do you conclude from it?
A	I conclude that people make choices. I
also conclude that from the literature of awareness, literature with respect to newspapers, magazines and the like, that many individuals find it very difficult to quit smoking. But there are individuals as well who as a personal choice continue to smoke.
Q	Would you agree with me that people who
are addicted to a substance are less able to fully appreciate information concerning the harmfulness of that substance?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I am not a specialist in the field of medicine and addiction. I can't speak in that field.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q You have talked about common knowledge, right?
A Yes.
Q It is pretty common knowledge that addicts engage in what is known as denial, isn't that true?
A Common knowledge in terms of addiction is, i think, widespread. You are asking a question in terms of denial which is a facet of simply more than addiction, it is a term that might be more appropriate for a psychologist, someone in that field. And I.hesitate to deal with those terms.
Q	All right, put it this way, you certainly
are not going to testify at trial that the fact that people are addicts has no effect on their ability to understand or comprehend statements about the health risks of tobacco?
A I don't understand your question.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Would you read it back?
(Record read.)
THE WITNESS: I will not be testifying with regard to people who are addicts, and I think that's the purport of the question that I see that you asked.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Well, what my question is, do you believe
that you are going to -- you are going to offer an opinion that addiction has no effect on the awareness of the person addicted, are you going to offer an opinion on that subject?
A	I am going to offer an opinion that the
health risks of smoking, including that of addiction, has become part of common awareness and that would affect individuals who also allege to be addicts.
Q	Let's --that wasn't my question.
Are you going to offer an opinion on whether people addicted to smoking are not affected in their awareness by that addiction?
A That is a realm of medicine, psychology, that is beyond my expertise.
Q Okay. In drawing your conclusions, how do you make the distinction between people making a choice to smoke and people who -- knowing the risks, and people who are unaware of the risks and smoke for that reason?
MR. ALLINDER: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: You look at the materials that have been published in the various places which I have referenced on page 2, and there is reference to individuals in both categories.
There are individuals who write letters to doctors, tell them they enjoy smoking, they have made a decision and nothing will change, and there are those who believe they are addicted.
So you get a feel from reading the materials that there are these two.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q I think my question may have been a little hard to understand.
What I wanted to know is do you make a distinction between people who smoke because -- they smoke in the face of the risks that they know, and people who smoke not realizing the risks, are you
able to determine that?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: There is no way to determine with respect to the individuals to which you are pointing. I am giving a trend which I have seen in terms of the literature which suggest that when you read the literature over a period of time there are individuals who choose to smoke and there are individuals who attempt to quit smoking.
And these are referenced in terms of the literature.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Let's talk about this, the nature of the general awareness. what would you say was common knowledge about the health risks associated with smoking in the 1950s?
A	In the 1950s you have an explosion of
information with regard to scientific studies which had been -- which were made.
Q Again, I don't mean to interrupt you but I don't think that's responsive.
I am just asking you a pretty simple question is, what do you think was common knowledge
in the 1950s, what about cigarette health consequences was common knowledge in the fifties?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: By the 1950s, cigarette smoking can lead to a shortened life. There are articles with regard to athletes and their ability to perform well.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Again, Doctor, I don't mean to interrupt you, but we will move a lot more quickly if you just answer -- Mr. Allinder is a good lawyer, he can bring out extra information if he would like to.
I just asked the straightforward question, not what the exposure was or how people now it, my simple question is, what diseases caused by cigarette smoking -- strike it. What I want to know is what you believe the common knowledge was about health risks associated with smoking in the 1950s.
A	In the 1950s - -
MR. ALLINDER: Excuse me just a second.
I don't want to quarrel with you concerning your characterization of his prior answer, but I think he was trying to be responsive to you and we will let the witness
take another shot at it,
MR. FITZPATRICK: Okay. I don't want to quarrel about it, we did raise this ahead of time, as you know.
MR. ALLINDER: I know that.
MR. FITZPATRICK: And I refrained from going to the judge on assurances that we wouldn't have this problem.
Now, when I ask what's common knowledge, I don't think it is responsive to tell me what some athlete did. I have a specific question in mind.
I want to know is the -- I thought it was clear -- I want to know what was the common knowledge, what diseases did everybody know were caused by cigarette smoke in the fifties.
.	MR, ALLINDER: I don't want to continue
this debate either. I think that the answer that he started to give you was responsive, and perhaps as you have restated it and maybe he understands it better and he can get at exactly the information that you are trying to elicit from him.
THE WITNESS: May I answer?
MR. ALLINDER: Yes.
BY MR, FITZPATRICK:
Q Yes.
A Cigarettes will stunt your growth, common knowledge.
Q	Do they stunt your growth?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form, -
THE WITNESS: I, I, I don't deal with the truth or veracity, as I indicated to you before.
Cigarettes will stunt your growth.
Coffin nails, COFFIN, nails, which refer to a wide degree of problems, it is going to kill you, that term was widespread by the 1950s.	,
Fag fiend by the 1950s, which meant an addictive nature to cigarettes.
Tobacco heart which was widely used in the 1950s to describe a whole host of maladies.
I would say by the 1950s, before the effect of the studies that were being done in the fifties were finished, those were common knowledge.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	What would you say was common knowledge
about the health risks of smoking in the 1960s?
A	By the 1960s lung cancer, heart disease,
circulatory ills, shortened life, and the beginning of a common knowledge with regard to smoking and pregnancy.
Q You think this was common knowledge in the 1960s?	;
A It began - -
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form. This
is?
MR. FITZPATRICK: what he just said. I want to make sure that I got -- that he understood what I was asking.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Your testimony is that it was common knowledge in the sixties that cigarette smoking caused lung disease, is that right?
A	It was common knowledge.
Q	Lung cancer?
A	Yes, lung cancer, heart disease, I
indicated circulatory ills and I indicated as well the beginning of common knowledge relative to
smoking and pregnancy.
Q	This was at a time when the tobacco
industry was vigorously disputing the conclusions reached by the Surgeon General, isn't that correct? MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form,
THE WITNESS: This was at a time when the tobacco industry did argue with respect to the Surgeon General's report that more research needed to be done, this was at that time, yes, sir.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Is it your testimony that by the 1960s the population in general was able to filter out and decide who was right and who was wrong on this, what the tobacco industry then called a controversy?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: My testimony is that according to the polls at the time and the literature at the time, which was being disseminated, that the information that was coming from the Surgeon General and public health officials was drowning out the information which was being disseminated by the tobacco industry.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Not taking into account advertising by the tobacco industry?
A	I did consider advertising
MR. ALLINDER: Excuse me. I object to the
form.
Go ahead.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	You did?
A	I did look at advertising as I looked
through all of these materials.
Q Maybe I misunderstood your testimony earlier. I thought you had not done that.
A No. You asked me whether or not I could make certain conclusions based upon it and I did take issue with that. You didn't ask me whether or not I did look at advertising,
Q So you did review advertising?
A	Yes, sir, I did.
Q	But you didn't, you didn't have the
expertise to draw an inference as to how that affected the common knowledge of the mix of information or the common belief of people?
A	Well, I had expertise as a historian with
respect to advertising. First of all, my attempt in terms of research was to ascertain smoking and health information which was being disseminated.
And the smoking and health information is not disseminated in advertising.
And certainly by 1955 the Federal Trade Commission forbade the tobacco companies to deal with health matters in advertising.
Secondly, I looked at advertising with regard to education which was being pursued at this time and earlier which taught kids in schools to be very wary of advertising.
So I did not rely upon advertising as a source of smoking and health information.
And lastly, in the Engle case I did a random study looking at newspapers I had examined in the Engle case to ascertain whether or not there were advertisements and whether these advertisements overwhelmed in sheer numbers the smoking and health articles that were being disseminated in a sample of newspapers, and I found to the contrary, that the smoking and health advertisements or the smoking and health articles far outweighed in sheer number those of advertising by the tobacco companies. .
Q	Did you review magazines when you did
that?
A	I did not review magazines for the Engle
case in large part because the plaintiffs read newspapers and very few magazines.
Q Have you reviewed magazines in preparation for this case?
A Yes. And I have indicated I think with regard to those magazines which were reviewed in terms of my production list.
But the newspapers were far and away the most important source.
Q	There are many, many, many, many
advertisements for cigarettes in magazines, aren't there?	,
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know how to answer that, many, many, many.	.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q There are a lot, aren't there?
A	My experience, I am an avid reader, the
magazines that I read have very few advertisements.
Q What about the magazines that teenagers read, do you take those into account?
A During the period of my looking at magazines with regard to preparation for this case I did not read teenage magazines*
Q I apologize to the extent this is repetitious but I want to make sure we get it right.
Can you tell me everything that you rely on in reaching your conclusion that the health risks of smoking were and are common knowledge? I want an exhaustive list,
A And the exhaustive list since we have it in front of me is on page 2 of my expert report. If you would like to go through that I would be happy to do it.
Q No, my question is, I guess, and I should have made it clear, is there anything more than what is here.
A	No.
MR. ALLINDER: And, of course, for the record, we know that there has been a reliance list provided for this witness.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes. I am really looking more substantively,
MR. ALLINDER: I understand.
Q If you can tell me other than the things that you have listed here, have you done any other work to determine what people know as opposed to what they were exposed to?
A	I think I have provided that in the
reliance list which you got, the 300 plus pages.
And at this point that represents the material on which I have relied.
MR. ALLINDER: Let me interrupt. I want to make sure there is not a misunderstanding about this.
Dr. DiBacco has reviewed much material as is indicated in his expert report, some of which is listed in his reliance list that we have provided to you which at the present time contains the individual documents that he intends to or may include in his testimony at trial,
But there certainly is the larger body of materials that he has reviewed as is indicated in hie expert report which is greater than the reliance list itself.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I understand that.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
MR, FITZPATRICK: It is the material on which Dr. DiBacco bases his opinion is generically of the type that is described in the report?
MR. ALLINDER: I think that's what he said, right.
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. FITZPATRICK: And with the exception of, I am not sure whether the subscriber depositions are referenced in here, but I would take them as included.	-
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q And my question is other than that, other than the subscriber depositions and other than the material generically listed in here, is there anything else that you have relied upon to come to the conclusions about general awareness or common knowledge?
A	I try to be very careful, Mr. Fitzpatrick,
in my expert report to designate on page 2 and page 3 that I have relied upon my education, teaching and experience of 34 years which I can't quantify on the reliance sheet, as well as the specific issues which are. contained in terms of the reliance material
which are drawn from those specific areas which I mention in terms of the top of page 3 there.
Q Fair enough. That general experience includes the fact that many, many, many people continue to smoke, in the millions, am I correct?
A That's general experience, yes, sir.
Q And it is fair to say that the tobacco industry has sought to encourage people to continue to smoke, am I right?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Everyone who sells a product from common sense point of view, I am not an expert in terms of marketing and the like, would encourage people to buy their product BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q And you have read materials, you have seen ads and you have read the articles or statements by the tobacco industry that tend to downplay or deny the health risks associated with smoking, correct?
A	I have, and I found that those latter are
minuscule compared to the materials which are presented about the health risks of smoking.
Q	You have seen the tobacco industry has
done that, I am not asking about the quantity, they
have done that, is that correct?
A	Yes, And I have indicated how that has
been done relative to disputing the matter of only the statistical association with lung cancer as well as the demand for more research and the search for scientific causation.
Q	And further they denied, outright denied
that smoking was addictive, isn't that correct?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: The tobacco industry given the point in time, you didn't give me a point in time, you just indicated generally.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Let's say any time up to and including 1995 did the tobacco industry ever admit that smoking was addictive?
MR, ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: The tobacco industry did not to the best of my knowledge make that statement. The Surgeon General made it in 1988.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	And it is fair to conclude that the
tobacco industry in arguing that there is need for
more science or that it hasn't been established that lung cancer is caused by smoking or that cigarette smoking is not addictive, they have a point when they do that, there is a reason for why they do that, isn't that true?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, you are asking me to become an industry expert and I am not.
I can tell you that from my reading of the literature that the term addiction has been defined in one of two ways. One term is that you cannot stop, and the other term is it is very difficult to stop but many people can stop.
My experience has been as a smoker that you can become addicted, we didn't use the term addicted, we used the fag fiend as I recall in the 1950s, but that you can quit so I think there is disagreement as to how you define addiction.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Still, I am asking you, you are an expert
on common knowledge, you are an expert on the culture as a whole, you have read a great deal of
material on the subject of smoking and health, you have read a great deal of material by the tobacco companies on the subject, my question is, why do you think the tobacco industry continued and continues to this day to question the link between smoking and, let's say, lung cancer,
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form,
THE WITNESS: You are asking for their intent and I don't know the intent of the tobacco companies.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:	.
Q	You can't draw the inference that they are
doing it to persuade smokers or to alleviate the fears of smokers so that they will continue to smoke?
A	No. You are dealing with intent, I have
no way of dealing with that.
MR. ALLINDER: Excuse me, I object to the
form.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	You can't sitting here just make the
common sense inference that the reason why the tobacco companies question or contend that there is not a link between smoking and health is because
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: As I indicated to you before, my understanding of what I have read through the literature of the tobacco industry's position is that the tobacco industry takes issue, took issue early on in the 1950s with the statistical correlation, urged more research, did not argue that smoking was safe and urged further research as well as the seeking of a scientific causation. >.
So that's my understanding through my reading of the literature what the tobacco industry was doing.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q That's your understanding in the context of your other understanding that there was an overwhelming body of information that smoking caused health risks and that everybody else was aware of it, right?
A There was an overwhelming public health as well as other avenues which suggested, made very clear to the general public that there were smoking risks, that's correct.
Q So everybody was aware of this except the smoking companies, except the tobacco companies, is that your testimony?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: No, that is not my testimony.
My testimony is that the public health community and many other areas of American life from early on pointed to the health risks of smoking. The tobacco company position was that there should be more research because the statistical correlation had been made and not scientific determination.
The tobacco industry in my reading of the materials did not indicate that smoking was safe.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	And my question is are you not able to
draw an inference as to why they did that in light of what the Surgeon General was saying or what in light of what other health authorities were saying, why?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: You should ask them. I am
not an industry expert.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q But it is pretty clear, isn't it, that they did it to persuade people to smoke?
A	I don't know.
MR. ALLINDER: Same objection.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Would you agree with me that the degree of
awareness is affected by the quality of the information that is provided to the public on any subject?
A I would say quality and quantity.
Q And it is affected by the source of that information, is it not?
A	It can be,
Q	Certainly if the Surgeon General says it
it carries more weight than if you or I published an ad saying that cigarette smoking is dangerous for you?
A Polls reveal that indeed the Surgeon General's stance with regard to health matters is viewed very seriously by the public.
Q	Would you agree with me if the
manufacturer of the product made the statement that
cigarettes caused lung cancer, that that would produce a higher degree of awareness in the general public?
A	I don't know with regard to the I the
awareness which is so widespread. I think people look for information with regard to products from many sources. The manufacturer is one source. But the individual looks to many sources for information. I don't know that with regard to smoking.
What I do know is that there is a vast body of information which has been disseminated and become part of what I call common awareness with regard to the health risks of smoking.
Q But you also testified that that has been an incremental effect, is that right?
A	It is incremental, no doubt about that,
and the incremental aspect of it would really start before we have the plaintiffs in existence. In other words, you don't have a Blue Cross in the first part of the 20th century but you do have already because of tobacco products the beginning of this common knowledge.
0	Let's look at this issue of, the knowledge
becomes incremental. And so to the extent it is becoming incremental what we are really saying more and more people know more and more about the subject, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And I think you have already testified that the numbers of people and the degree of knowledge grew over the fifties and sixties and seventies, correct?
.	MR. ALLINDER; I object to the form,
THE WITNESS: I think that's a fair -inference relative to the amount of material that was coming out.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Now, in 1964, let's just assume for a moment that rather than contesting the Surgeon General report, the tobacco industry publicly stated that their product caused lung cancer, caused emphysema, caused heart disease, would that not have increased the awareness and made a greater degree of awareness possible at an earlier time?
MR. ALLINDER: objection.
THE WITNESS: That's speculative. I can't deal with speculation. That's speculative,
hypothetical.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q You are drawing conclusions as to how people were aware by virtue of what was said and by whom?
A That's correct.	,
Q I am asking you now, you can't draw an inference whether the tobacco companies themselves, manufacturers of the product, if they had come out and said, this product kills, this product causes lung cancer, that that would not have had an effect on the general awareness of the public?
MR, ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I don't know, because of the fact that so many individual other sources of information are coming out which tells you it is bad, and it is also clear from reading the newspapers and doctors' advice columns, and people writing in that people say, it really doesn't matter what you say or anybody else, I am going to smoke.
So I don't know. You are asking me a hypothetical, speculative question.
Q I am not asking you what their conduct would be, I am asking you about what their level of awareness would be and the level of common knowledge would be. And had the people who actually made the product, who stood to gain if people bought it and to lose if they didn't, had they come out and said, this product causes lung cancer, would that not have increased the degree of awareness in the society as to the risks of smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't know. That's a could have/would have/should have question. I can't answer that.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Is it common knowledge as to the degree of risk of incurring, for example, lung cancer from smoking?
A	The degree of risk --
Q	Do you know how more likely a smoker is to
incur lung cancer than a nonsmoker?
A	From the literature that is being
disseminated, and it is not necessarily always the same, but it is a, many times that of a nonsmoker.
disseminated in the materials and often the risks are couched with respect to other factors in a person's life. For example, one of the newspapers read, "Smoking and on the Pill, Write a Will," that's the title of a newspaper article.
So these risks are not necessarily-delineated by any specific quantification.
Q	Do you know how many times more likely a
smoker than a nonsmoker is to get lung cancer from smoking? I am sorry, let me rephrase that.
Do you know how more likely it is that a smoker will get lung cancer than a nonsmoker?
A Well, from the literature that I have read, it ranges from the statistics I have seen quoted from five to ten times more likely. And it is not necessarily one or the other. I have seen a wide variety.
Q Do you believe that that is common knowledge?
A I believe that people know that there are risks.
Q	I am just asking you a specific question.
A	Yes.
Q	Please answer my question.
A	Right.
Q Do you believe that it is common knowledge among smokers, or the people, the population at large, that if they smoke they have a five to ten times as much chance of getting lung cancer than if they don't smoke?
MR. BAILEY: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't know if they know that specific figure but I think they do know that there are a multi-fold risk.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q You would agree with me that tobacco companies know that information, right?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Do you seriously doubt that they know it?
A	Again, you are asking for speculation. I
don't know.
Q	Do you know how more likely it is for a
smoker to get emphysema than for a nonsmoker?
A	What I have read in terms of the
literature is that about 85 to 90 percent of all emphysema cases are found in smokers.
Q Do you believe that that is common knowledge?
A I believe from the reading that I have done that individuals know that there is an increased risk. The specific percentage, I don't think that's probably known commonly.
Q Do you know whether the tobacco industry has ever revealed to the public at large that 85 percent of emphysema is caused by smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't know that,	.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Do you know whether they ever revealed to the public at large that a smoker is five to ten times more likely to get lung cancer than a nonsmoker?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection,
THE WITNESS: 1 don't know that.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Do you know the increased risk that a
smoker has of incurring heart disease?
A	Again, from reading the literature, it
varies, depending upon other factors in the person's health, whether they have other maladies such as
diabetes, if they had diabetes, it would be increased, but it is several times that of someone who does not smoke.
Q Do you know whether that information is common knowledge?
A I believe what is common knowledge is that there is a greater risk. The specific percentage in terms of times, I don't think that's so.
Q	And again, are you aware of the tobacco
industry ever informing the public -- well, let me rephrase that.	-
Are you aware of the tobacco industry ever telling the public that there are diseases associated with smoking? Have they ever told the public that?
A As I indicated before, I know of, at this moment in looking at, thinking about the literature which I have reviewed, the tobacco industry statement is that which I indicated earlier and therefore the answer to your question is no.
Q And I know we had a colloquy about this, but just to be sure, you will not testify, you do not plan to testify presently that the Blue Cross subscribers were any more aware of the dangers of
smoking than the public in general?
A At this point I am going to, I have indicated that I will testify that Blue Cross/Blue Shield subscribers had an additional layer of that awareness. That doesn't mean in terms of any sort of sophisticated formula or quality assessment, but they had an additional layer of awareness. That's what I am arguing.
Q	Okay. But -- and I am sure your counsel
will advise you that it is important that you answer this specific question.	.
A	Okay.
Q	Okay.
I understand that will be part of your testimony. My question is a little different.
I am simply seeking to confirm that your testimony at least at this point you do not intend to opine that subscribers of Blue Cross are more aware of the health risks associated with smoking than the public at large, is that correct?
A No, that is correct.
MR. ALLINDER: Vin, how long do you intend to go before lunch?
MR. ALLINDER: I need a short break soon if you intend to go for a while,
MR. FITZPATRICK: I hear you, I hear you. THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record. (At 12:24 p.m. a luncheon recess was taken.)
AFTERNOON SESSION 1:16 p.m.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are on the record. You may begin.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK;
Q Good afternoon, Dr. DiBacco.
A Good afternoon, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Q	Did you in your gathering of materials on
which to base your opinion consider any information disseminated to doctors by the tobacco industry?
A I had no way of considering such materials so I did not consider any of those materials, no, sir.
Q Did the tobacco companies or any of the attorneys inform you that the tobacco industry did send such materials to doctors?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: No, never mentioned that, never came up.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Would you agree that it would be relevant
to your testimony as to the degree of awareness to know what information was being disseminated to physicians by the tobacco industry?
A It would be one source of information. It would be a source of information that would be considered along with the others. That would be a source of information, yes, sir.
Q	In your report you mention wellness
programs or educational programs engaged in by Blue Cross with their subscribers relating to smoking and health, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Are you aware that insurers in general engaged in those activities or attempted to engage in those activities?
A I was aware through the reading of the literature that there were many, many groups of which insurers were a part in terms of advising their subscribers about the health risks of smoking and offering certain incentives for them to quit.
Q	Did you come across any documents that
indicated an attempt by the tobacco industry to pressure life insurers and health insurers to refrain from engaging in such educational activities?
A No, sir. The only thing I came across was I believe in reading the complaint which your
company filed, there were references to that.
Q But you were not provided by defendants with any documents that would reflect those activities by the tobacco companies?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Remember, I'm going into the public realm, that which is public, and therefore I dealt with all those records from newspapers to books to magazines that were in the public arena. So I was not provided with any private documents, no, sir,
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Have you ever been qualified as an expert to testify about common knowledge on any subject?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: In terms of -MR. FITZPATRICK: Excuse me.
What is the problem with that one? I will correct it if there is a problem.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay, You are, if I understand your question, and this is where I am not sure that it is clear either to me or to the witness, are you asking Dr. DiBacco what his understanding is with respect to a ruling
by any court as to his qualifications as an expert to testify by opinion evidence or opinion testimony on the subject of common knowledge?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes, that's right.
MR. ALLINDER: I don't think your question was that clear.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Fair enough, that's why I question you.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q So with that amendment, my question is have you to the best of your knowledge ever been the subject of a court ruling that you were qualified as an expert to testify on the subject of common knowledge among the American public.
A To the best of my knowledge, I have no knowledge of that,
Q	And prior to today have you ever testified
in any forum about the common knowledge of the American people on any subject?
MR. ALLINDER: I am going to object. You want me to explain again?
MR. ALLINDER: I think your question is intended still to look at his testimony as an expert witness in a smoking and health cases.
I	don't think your question is so limited.
MR. FITZPATRICK: No, I am sorry, I meant it to be broader than that. I wanted to know,
I	am looking at his qualifications to testify about common knowledge. And my question is:
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Have you ever testified in any forum on the subject of the common knowledge of the American people?
MR. ALLINDER: Objection. Testified in any forum, judicial, regulatory, administrative proceeding, is that the idea?
MR. FITZPATRICK: I mean anywhere, any testimony whatsoever.
MR. ALLINDER: But you are seeking to distinguish by your question any publications or speeches that he may have had as a historian over the years about matters of common knowledge to the American public?	,
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes, I will ask that
next.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
MR. FITZPATRICK: What I am addressing my question to is testimony. And I am including in that any kind of testimony, regulatory, court, whatever.
MR. ALLINDER: Trial, deposition?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Any.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Have you ever testified prior to today on
the subject of the common knowledge of the American people on any subject?
MR. allinder: Objection,
Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: Only as it related to the plaintiffs in the Engle case. There was some reference to that.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Have you written, have you published any
peer-reviewed articles on the subject of the common knowledge of the American people about any subject?
A I have written peer-reviewed articles about the common knowledge of specific groups of the American people about certain topics.
Q	Let's start with the topics. Do any of
those include tobacco?
A No, sir.
0	Or health risks associated with tobacco?
A They do not, to the best of my knowledge.
Q Can you tell me what groups you have written about?
A	My doctoral work was in the field of
attitudes with respect to dissertation on American business attitudes toward certain government programs. And that dealt with the issue of what they knew and how they attempted to deal with what they knew in influencing the American government.
My master's work, like my doctoral work, also dealt in that, I dealt with newspapers in colonial America attempting to find out information about a colonial figure by the name of Thomas McKean who lived in the area of Delaware in Philadelphia.
Most of my peer-review articles deal with attitudes, knowledge of the specific groups. For example, I did articles on American business magazines' and newspapers' reaction to the Vietnam war. I did articles with regard to certain facets of, of reaction the American, certain facets of the
American population's reactions to new inventions in terras of how they reacted and what their beliefs were.
In addition to peer-reviewed articles, I have done many articles for newspapers which have looked at the reaction of the American people to, again, certain products which have been produced, products ranging from the microwave oven to electric light bulbs. Much of my work has been in the field of what we call social history which is the reaction of people to things in their everyday life.
Q Have you written on the reaction of people to tobacco, to cigarettes?
A I have not done specific work with regard to, to the best of my knowledge, with regard to American people's reactions to tobacco and cigarettes. The only thing I can recall at this point is that I did do an article a number of years ago in which I pointed out how there were in the 19th century and even earlier in the 18th century some groups which attempted to sell tobacco products for therapeutic purposes, that it would be medicinally good for you,
And I do recall I have a chapter in my
book entitled Made in the USA, a chapter on William Byrd, II of Westover who was an early Virginian who also promoted therapeutic use of tobacco in 17th and 18th century Virginia.
Q What do you consider your expert credentials to enable you to render an expert opinion on the common knowledge of the American people?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I consider that I have for 35 years been one of a group of historians -using newspapers and periodicals and similar sources which are identified in my expert report to fathom aspects of everyday life.
I think I have done that in terms of my peer-reviewed articles.
My first peer-review article which appeared in the Harvard Business History Review, the editors said, this is a fascinating article but we have never published anything which is based so much on newspapers and magazines. They finally published it.
And since that time there has been a growing body of scholars working in the field
of attempting to recreate American life and popular attitudes as revealed by study of newspapers and magazines and media to which people have been exposed.
That field is deemed social history,. I read an article in the Organization of American Historians the other day which pointed out that this is one of the leading fields among students and scholars today.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q Prior to your -- strike that.
Have you ever made a study of the tobacco
industry?
A I have never made a study of the tobacco industry. I have referenced the tobacco industry, as I recall, in my textbook, History of the United States. I have referenced the tobacco industry only as one of the several industries which emerged in the late 19th century in my book, Made in the USA. But these were all references as opposed to any detailed analysis.
Q	You haven't taken, undertaken a study of
the behavior of the tobacco industry in dealing with the subject of smoking and health from the 1950s to
date?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form,
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Have you?	.
A No, I have not done a study of the tobacco industry in terms of the period from the 1950s to the present, only as that material was revealed to me through the newspapers and magazines that I surveyed and other materials.
Q	Prior to your initial retention by the
tobacco companies to act as an expert for them in I believe you said 1995?
A	Five, that's correct, sir.
Q	Had you done studies concerning the
attitudes of the American people about cigarettes or smoking and health?	1	,
A I believe I had done articles which referenced coined phrases such as fag fiend, coffin nails, paper pipes, which was the first time one way cigarettes were referenced. I think I had done some reference only in terms of, of looking at some coined phrases, but with no specific focus on this industry in terms of a focused analysis, and other than the references I gave to my textbook, Made in
the USA, the other book, but, no.
Q Just to clarify one thing, when we are talking about a fag fiend, fag is used in that term to mean cigarette, right?
A	Excuse me?
Q Fag means cigarette in that context?
A That is correct, absolutely, yes. That's a term that was common in the 1950s and it should be very clear that's the only reference. But that term was widely used in the 1950s and I was a young person in that era and that is the term we used and it was not "pejoratory" in any sense of the word.
Q You mentioned earlier, and I forgot to follow up on it, that you had consulted with Dr. Gary black?
A Greg Black.
Q Greg Black. What did you consult with him about?
A I had found by virtue of my research in looking and going through research materials that there had been a collection made by a business professor at the University of Kansas City Missouri, Kansas City. The collection was called the Peter Dart Collection. And he was a professor
in the field of mass communication and television, I think it was still in the college of business, and during his period of tenure at the university had collected many, many films.
And I thought that I would like to see those, And Mr, Dart, Professor Dart had left the university and I found that Mr. Black had access to those.
Q	And did Professor Black provide you with
substantive information or did he merely point you to the materials and let you view them?	*
A Both, in other words, he provided me with the details of how this was done and I was able to get the actual films that I wanted to get.
Q Are you, I don't mean to belabor it but I have to get it clear, are you in giving your testimony relying on anything that Professor Black told you?
A	No, not in terms of conversations. I am
relying upon the actual result, the films which are included.
Q You are relying on the materials he gave you access to?
A	That's correct.
Q Okay.
A That's correct.
Q I know that there is, from looking at your other testimony that you participated in a video made for the, or in conjunction with the University of Notre Dame, is that right?
A That's correct.
Q	Can you tell me what that video is about?
A That video is about the issue of legislating morality.
I was asked by the University of Notre Dame, I believe it was in 1996, to do a segment for what they called their Golden Dome Productions which ran on PBS. And I was asked to do a 30 minute segment dealing with how difficult it is to legislate morality.
And as part of that film we dealt with a number of issues and we had many notables there. I got former Governor Mario Cuomo to become a part o£ it, I got the head of the American Civil Liberties Union to be a part of it, Nadine Schneider, and several other professors to contribute to that, in which there was a debate as to whether or not we can in fact legislate morality.
Q	Did you yourself engage in debate on the
video?
A	1 was one of the commentators, yes, sir.
Q	Did the subject of smoking and health or
the tobacco industry, was that discussed in the video?
A	It was discussed in that, that is correct.
Q	If you can recall, can you give me the
general gist of your comments on that subject?
A	To the best of my recollection as I sit
here today, I believe what I indicated in that particular discussion or dialogue that was going on is that the best way to deal with the issue of legislating morality is not to legislate so much as to let time pass because education is the great healer.
And I gave as several examples the alcohol industry in which the consumption of alcohol today has declined, and the tobacco industry in which the consumption of cigarettes, the number of smokers has decreased.
I also gave, as I recall, although I am not for sure, the fact that education has also resulted in a drop in the number of abortions that
And I think that was the general tenor of my comments, namely, that education about alleged evils is the way in which to deal with those,
0	Doesn't that logically lead to the
conclusion that had the tobacco industry in 1964 set out to educate the American people about the dangers of smoking, that there would have been an earlier decrease in the amount of smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I think that is speculative. That is a could have/would have/should have.
What I do know from the record is that the education which was provided by the ACS, the Surgeon General and all of these groups did in fact have an impact in terms of action.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Isn't it fair to say you also know in your
expertise and your study that had the tobacco industry engaged in such action there would have been even a greater decrease?	.
A Again it is speculative. What I do know is, sir, that the cup of knowledge with regard to
the health risks of smoking was full. What you are saying would another drop have made a difference, I don't know.	.
Q Well, I am not talking about a drop, I am talking about the tobacco industry coming out itself and saying smoking causes lung cancer, smoking causes emphysema, smoking is addictive, had they done that rather than argue about it, don't you sitting here today, don't you believe that people would have heard that and that it would have reduced the amount of smoking?
A Again, it is speculation and I can't, I can't deal with that. I am sorry.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I would like to request, Bill, a copy of that video. I know from the Engle transcript that you have obtained access to it, the video Notre Dame -MR. ALLINDER; I will get back to you.
MR, FITZPATRICK: Thank you.
MR. ALLINDER: I will have to check on that, I will get back to you.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Thank you.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	I don't mean to belabor it, but is it your
testimony that the tobacco industry's position on smoking and health and their statements about smoking and health had no effect on the public awareness about smoking and health?
A No. My testimony is that the message of smoking and health was given enormous quantitative and qualitative emphasis in the media, and that of the tobacco industry was given essentially very little.
Q	Okay, but my question is a little more
specific than that.	-
Accepting that is your testimony, I am asking you if it is also your testimony that the statements of the tobacco industry had no effect on the body of common knowledge or the general awareness of the American people.
A	I don't know that.
Q	You testified that the Blue Cross plans
provided information to their subscribers about smoking and health. Do you recall which ones have you ascertained that to be the case?
A	I referenced those in my expert report.
First of all, the Empire.
Q	Let me maybe to shorten this, not to
interrupt you, other than the ones that are in the report, I am sorry, that's really what I meant to ask. Other than the plans that you mentioned in the report, have you made a study of the other plans in this case to see whether they disseminated the same type of information to their subscribers?
A Yes. And I was aided by the fact there is a book published by Blue Cross/Blue Shield entitled Wellness at Work which delineates up to the year 1982 all of the steps that had been made by Blue Cross associations across the country. And that book which was published by Blue Cross/Blue Shield in 1982 delineates those in addition to those which are listed in my expert report.
Q Sitting here today, what I am going to do is, I am sure you couldn't, I couldn't name by memory the various Blue Cross plaintiffs in this case but I am going to go through them and tell me if you have any information as to whether those specific plans disseminated information -A	Okay.
Q	-- of health risks.
New Hampshire.
A	New Hampshire did. New Hampshire's plan,
as I recall from my reading, was dissemination of American Cancer Society materials against smoking.
Q The Delaware plan?
A	Delaware had a plan called SHAPE, Safety
and Health -- Safety, Health and Physical Education, and it was so noted in the Wellness at Work book.
And it recommended that subscribers as well as employees refrain from smoking, watch their eating and, in other words, make prudent lifestyle choices, and in Delaware it was called SHAPE.
Q Do you remember when that happened? .
A	1980, '81, in that period, that's my best
recollection.
Q	Let me ask this before I go on.
What to the best of your knowledge, what is the earliest time that any Blue Cross plan in this case disseminated these types of materials, that is educational materials about smoking and health, to its subscribers?
A	The first one I can recall as I sit here
today is the Minnesota plan. They devised --
0	I am sorry, Minnesota is not in the case.
I am just trying to limit it to the -A	I am sorry, I thought it was. My
complaint had its -- no?
Q	No,
A	Okay.
Q	Minnesota - -
MR. FITZPATRICK: Go off the record a minute.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are on the record.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Okay.	„
A Okay. 1973 I found reference to one of the plans in New York if not more than one, Blue Cross/Blue Shield encouraging with the cooperation of, of employers like Prudential Life Insurance, General Telephone, Hughes Aircraft, 1973 was the first that I can recall in terms of a lifestyle change, and I believe that was one or more of those in New York because they established at the same time just a few years later their health education center.
Q	Now, going back to the New Hampshire plan,
do you recall when they first did - -
A No, I do not, not the specific date.
Q And you may have told me Delaware, I don't remember - -
A SHAPE, early eighties, '80, 81, 82.
Q Georgia, did they -A Georgia, found very little relative to Georgia materials at this point. 1 cannot recall at this point.
Q	Michigan.
A	Michigan, Michigan had a program called Go
to Health which was inaugurated, and again delineated in the Blue Cross book, 1982, which was designed to get people to recognize the need to quit smoking, watch what they eat, drink, et cetera.
Q	Do you recall when they did that program?
A Sometime before 1982. It would have been again the early eighties, late seventies.
- Q	The Florida plan.
A	Florida to the best of my knowledge, as I
sit here today, got very little material through the discovery process on Florida, so I am at the mercy of those discovery, precious little.
Q DC, District of Columbia.
A	DC, only in the sense that I was a
subscriber at the time and I cannot recall anything
from what was called Group Hospitalization at the time.
Q California Blue Shield.
...	MR, ALLINDER: Stop just a moment.
You are not meaning to draw any distinction between Blue Cross and Blue Shield in your questions, are you?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Here I am.
MR. ALLINDER: You are here, okay.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes, because for the simple reason California Blue Cross is not a party to the case, they are separate entities.
MR. ALLINDER: You have used two or three different terms before and I have not stopped you.
MR. FITZPATRICK: I did because simply there is a distinction in California because the Blue Shield and the Blue Cross sides split, unlike in the others, and in this case the only plaintiff is California Blue Shield, that is the sole reason for referring to it as California Blue Shield.
MR. ALLINDER: You got the question?
THE WITNESS: Yes, got it.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay.
THE WITNESS: As I recall, California Blue Shield was involved in the first American Smokeout, as I recall, which was before the National Smokeout which was created in 1977. California was the first state to do that.
And as I recall, California Blue Shield may have been a part of that. I believe it was. And the idea spread the next year to other Blue Cross/Blue Shield, Empire being the most notable one.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q	Without taking up your time on all of
these, do you recall, other than the example you have already given, any Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan engaging in these educational activities about smoking and health prior to the late 1970s?
MR. ALLINDER: I am sorry, part of your question was other than what he has indicated already?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Yes, yes.
MR. ALLINDER: All right.
THE WITNESS: What I already indicated.
I am trying to think, to the best of my
recollection, the Blue Cross/Blue Shield supported book entitled Take care Of Yourself, which was by Donald Vickery and James Pries which was adopted and urged to be distributed to subscribers was 1977, and the film, You Can't Buy Health, which was done by Blue Shield Association, was also 1977, so I would say with those, with what I have already mentioned, I think it would be certainly in the seventies, most of these are in the seventies, yes,
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:	.
Q And some later?
A	Many later, yes, sir.
Q	In the -- changing gears now -- in the
materials on smoking and health you have revealed -I mean that you have reviewed, did you find much references, many references to the constituents in tobacco smoke?
A	Yes. There were articles which dealt with
the constituents in tobacco smoke from the 1950s all the way through.
■ Q	Could you quantify -- do you know, for
example, how many chemical constituents there are in cigarette smoke?
A Well, I have seen numbers from hundreds to thousands. There are many.
Q	I)o you know how many known carcinogens are
contained in cigarette smoke?
A	I can recall only when I was questioned by
Mr. Rosenblatt that he indicated there were so many, I think it was 27 and the like. But I am not a, you know, a scientist.
I have read the public literature in newspapers and magazines which indicate there are many chemical constituents.
Q Let me turn it around a little bit. It is fair to say that you would not consider it part of the common knowledge of the American people as to how many carcinogens are contained in cigarette smoke, is that fair?
A	I think it is fair to say that they know
that there are carcinogens, I don't know whether or not they know how many.
0	Would the same be true of other chemical
constituents, that they know there are some but they don't know how many?
A	I think there is widespread awareness with
can be delineated by name and by number, I don't think that's the case. I don't know.
Q Do you have any opinions as to the American people's awareness of the relative risks associated with smoking?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: You have to define what you mean by relative risks,
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q How risky it is. You have testified that they know that there is a risk. When we step out into the street there is a risk of getting hit by a car. On the other hand, if you run out into a Los Angeles freeway there is a lot higher risk of getting hit by a car. So I am drawing that type of distinction in terms of relative risk.
Have you reached any conclusions as to the public's awareness of the relative risk of smoking cigarettes?
MR. ALLINDER: I object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I am not certain what you mean by relative risk. Relative to what?
My understanding from looking at the literature is that there has been more precise
refinement in terms of risk taking with regard to smoking.
In the early years when the health warnings went out there was, of course, general awareness. And now in recent years there has been more specific I think refinement in terms of what the risks might be. And those have been aided by rotating warnings on cigarettes and advertisements and things of this sort.
But I can't quantify that. I could not say in relation to walking on a freeway or not smoking in terms of three cigarettes a day or six, no,
I have no knowledge of that.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Let's just take a minute off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are on the record.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Dr. DiBacco, I have no further questions. I thank you for your time today.
I would like, and I am sure you have agreed that if Dr. DiBacco does read the depositions and does then thereby believe
himself in a position to render and intend to render an opinion with respect to those depositions, I would ask that the defendants, should we so request it, produce him for another deposition to inquire into that subj ect.
MR. ALLINDER: Your request is certainly noted for the record. And as we had discussed before each side has made some reservations with respect to their expert's review and possible preparation to offer opinions on that evidence.
As I mentioned to you, and as Dr. DiBacco has testified, he has reviewed some of the depositions. It is our intention to send to him for his review each of the subscriber depositions. When of course he has decided whether he has additional opinions to offer or if he is going to rely on that information we . will certainly make a disclosure that's appropriate. And I am sure we will be talking later with respect to all of these experts as to whether there is going to be the necessity of additional depositions of each of them for
that reason.	'
MR. FITZPATRICK: Fair enough.
MR. ALLINDER: Okay. I have no questions. And that concludes the deposition,
I	believe.
MR. FITZPATRICK: It does.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
(Witness excused.)
(At 1:58 p.m., the deposition was concluded.)
STATE OF FLORIDA COUNTY OF DADE
I, the undersigned Notary Public, in and , for the State of Florida, hereby certify that THOMAS V. DiBACCO personally appeared before me and was duly sworn.
WITNESS my hand and official seal this 24th day of June, 2000.	,
RI^^
Notary Public - State of Florida My Commission No. CC 759731 Expires: July 17, 2002
STATE OF FLORIDA COUNTY OF DADE
I, Richard Bursky, a Registered Merit Reporter, do hereby certify that I was authorized to and did stenographically report the deposition of THOMAS V. DiBACCO; and that the transcript is a true and correct transcription of the testimony given by the witness	.
I	further certify that I am not a relative, employee attorney or counsel of any of the parties, nor am I a relative or employee of any of the parties' attorneys or counsel connected with the action, nor am I financially interested in the action.
Dated this 24th of June, 2000.
Riqh^r-a Bureky	~—
Registered Merit Reporter
The foregoing certification of this transcript does not apply to any reproduction of the same by any means unless under the direct control and/or direction of the certifying reporter.
STATE OF FLORIDA COUNTY OF DADE
I, THOMAS V. DiBACCO, hereby certify that
I	have read the foregoing transcript of my deposition and that the statements contained therein, together with any additions or corrections made on the attached Errata Sheet, are true and correct.
Dated this day of	, 2000.
THOMAS V. DiBACCO
The foregoing certificate was subscribed to before me this	day of	, 2000, by the
witness who has produced a
as identification and who did not take an additional oath.
_____________________ys.3, in.w	aiaea iuy:»; i	applying 45:25
5; 373-22 74 3	actual 7:24; 103:15,21	Aircraft u 117	appreciate 59:3
30 17 24 44 24 104 15	actually 11:24; 84:5	al4:7,8	appropriate 59:19;
300 12 7 72’:7	ad 18:4,5:80:19	alcohol 105:18,19	U*22
,, , . ’7, ,,	adages 11:?	Alf 9:20	approximately 7:18 addicted45:8;59:2;	allege60:18	archival 14:10, [8 ___60:13,22;6l:l6;76:i7,18	alleged 106:4	archives 14:14,15
4	addiction 59:7,15,18;	alleviate 77:14	area 612 R I6 *n ?*-
60:12,17,2}; 76:11,21	ALLINDER 4:25,25;
.......................addictive 45:21; 65:19:	12:5; 15:23; 16:22,17:3,	areas 11-21 7i?-7QQ
444:25:45:2	75:9,17;76:4; 107:8	15;20:13; 21:15:23:16;	^' ! ’7^79'9
----—--addicts59:13,23;60:6,	24:16,20;25:11,24;27:8;	areM;,‘' m ,
_	19	29:IK;30:18; 31:6,9;	argue 67:8;78:10; 107:9
__addition 19:13:98:5;	m-	argu?d3*22
log ii	36.12,37.18,39.3,16,20,	arguing75:25;89:9
eft o- j/l	, ,	40; 14f 16,24j 4lil 1,37,	adfjai h c.c c n
l0816 __additional 19:15,19;	23; 42:6,9; 46:17; 47:20,	^OLD 5.5,5,7
32:22;47:23;89r5,8;	25;48:7,14,23, 25;49:11,	"round 116:13
o	119:19,25	13,19; 50:4; 51:11:52:6,	arrived50:19
----------------------------------additionally 9:22	11:53:18; 55:25; 56:12;	Art 44:5
'20: 64 35:22	addressing 96:3	59:5;6l:7;62:3;63:4,12,	Arthur 29:9
19; —............—------—	administrations 19:6	21; <54:6,18;65:3,9;	article 9:4; 85:6; 98:19;
m	administrative 95:15	99:18,21:100:7
administrators 21:22;	i.-Ire.in io-	articles 9:7,8; 11:25;
,3:10. --------------:--50:25:51:18	12:2, 7; 13:2.5; 39:6; 63:7
7144:2	admit 75:16	24' 807-82* 11 23 83"14•	69 21’ 24; 74:18; 96:21,
-—--adopted 115:5
. e„ &	ads 18:3:27:20,20; 74:18	89.23;90:2;9l:18;93-.6,	99 l7''^ 1^
5:13;-------advertisements 1712	16,21;94:7,11,23:95:2,	ascertan 15.2,693,18
„	14,19:96:2,7,9,14;	ascertained 108:22
;2: Of!8,9^	69 19 19 23 70 15 23-	99:10; 101:3; 106:11;	ascertaining 15:10
80,12:4	H 8: H> 70.15,23,	107;J9)21;113;5il0iH>	Rsldel6;l6.948:15
82 112:4	advertising6:15,16,18,	*)\%^ll7;7’	aspect54:7;81,9
*	frU2\	20,21; 16:7,25; 17:6,9,	aspects 99:15
8586:24:87:9	19,21;26:16;27:3,5,10;	^ t ’ , «	assessment89:7
—’-------------------29:21,24;30:12;68:3,5,	although 105:23	ft
O	11,18.19:69:2,6,9,10,	always84:23	, 3 ,,
, ___________________________13,14,25	amblyopia 35:6	^S^-To 1*2 4 11
908624	advice 35:13; 3^:17;	amendment 94:13	55:24!5&ll; 57:25; ‘
______1_______:__America 97:17	G2:17; 63:19; 74:20;
A	advise 89:11	American 8:18; 11:5;	B8:15;89:20; 97:5; 117:6
' ' A	advising 92:16	12:24; 14:22; 22:18:	Association 11:6:36:19
------------------------------affairs 22:18;24:25;26:2	27:15,16;34:2,1S;36:I9,	20;75:5; 115:8
a.m4:10;46:14	affect60;18	20; 38:19;79:9:94:17,22;	associations 109:12
ability 14:7,9:59:23:63:8	affected45:18;57:9,10;	assume 27:10; 29:20;
able ,2:18; 15:2;20:25;	60:22:68:25;80:10,14
30.24;31.II;44:6;50:10;	AFTERNOON91:2,7,8	io4 21 1068'108 17	assurances64.8
59:2;62:2;67:14;79:19;	again 5:22;9:10;25:25;	1103; 114:4 116:15 '	athlete64:12
103:14	27:9; 29:19; 30:19:31:14;	i17;5	athletes63:7
abortions 105:25	33:24; 42:14; 50:2; 55:3,	Americans 18:24; 19:14;	attempt 14:13:62:10;
__above 19:2	>0:^;13;W:22; 63:10;	32:21; 33:2; 36:9; 58:14	69:2;92:20
Absolutely 44:14; 102:8	among 48:6; 86:4;94:17;	attempted 92:12; 97:13;
Accepting 108:13	10612 24 107:13	100:9	98:22
------- access 103:8,24; 107:17	i i2;ii! 17; 117:22'	amount 82:13; 106:10;	attempting 14:19.97:17
2; according 67:19	against 22:20; 110:3	107:12	100:2
account 58:14; 68.3;	ages 42:23	amplified 35:22	attempts 14:22
; (70:25	aggravate 4215	analysis 16:20; 37:5;	attend44:6
j accuracy 41:6	ago 23 3 18 98 20	100:22; 101:24	attending 58:7
16	I across 18:25:92:19,24;	agree 15:22-27 3'2914	Angeles 117:15	attention 18:23; 55:18
| 109:12	16;3(>:14;55:21;56:23;	ai»IW>une«4:l7	attitudes 97:10,11,21;
43:24;44:3:75:20;94-14,	104:14; 11 0T5,11; 112:10;	59:21:69:7; 72:20;80:17;	coming 67:22;82:14;
18; 97:6;98; 16; 105:11,	113:2	115:10; 119:8, 21	83 17; 107 6
H; 110:13,16, 112:19;	came 91:20; 92:24	certainty 42:20	commencement 44:5
' .	Can 7:18; 22:14; 23:19;	cetera 11214	comment31.ll
Bethesda 13; 16	28:13; 30:4; 31:23; 35:21,	rKanrft fif'/	* * ► me ^
better 52:15,23; 64:22	23; 35:10; 42:15; 43:25; ■	C[)a ^ ,	commentators 105:4
beyond 30 25 60-25	44:18; 4?:8,10,14,23;	change 61:14; 111:19	comments 7:5; 105:10;
bin9.2! ’ '	51:3,15; 53:25; 54:4,56:4,	changed 46:8	106:4
9,15; 57:12,63:6,12;	changing 115:15	Commission 69:8 onl41:16:>1:5 107:16 n ,
niih.A.9	64 22,71.7,72.2,76.10,	chapter 98:25:99:2	common 8:17; 27;4;
bJo„3,«l8	S5SB3&,'
bH 47:23; 116:13	105:9,9; 110:21; 111:18;	Characterize 15:24;	57 14 19 22 5534
Black 13:12;102:16,17,	116-6,117.2	? , ,	56:7;57:8;58:13;59:10,
18; 103:8.10,18	Cancer 11:5; 12:24;	characterized 16:2	13,15; 60:17; 62:16,25;
bladder 34:22; 35:23	33:15; 34:17,22; 35:7,9,	checkl07:21	63:3,18:64:10,15:65:6,
blood 45 25	17,23,24:36:4,4,6,11;	chemical 115:24;	24; 66:3,7,9, IS, 21,25;
Blue 4:6,6,20.23:5:23;	S^iwo R-Jrfo 22-	ll6:12>21	6823' 2*7l;9:75:l8;
7:13; 18:24,24; 19:6.6,	42-3-4^ 17-4^’17 45^!children 11:12;29:17;	74:13;76:24;77:23;
10,14,14,18,25;20:11,	54^21.23; 22,23; '	30:16; 31*	9V1V
21:21;7,21,23; 31:17,17:	75 5 76 3 777 81-2'	choice 45:6,6; 46:10;	86 3,87.2,88.6,7,93.15,
32:3,12,19;33:17;34:10;	62^9 83:12 84:8 17 21	58:23:61:4	94:4,16,21:95:9,12,22;
mm Mi''	®5:loi 13; 86:6; 87:16;	choices 58:18; 110:10	Sl6 llfrj? ^
17,23;81',21; 88:24; 89:4,	,o7;7;no:3	choke433	108.16,116:15
1*927; 108:19; 109:9,	cnoKeii.j	commonly 87:7
11,13,18; 110:17; 111:14;	“ **"”24	ehoose62:9	communicated41:3;
112:12; 113:4,7,7,12,19,	car 117:14,16	chose44:2	47:2
19.21,23; 114:3,8.11.	CARBERRY 4:22,22	cigarette 11:19; 17:11,	communication 103:2
16; 11S:2,7 .	carcinogens 116:4,16,	20,18:6;26:19:28 18;	communitv 53 7 79 9
W-kS78^'8'11*'	S?,2SJK5SKSR	companies 1T:20;23:I2: ■
99-Z>. 108.16	carell5,3	66:19;76:3;80:19; 102:5,	28'9 37 9 13 15 ^9'24
Bogart 15:16	careful73:20	7;115:25; 116:5,16	69-8 25'77'4 11 24'
book 30:5; 99:2; 100:20;	carload	cigarettes 11:13,16;	79 3 3'839 8614'91 15'
102:2; 109:9,13; 1107:	carried 18:5	15:18,19; 26:16; 27:5,24:	93 5] 101:12 ‘
112:12;1I5:3	carries 80:18	Company 5:2,6,11;
books93:10	case 10:16; 11:24; 12:4,	ISiS ii^oVai-	™
both 10:4:61:11; 103:13	10; 20:15; 21:17.19, 20; ii Sl S Q H	compared 74:22
bought 84:6	22:9,10; 25:l4;47:20,21; , '	3	complaint 92:25; 111:2
brands 28.16	69:16,18;70:5,8;71:3;	c rcu" «* 10 .	Complications 35 5
break 46:11.20; 47:8;	*>6:1* >08:22; 109:6, .9;	c rcuiatory 35:7; 66:6, 24	J^C™S95”
M 25 QOO	110:18,23:113:13,20;	circumstances 22:15	eompreneno»,«
Z,	,	117.3	ched 19 2	concerning 9:12,13;
b[ "ad 2o\% W24	CBS6S 2ii9/ 25'24'17'	Crty 13.13; 102:23,24	^6J 23i
ssssr	:i2^fni:r4	civH 10421 1^,1, ^
broadcasting 14:4	IS, Ln,	Claim 6:1.; 17:12; 36:8;	75:24	’
broadcasts 15,3,7	^lo-,*)	included 120, i
broader 95:7	caUsative42:2	clarify 102 3	conehides 120:5
Broin 24:10,12	cause 37:16;41:22;42:5,	ciass443
Buchwald44:6	n 13	casS44.4	50:20; 71:8; 106:7
Buerger’s 35:7	caused 36:11:38:9:39:2;	™”.f.’	\3;
k.iik<.AoiA	Cii.ii ii.si.is.icj.n	Clear 64.15;71.16 78:24	50:10,61:2;67:4;68:16;
a	c	^76^19 8 ^	80:4;83:18;93:23;94:8;	7*:18;83:4; 117:18
Bursky 4:15	102:10; 103:17	conduct 39:8; 40:8; 84:2
SSSgZg	~4:11;7:13,
buv 74-! 5-11 s 7	41:9:45:20,21:83:11;	coined 101,19,23	16; 57:23
d j	84:8;107:7,8	colds45:13	conducting8:21:9:12;
Byrd 99.3__________________caveat 55:15	collected 1035	10:6
« ‘	Center 14:16; 111:22	collection 7:21; 12:22;	confined 7:22
century 81:22;98:21,21; 102:22,24,25	confirm89:17
99:5:100:20	college 103:3	confirmation 51:16
C4:2;65:14	ceremonies 44:7	Collier 5:9	conjunction 104:6
114'il 16 115 2	deny 74:19	14, 17; 30:4; >7:2;	E4:2,2
821' cues 16 18	depending 87:2-1	<53:16; 6-4:16; 88:14	earlier 16:4; 18:8; 2(5:5;
culture 11:8; 26:1 j;	depictions 18:5	disproportionately	5 U5.25:152:9.5^5;
27:15;30;2,9; 52:17,19;	deponent 25:9	30.16	68.14,69.12,8122
53:6;54:3,5; 56:7,15;	deponents 21:7; 23:14;	dispute 31;4	88^0,98.21,102.14,
2:15 57:9; 76:25	50:11	disputing 67:4; 75:4	.
Cuomo 104:20	deposed 20:23; 24:12	disseminated 15:13;	ear lest 110:17
19,21 cup 106:25	deposition 4:5,10;	16:13; 19:15:67:21,24;
—--------10:17,22:12,22; 23:10;	69:4,6,21;81:13;84:23;	* 12:4,17; 118:4
25; D	25:23:96:7; 119:6; 120:5,	85:2; 91:11,24; 109:6,21;	eat 112:14 ________"___io	110:18	eating 110:9
17	~	depositions 20:24;	dissemination 35:20;	editors 99:20
*	21:1l,13,14,21,23;	37’8 10j 1102	educate 106:8
Dame 104:7,13; 107:18	22:16,21,25; 23:4,12,14. ” ,	educated
dangerous 80:19	21,24:3; 25:7,14; 26:3;	dissertation 97:10	education 11 15 54 9
dangers 88:25; 106:8	48:17;49:4; 50:9,13,22,	distinction 39:25;40:6;	gn 73 ^^516 24
*	Dart 102:25; 103:7,7	SShKw".*	<7^.23; 113:7.18;
data54:24	’	... *. , u	educational 11:4:36:18
10' date 4:9,49:5; 50:9;	Jul ™ 1	d.stmguish 51:24:95:20	52;21 ;92:7,22., 10:19;
' 51:14; 53:10; 101:2;	described 73.4	distributed 115:5	114:17
111:25	designate73:21	distribution 11:15	Edward 13:6;28:22
i[24; dated 13:23	designed 112:13	District 112:23	effect 6:20; 18:6;37:16;
day 40:2; 44:19.20;77:6;	Stalled 100:22	diverse 57 11	55:20; 59:23:60:12;
100:8; 118:13	details 103:14	_	65:2*81:17:85:12;
DC 112:23,24	determination 79:14	doctor 39.22.45.23.	108:4,15
dead 53:21	determine 57;24; 62:2,4;	.	Q 1C	effects 45:14
deal 15:17; 28:23; 30:21;	72:4	doctoral 97:9.15	eighties 57:6; 112:4,17
38:15; 56:14,15; 59:20;	determined 38:3,14	doctors 35:13:36:17;	either 64:19:93:23
65:10; 69:8; 76:25; 77:3;	determining 58:12	58:5;6l:13;83:19;91:M,	election9:22
>	82:25:97:13,20; 105:14;	devised 110:22	^	electric 98:9
:20 106:5; 107:14	Dewey 4:20,22; 9:22	documents 11:17; 21:6;	elicrl 64:23
5	^l-!n?02lm i/-	diabetes 88:2,2	72:17; 92:19; 93:4,12	else 29:6; 46:7; 73:17;
:l6 dealt 2^3 93 9 97^2	dialogue 105:13	E0^041’;	™2°i»3:22
?6 16 fo4 ?8 1 ’IS 201	DiBacco 4:6; 5:14,19;	Donald 115:4	emerged 100:19
i ‘ ^ 11:> ^	13;22,24;48:15;51:15;	done 10:12; 18:10; 25:4;	emphasis 108:8
>811; yt, '	72:13;73:3;91:7;93:24;	29:6:37:5,8,10,12,25;	emphysema 33:15;
9''	118:20,24; 119:14	49:22;65:23; 67:10;	34:17;35:18;36:5;42:5;
104.24,105.2	DiBacco's 13:23; 46:22	68:14;72:3| 74:25:75:2,4;	45:22;82:20; 86:22,25;
debilitating 43:23 .	difference 33:17; 47:8;	87:5:98:6.15:99:16;	87:10; 107:8
decades 40:22	107:3	101:6,15,18,21; 103:14;	Empire 108:24; 114:11
decide67:15	different 10:2; 19:23;	107:9:115:7	employees 50:24,25;
; decided 51:5; 119:18	48:4:89:16; 113:15	doubt 16:11; 28:25; 29:7;	51:4,18; 110:9
decision 61:14	difficult 14:12:36:14;	81:18:86:18
employers 111:16
declined 105:20	45:15:58:22; 76:14;	downplay 74:19	employing 16:25
decrease 106:10,23	104:16	dozen 22:2	enable99:7
decreased 105:22	Digest J>: 19	Dr 5:19:13:12,23:46:22;	encourage 74:9,15
‘ ’ deemed 100:6	digress8:19	48:15:51:15; 72:13; 73:3;	encouraging 11115
4:2, defendants 93:3; 119:4	DIRECT 5:17; 53:15	91:7; 93:24; 102:16;	end21:4;2?:5
define 52:16:76:20;	directly 35:25	118:20,24; 11914	endeavor 18:7
117:8	disagreement 76:20	draw 50; 10; 68:22; 77:13:	engage 59:14:92:12;
defined 76:12	discipline6:23;9:ll;	79-2U, 83.8,113.6	(05:2
degree 25:4; 35;21;54:6;	10:3	drawing 61:2;83:4;	engaged 22:5;92:7,12;
56:20; 57:2,5; 65.15; 80:9;	disciplines 6:20	11710	106:22
( 81:3; 82:8,21; 84:9,16,	disclosure 119:21	drawn 74:2	engaging 92:22; 114:17
’ 19:91:23	discovery 20:19; 112:21,	drink 112:14	Engle 11:24;21:20;24:7
24. Delaware 97:19; 110:4,	22	driving 19:22	11; 25:4,14,18,20,22;
9:19; 5.11:112:2	discussed 35:11; 105:6,	drop 105:25:107:3,' 5	69:16,18; 70.4:96:17;
,18; delineate 36:23	8; 119:9	drowning 67:23	107:17
7,12,	delineated 85:8; 112:12;	discussion 33;7;50:6;	duly 5; 15	enjoy6l:13
' 1 iml	finally 99:23	formu1a85>:7	great 15:17; 28:23; 36:9;
57:14,18,72.5,100:5	find 22:24; 58:21; 97:17;'	Fort 4-14	38:15; 76:25; 77:3; 105:16
5S&,	I!*” „	forthcoming20:,?
12:63:15	Fine 64:25	forum94:21;95:ll, 15	«-22,82-21 M a 106 23
expressing23:13	finger23:4	found 12:24; 13:15;	re9 ' ' ' ’
exlent 16:12,18; 20:7,8;	finished 65:24	H: 16;69:22;74:21;	0rew 8!:9 ^
25:7; 34:15; 48:4; 71:5;	first 5:15; 22:5; 3921;	86:25; 102:20; 103:8;	ground43:2
82:2	43:5,7,45:23; 46:2,23;	111:13; 112:6	group 47:18; 55:17;
extra 63:13	48:12; 54:12.13:57:22;	framei9:l6	99:12; 113=2
eVe is o	69:2;81:22;99:18;	Franklin9 20	groups 36:21; 92:15;
eye15'9	101:20:108:24:110:21:	FranM.n9.20	96:24:97:7,21:98:22:
■ _	111:18,24:114:4,7	free28:18	lo6.p
F	fit 52:25	freeway 117:15; 118:12	growing 14:18; 99:25
——---------------------------FITZPATRICK4:19,19;	frequency 35:10	growth 656.8.13
F 65:14,14	5:18,20; 12:12; 13:21;	friend 42:25	guess 12:13; 52:23;
face 61:24	14:2; 16:15,23; 17:7,17,	Frlesll5:4	71:15
facet 59:17	front7l:12	guy 43:5.7
facets 97:24,25	27 12 29 22 3T2 13^	ful1107:2	guys 49:10
fact 9:16; 26:9; 36:10;	fully S5:23; 56:11; 59:2	---------------
37:15; 55:8; 59:22;74:5;	36:24; 38:4; 39:10,18;	function 39:7	JJ
83:16; 104:25; 105:24;	40:11,15,18; 41:8,14,18,	further 75:8; 78:11;_____
106:18; 109:8	20; 42:4,8,12; 46:11,20;	118:21	a*-w «
factors 42:2,85:3; 87:24	47:7,13,22; 48:5,10,11,	future48:20	Hampshire 109:24,25;
facuHy 22:17; 24:25; 26:2	22.24; 49:2,3,9,12,15,	fuzzy23:19	u ut -
Faa65 18'76 l8 101 19	25; 50:8; 52:5,10,12;	---------Hampshire s 109:25
102 4 4 7	53:20; 56:8,16; 59:9; 60:3,	.	r	hand 117:14
fair 14:7; 15:18; 16:24;	_____happened35:16,20;
!7 R	7,25i65.,i*66.2l 14t 17,	110:12
5!:S2«:2,S”°i9	042	{
48:23,24;49:2^57:4;74:4, 20 74:16:7S:14 23	fl«in*W	hard 21:18;6l:21
8;75:24;82:12;94:9;	76:22; 77:12,21;78:I6;	Gallup 7:15,21;8:15	Hardy5:2,5
106:20; 116:14,17.16;	79; 1S; S0:3,8;62:15; 83 3,	Gary 102:16	harmful 28:5
.	25;84:15;86:12,17;	gathering91:9	harmfulness59:3
family 25 15	87:13,20; 89:25; 90:4;	gave 101:25; 103:23;	Harry9:23
far 14:9,12;21:20;36:2; .	91:6,8.21:93:13,18;	105:18,23	Haivaid99-19
55:16; 69:24; 70:12	94:6,9,12,25:95:6.10,	’
fascinating99:20	17,24;96:3,8,10.19;	™ ,, ,Q	have/should84:13;
fashion 15 21 16 2	100:11; 101:4: 106:19:	9eneral 11 ^19.16,	106:14
frfhnmoo.u'	107:15,20, 23, 2.4; 111:6,	30:2°; 32:21,24; 33:2;	have/would 84:13;
fathom99.15	11 -113:9 11 17 114:13	34:15; 35:19; 38:16,18,	106:13
fears 77:15	22; 115:12; 117:10;	19; 46:25; 47:11,16,24;	head 104:21
Federal 69:7	118:15,20; 120:3,7	healer 105:17
f«l61:17	five85:16;86:5;87:15;	i5.22’73:18;74.4,7;	health 11:4,12,20; 15:4.
felt 43:18,25	101:14	75'2178’24; 79:21;	12; 16:14,17; 17:13;
few6:4; 22:2; 50:17;70:6,	Florida 4:12,14; 112:18,	8017 81'3'82 18 83'I3'	18:25; 23:24; 28:5,7,19:
23; 111:21	19,21 .	89:Z;92:ll; 105:10; ’	31:18, 24; 32:7; 33:3,8.
field 10:11; 16:6; 18.9,14;	focus 16:12; 101:23	106:3.17; 108:16; 111:17; >0,12,14; 35:16,17;
30:23; 31:5; 59:7,8,20;	focused 101:24	118:5	36:22; 37:11; 38:16; 39:9;
97:9.98:1°;99:25; 100:6;	fo„ow l02;15	General’s 54:13,25;	«:20,44;12;47£50:1I;
103:2	. I* r- rs	fi53<9» 11« 54.17,55.24,
fields 100 9	follows 5:16	67.9,80.22 , _	56:6; 59:24; 60:16; 62:17;
forbade 69:8	generally 37:3; 75:13	63;2,19;66:4;67:23;69:4,
in?’J	force 26:6,9,12	gehericaliy 73:4,16	5,9,15,20, 23, 24;71:8;
forgot 102:14	Georgia 112:5,6,7	74:20, 23; 77:2,25;78:20,
fifties 26:15, 20; 27:6, 24;	,	gist 105:10	22;79:8.10.22;80:22;
56;22t 24\63:3; 64:17;	I0NTI 15.23,20.13,25.11,
65 24 82 9	24; 29:18; 30:1*31:9;	given 14:8; 20:5; 25:22; '^■*7'«.W.20,925,
36:12; 37:18:39:3, 16;	75:11; 108:7,9; 114:16	,4 1Ai’?
97%	53:18; 55:25:56:12;61:7;	giving 44:5;62:6; 103:17	2WOT-2V
y 1	66-12-67 6 17- i -	108.5,4,5,7,21* 109.23,
filed 93:2	S^o^n-^o'	?T 5	110:6,6,20; 111:21;
film 13:7; 104:18; 115:6	18:76:7;77:8, 20: 78:3;	Godfrey 29:9.10	112:11; 114:18; 115:7,16;
f iItvto 1 1 'O' I	”)") 1A •	“70-1 1 1 1
Golden 104:14	118:4
indeed 80:21	intends 72:18	M'filifetime 9:12; 10:4
Indicate 7:3; 20:9; 21:5;	intent 77:10,10,17	17^18,19,21; 95:9,12,	light 79:20,22; 98:10
79:16; 116:11	intention 12:3; 19:9,12;	23;96:12,22,24; 97:6,21; likely 84:20:85:9,12,16
indicated 10:19; 18:8;	31:20; 49:20; 119:16	98:16; 99:8; 106:25;	86:21; 87:16
29:20; 31:25;40:25;	Interlm4:]6	108:16; 110:16; 112:19; limit 110:24
45:24; 48:16,52:9; 56:5;	Interpretation 9:4,13	116:15;118:14	Iimited95;5
interpreting 8:24;9:2;	known 7:16; 59:14;87:7; link 77:6,25
72.14,21,75.3,13,78:4;	r a	L16:4	,0
•	interrupt 13:10; 25:17;	knows 53:17	'
m indication 20:10;42:20	3«.62:22;63:10;72:10;	—	70:H;71:10,11.21;72:7
l7:15> individual 16:14; 20:5;	interviews 57.23	_"	listed 12:8 72 3 15
? 38:23; 41:7; 48:17; 52:22;	nremews57.«	—-------------- nsiea	n,
' 55:16;72:17;81:9;83:16	Into 58:13;68:3;70:25;	L7:6,6,7,7	73.16,109.15
Individuals 16:8; 54:8,	^7; 117:13.14; 119:6	(ack ^	LKerary 919
24-SS-17-S6-14 U-	Introduced 5:21	. . .	literature 36:18:40:2;
£4, 5J.1 /, 50.14, H,	Lakeview4:ll	M m
57:17;58:7,21,23:60:18;	inventions98:2	,	„	5^.^1,58.19,20,62.7
61:11,12;62:5,9,10;87:5	Invincible44:22	^	n
. ...large 11:25;27:23;54:15; 14,84.22;85:14:86:24;
inducing 30:12	involved 33:8; U4:4	55:22;70:5;86:5;87:9,15; 87:23;88:18;92:15;
V2 .industries 100:19	issue 9:21; 2l:9;68:17;	8<>:2i	116:10; 117:25
Industry 22:7; 37:21,22;	78:8,,8; 81:25; 97:12;	largely 10.21; 29:6	litigation 5:25
45 1Q267 4 ft 25-7’8;	I ^107x->a	larger 72:20	little 10:2; 29:7;61:20;
45:19;67:4, ft, 16,25;	Issues 34:19; 73:24;	. *	BQ lK. lfla.,n n. << ■>?
68:4:74:9,19.24:75:11,	104:19	larynx 34:23	5n«iw'ia
18 16,19,25; 76:9; 77:5;	iterated 10 23	last 8:16; 10:9; 18:22;	20^116^13
78:8,15; 79:15; 80:2;	_........._ 36:15; 51:12,13	lived 97:19
u 82:18;87:8; 88:11,13,19;	T	lastly 69:16	liver 36:4
___91:11,16,25; 92:20;	J	lasts 39:25	lives 14:22
late 100:20:112:17;	logically 106:6
	-..........jacMV,8,„	:\4:1*	5ft*8*1*4**
i	n# ■>	James 5:5; 115:4	later 33:21; 111:21;	«?:23
nclustrv $ 78.7,108 2	January 13:23:20:16	I15:13,14; 119:23	look 16:12; 1816; 20:25;
-	Jersey 4:7	latter 74:21	61:8:68:11.18; 81:7,25;
82'13‘83'9 ’ ' ‘ ’	job 46:2	Lauderdale 4:14	95:5
oi.iS.ej.y	.	Lauren 16 19	looked 7:20; 10:24; 11:2,
Influence 30:2,9,16	Johnson 5:3	Lauren 10.19	3,7.8,10,14,17,22;
'influencing 97:14	judge64:8	laws 11:14	12:20; 13:18; 14:25; 16:9;
influenza 45:12	judicial 95:15	Iawyer63:12	21:2:29:2:68:11:69:10;
inform 91:16	Julia 5:3	lawyers 12:13	98:7
23 information 10:20;	June 4:9	layer 32:22; 89:5,8	looking 7:22; 18:2; 69:1'
19:15, 20;21:3;3l:18;	jury 39:12	lead 63:6; 106:6	71:2,23;88:18;95:8;
31'7; 32:13; 34:3; 36:3,10,16;	—----—---------- leading 100:9	ioi:22; 10221; 104:4:
37:8,10; 38:16; 40:21;	|T	learning 10:4	1,7:24
18	41:2:47:2,10:51:19:52:2,	ImsImrrqir	looks 81:9
7.8:53:25, 56:5; 57:16:	~	lectured 6*9	Lorillard 5:2.6
58:6; 59:3:62:20; 63:13;	Kansas 13:13; 102:23,	eciureau.*	Los 117 14
M1 64:23; 67:21,24; 68:24;	24	left 103:7	_
1,1 69:4,5,15;78:19;80:)1,	key32:2	Legal4:13	'
15:81:7,10,13:83:17;	kidnev «-24	legislate 104:17,25;	33.24
t 86:14:88:5;91:10,24;	105:15	lot 39:12; 63:11;70:21;
92:2.3.5:97:17; 103:11;	legislating 104:11;	1I]7^
)7.3 108:20:109:7,20,21;	Kill 65.16	105:15	loudly 43:15
24; 11'9:2°.	kills 83:1!	less 14:9,12,20:36:2;	lunch 89:24
Informing 88:11	kind 50:13; 96:5	49:23:59:2	luncheon 90:6
Initial35:18; 101:11	knew3l:ll;34:10;	Iesser35:2l	lung 33:15;34:17;35:17
:19; int’u're 1,9:6	letters 6|:l 2	36:5.19:38:2,9,12; 39:2
instance 22:22	21:97:13,14	15;40:12:41:10,22:42:3
instances 22:21	knowmg 52:22; 61:4	533'58 12 84 3 4	45:21:54:21,23;66:5,20
o	in«ttt.itlAiH 11-i-u-iQ	knowledge 8:10,17;	i™cuenwtv’	22,23; 75:5; 76:3; 77:7;
(;8 nstrtutions 11.4,14.19	B:8:23:15;284,6-34 16	LEVENS0N S; '	81:2; 82:19:83:12:84:8,
*9; instruction U:ll	^:25;48:6,13;52:14.24;	Liberties 104:21	17,21:85:10,13;86:6;
InfiUffthCP 1 I 1 ‘1 (\	CA.n in	i ihfdiv Il lA	tm-i
115:17; 117:9, 23	80:16;82:3,4,4,4; 8*20;	™ _	57:14; 72:4:100:21 ’
meaning 113:6	85:9.12,16; 86:21,87:16;	noted 110.7, il?.?	order20 lH
^	88'25'89'19'10811‘	notlced7:2	oraeiiuio
JJfJUfr 57 8-1027	111:l^i 19; 117:25; 118:7	Notre 104:7,12; 107:18	organization 8:14; 100:7
iy.iy,M,(07.8, iu<!,7	mornlno s-19 20	number 7-25-11-25-	organizations 7:16; 11:4
meant 18:21; 20:8; 32:24;	morning 5.19,20	numser 7^,11./>,	*
65:18- 95:6' 109:3	Morris 4:8; 5:4,8	27.23,69,24,98 19,	original 35.22
media 1414 14-3314-	most 17:21; 26.12; 29:17;	1°4:19,105:21,25; 117:2	others 8:8; 34:21; 35:19;
Ssiw	70:13; 97:20;1H:I2:	S7^a:92*m:20
median 14-q	115:11	69.20,82.8.116.2	otherwise 25:6,43:18
medical 39:22,22	mouth 34:23.23 g\	ourselves 5:22
medicinally98:24	move48:i4;63;ii	U -__
Medicine 13:16:59:7;	movies 52:20 ~	£&*'} ■
60:24	much 52:18;53:5;72:13;	04:2;7:6,7;65:14	££ J&lo
medium, 4:9:27:5,21;	«*£***	£££58* '
members 25 15	mUm^U	SSSS	106 8; 107:6; 117:12,14;
members 25.15	16;41:23;53:18;55:25;	118:5
memory 109:18	Murrow 13.6,28.22,25,	56;12;6l;7;63:4;6s.9.	0utright75:8
mention 7:12; 74:3;92:6 ■	__:__66:12; 67:6,17; 68:6;	outweighed 69:24
mentioned 26:5:28:22;	70:17;74:11;75:10,18;	oven98:9
35:21; 9119; 102:14; «	over9:l6>2j.15:15;
109:4; 115:9:119:14	-------------24; 82:11;	S6:17;62:8;82:9;95:22
mercy 112:21	N4:2;65:14	99^0 101;3-106:11-	overwhelmed 69:20
merely 103:11	Nadine 104:22	H7;7i21 '	overwhelming 78:19,22
message 18:6; 108:6	nails 65:14,14; 101:20	Objection 12:5; 16:22;	own 23:10
methodology 8:21;9:12;	name 49:8;97:18;	17:3,4; 23:16; 27:8; 31:6: -----r—------
10:6	109:17; 117:2	40:l6;42:7;59:5;62:3;	p
Miami 14:16	namely 106:4	80:7; 82:23; 84:11; 86:8;	*_'__
Michigan 112:9.10,10	names 49:15 .	87:11,18;95:14;96:14	' ' ~
microwave 98:9	nation 18:25	obtained 107:17	P 4:2; 7:6,7
mid-1960s 54:20	national 8:14; 10:25;	October22:10	p.m 90:6; 91:3; 12010
middle 29:5	11:5; 13:15; 36:19; 114:6	off 13:19; 43:2; 46:13;	page 10:23; 18:19.21,
might 20:18; 30:24;	nationally 7:16;8:14	50:2, 5,6;90:5; 111:6,8,	22;31:14:46:23;47:6;
59:18:118:8	nature 14:8; 62: IS; 65:19	9; 118:16,17,18; 120:8	SM3,'61.10,
milestones 32:3	necessarily 84:23; 85:7,	offer 41:2; 51:3:60:11,	■ ■ ' ’ 1 '
millions 53:16;58:10.14;	>7 *	IV19	Kf“ ^
74:6	necessary 51:16	offering 92:18	Palm 4.11
mind 23:19; 25:8; 57:22;	necessity 119:24	officer 22:19	pamphlets 11:3; 195
64:13	need 7S:25;90:2; 112;13	officials 67:23	pancreas 34:22:35:8,9, .
Minnesota 110:22,23;	needed 37:25;67:10	often 35:12;85:2	10 ,,,,,
111:5	neoplasms 34 23	Old 28:14	pancreatic 36:3,11
minuscule 74:22	New 4:7; 98 2; 109:24,25,	once 12:17; 24:13	J
minute 13:20; 46:12,14;	25; 111:14,20,23	one 19:19; 26:14; 32:22;	paragrapn
50:3; 104:15; 111:7;	news 7:17; 14:14	42:2:47:18; 53:16; 55:10;	part 14.13; 16.11 19:
118:15	57:19; 76:12,12; 81:8;	17:21; 27:16; 41:12; 51:9;
Missouri 13:13; 102:24 ’ ** r 1^	85:4,17; 92:2; 93:19;	52:17,19, 21; 53:5,5, .
mistaken 20:10	2^5 85 6	99:12; 100:9,19; 101:20;	54:2 5 Kl5 l6;56;6;
%■> (	25,13 5,85.6	102:3; 105:4; 110:21;	60.17;70:5; 81:14,22,
misunderstand3Z,0	newspapers 10:24, 25;	11113 14 19 114:12	89:15;92:16; 104:18,20,
misunderstanding	14:10; 19:17:26:24;	on«s « m 4Q 7	22; 114:9,19:116:14
72:11	37:20; 39:6; 58:20:69:17,	JJJS 35.23,49-7,108.21,	^
misunderstood68:13	22:70:6 12,83^9,85:4;	6n(y ]8;25;	participated 104:5
mix68:23 S’?2 I00 4:ini 9'	34:7;37:23:50:18;55:15;	particular 13:8; 18:4;
moment 7:3,24; 14:20;	W.M. iw.-i, lui.y,	56:15:75:4;92:24; 96:16;	22:21; 28:18;32:7; 105:13
18:17;25:18;48:15; L., «	98:18; 100:18; 101:8,22;	particularly 10:9;27:15
82:17:88:18; 113:5	next 34.11,51:13;95 25;	io2:10; 112:24:113:20;	„or1u1I,.u
monolithic 15:25	114:10	116:6	P
moraiityj 04.il, 17,25;	non-tobacco 24:23	opine 57:13; 89:19	P
105:15	non-verbal 16:18; 18:6	opinion 23 2,7,13;	passed 11.14
more 19:3; 20:24; 21:19;	nonsmoker 84:21,24;	27:19; 31:4; 32:19; 33:2;	22
lU-d lO, it.,!	fJrULJUL-C a 1 .3, 1 4,7. J	«■
0=4- point 12:19; 19:23;2l:5;	produced 11:5; 12:6,23;	____________________reasonable 55:11
»:	98t	qualifications 94:2;95:8	««<>"* «:20
50.18,72.8,74,13,75.12,	product 74:12,15; 80:25;	recall 25:25; 38:5,7.10;
' ' 12; 76:4; 89:3,18; 98:19;	82:19;83:10,11,11;84:6,	?^L 40.9,93.14,	49:7; 76:18; 98:18.25;
103:11; 112:7,S	8	94:15	100:17; 105:9,23; 108:21
[<j- ' pointed 46:21;47:5;	production 7:25;70:11	qualrtative 51:25; 108:8	H0:2,21; 111:18,24;
f g. 79:10; 98:20; 100:8	£roductions ,M.l4	«*1°. >3; 89-7	1,2:7,15, 25; 114:3.5,8,
pointing62:6	oroductesi7 23-98-8	<luantHlca«oii85:8	15; 116:6
5.13; political 9;17	£ 22	quantify 73:23; 115:23;	receive48;l6
2-13; poll 7:13; 8:4; 9:19	professor 43:I4;44:3;	118:11 .	received 32:14
polling 9:25; 54:23	45:2,3; 102:23,25; 103:7,	quantitative 108:7	receiving 19:19
’ polls 7:5,6,9,11,15,15,	10.18	’	quantity 21:18;74:25;	recent 36:15; 118:6
15,15,19,20,21,22;	professors 104:23	80:13	recess 46:14;90:6
^1u11V2Vo2r7.^5m	proffered 40:20	quarrel63;22;64;4	recognize 9:10; 112:13
67:19;‘e0:21 ' ' ' ’	program 29:4; U2:10,15 qU|f^V	recollection 30:8.
0	popular 11:8; 15:6;26:6.	programs 14:5; 28:21,	W&6VIVI0*»	"5:2 3:8 9,12; 27:15; 100:3	24; 92:7,7; 97:12	9S112'l3	recommended 110:8
population 27:7;47:11;	progressed 10:9	quite 20:14	w-?? 6 7
5V22'f^L	pr°JeCted 9:25	quote 18:23,31:16	60i4;71:20; 90:5:91:4;’
populations 98:2	promoted 99:4	quoted 85:16	106:15; 111:6,8.9,10;
Porter 5:8	proper 913; 10:5,6	:-------------------------118:16,17,18,19; 119:9;
position 22:17; 25:2;	proposed 5:24	n	120:8
<; 26:2; 31:4; 37:22; 39:4;	proved 37-24	records 93:9
3:4; 78:7,79:11; 108:2; 119:2	Jreven39;2	~-------recreate 1002
possess &23	provide 21:3; 22:22;	R4:2;13:6;28:22	reduced 107:11
■3 possible 82:22; 119:12	28:7; 103:10	R.J5:10	refer 18:19; 31:14;65:15
potential 56:10	provided 71:21; 72:6,16;	’.122°:14;3,8;	reference 19:16,20;
powerful 27:6,21;29:17;	80:11:93:3,11; 103:13;	15:3,7;29:11	6l:l I; 96:18; 101:22;
4 30:2,6,9,11	106:16; 108:20	raise64:4	102:10:111:13
5.17, precious 112:22	prudent 110:10	raised9:i8	referenced 7; ll, 25; 8:5;
precise 117:25	Prudential 111:16	ran 104:15	12:25; 24:25; 33:13; 35:6;
predicted9:19	psychologist 59:19	random69:17	37:2I;54:11;6|:10;
preface 16:3	psychology 6:6,7,9,12,	ranges 85:15
! pregnancy 33:16;34:19;	14; 16;5;60:24	ranging 19:4;98:9	* ’ , ,,
66:8;67:2	Public 5:15; 10:22; 13:9;	rather 14:13;82:17;	’
_> preparation 10:16,18;	14:4; 19:16; 34:2; 37:3,6,	107:9	iicioiii
70:7;71:3; 119:12	11; 39:9; 46:25; 47:12,17,	,each 18:3
prepared 40:25	24; 48:6; 51:20; 52:3;	reached 675 117 18	,	13
preparing 239	67:22:78:22,24:79:8;	..	referring 31:15;33.11,
preparing 23.9	80:|i,23;81;4;83;13;	reaching 71.8	13,50:22; 53:22; 58:4;
in a	87:9,15;88:11,14,16;	reacted98:3	113:22
48.:o,72.ib,iui.8	89:2,21:93:8,8.11;	reaction 97:23,25; 98:7,	refinement 1182,7
presented 12.10;74:23	94:17; 95:23; 108:4;	11,13	refinements 9 24
presently 88:24	116:10	reactions 98:2,17	reflect 934
!3; pressure 45:25:92:21	public’s 117:19	read 21:12,19,21.22;	reflected 46:23; 48:2
pretty 53:14;59:13;	publications9:9; 19:4;	22:11,16,21,23;23:4,5,	retrain*)? iinq
62:24:80:4	20:6; 31:21;95:20	12; 31:16; 38:15:39:6,12;	re™n 110*
previously 5:21	publicized 8:17	40:2; 50:9.17,19:60:3,4;	"trained 64:7
primarily 29 11	publicly 14 641 3	62:8; 70:5,23,25;71:4;	refreshes 30:7
n ™ «.,R	45-20 82 8	74:17,18;76:25; 77:3;	regard 12:8; 20:6,19;
pr me4i:18	IStji Q	78:5;85:5,15:86:23;	26:2; 27:2;31:25;32 3;
printed 19:5	^btehBd9;8;6l;9;	100:7; 116:10; 118:24	38:12;40:6;55:18;57:9,
Prior 22:4,11; 25:20;	JJJJ;96:20;:99:2! .23;	reader70;22	17;5e:5,7;60:6;62:20;
40:16; 47:8; 63:23; 94:20;	ltJ9.9,li	readinn 1123-35 15	63:7; 66:7; 69:11; 70:10;
96:11:100:12; 101:11;	purport60:7	? 19 38 5 7 10 61 17	71:3:80:22:81:5,7,10,
i:23; 1,4:18	purpose 22:25; 23:6,9;	76:10! 78:14:79:15; ’	15:97:24:98:15,16;
09:18 private 93:12	41:19	83:19:87:4,23:92:14,25;	106:25:118:2
probably 8:3; 21.19;	purposely 29:23	no:2	regarding 11:12; 41:2
22; 22:2:43:5; 57:21; 87:7	purposes 98:23	realizing 61:25	regularly 43:9
1	ft	nnrciiAfj flHil 1	___ll.. aa	y____pmtnlninni nr F . n/c
reveal 80:21 , ™ ™	31:17;32:3,12:33:18;	101:17; 105:5; 106:9,10;
revealed 11:8; 23:14;	sate 78:11;79:17	47:10; 51:18.23; 89:5;	107:2,7,7,8,12:108:3,4,
87:9,14; 100:3; 101:8;	Safety 110:5,6	109:9,13; 111:15: U3:4.	5,7,21:110:3.9,19;
11516	sate 11:15	7,19,21,23; 114:4,8,11,	112:14; 114:18; 115:16;
reveals 2V8	same 12:3; 16:24;40:14,	16; 115:2,7	117:6,19; 118:3,12
,	15; 42:7,11,14:44:16;	Shield/Blue 47:17	snatch 43:2
51:19; 80:7; 84:24; 109:6;	ShooM:25;«	social 98:11; 100:6
70:2 4-99:20 11911 17	short 49:9; 90:2	Society 11:5; 12:24;
i	''2'r.oI!1	shor1en 108:25	38:20:52:22:84:9; 110:3
Sa"dy4:13	shortened 63:6; 66:6	*ote 113:22
: : J	saw1^	shot64:2	somebody 29:6
33.7,34.5,sat/in a 16*17*79-21 22'	.	,
51:14:70:7.10:72:13,21;	HRJ£	6 ?WSl5;7	soir*one 3.:4; 59:19:
88:19:115:17:11915	cm,in« 11 Q-s?	side 119:10	88.3
rouipwinn\asayings ll.9,52.20	sides 11319	Sometime 112:16
reviewing 14.3	Schneider 104:22 t	COnn<*v7
revised 48:20	scholarlv9 9	significant 14:13; 31:7	soon 90.2
ii	scnoiariyy.y	slans 4316-4417	sophisticated89:7 revision 46:22	scholars »25:100:10 17	corry 13:10:18:21;
revive 14:15	schoolbooks 54:9	slmnle 41 10 53 14'	25:17,19; 32:5:33:19,23;
Reynolds 5:10	schooled 39:22	62 24'6316-i 1312	34:12; 35:3; 50:4;85:11;
Richard 4:15	schools 69:12	simply 30:15; 3616;	' '' ' •
right 17:14; 24:20; 25:21;	science 9:25; 10:8;	59:17; 89:i7; 113:17	110.23,25.114.19
26:7:28:19,24; 34:20;	39 23:76:2	sit 105:11; 110:21:112:20	Lo.L^.omo 5' 25;
37:9;41:17;47:13; 49:12;	scientific 38:2,13; 40:3;	sittina 7722-107 10-	563f6,1,810
53:21:58:9:59:11,21;	52:19:62:20; 75:7; 78:12;	*™ng 77.22,107,10,	sought74:9
66:20; 67:15; 71:6; 73:7;	79:14	eiv,o« im t*	SOurce69:15; 70:13;
74:10;78:21;81:I7;86:2,	scientist 116:9	. . ’ ' (	80:14;81:8;92:2,3,5
14;94:6;102:5:104:7;	Scott 5:10	^	sources 10:20,22;81:8,
’ ' ,	25;56:21,24;57:3;66:19;	o.«Vi7-99-u
114:23	search 75:6	g29	v, 05.17,51^.14	|
risk 8:15:11:12:15:13;	second 819:18:22; 53:3:	sliahtlvl923	speak 43:15; 59:8
16:14:33:14; 35:16.17;	63:21	smoke 29:4 10 13 15'	6Peakin940:8
36:10; 53:25:84:17,19:	Secondly69:10	36*21,42,19 21 22*43"3	special 32:13
86:11:87:6,21;88:8;	seeking 78:12; 89:17;	9,10,17; 44:9,21; 45:12;	specialist 16.5; 29:21;
117:12,13,15,17,19,23;	95:19	58:9,10,15,24; 61:4,5,	59:6
118:2	segment 104:13,16	23,24.25;62:10;64:17;	specific 11:21; 16:16;
risks 11:20; 16:17:19:2,	sell 98:22 .	74:6,10;77:16;80:5;	30:4,22; 34:16; 37:2;
3; 28:7:31:18,24:32:7;	sells 74 12	83:22;86:5,7;88:4;	64:12;73:24;74:2;85:8,
333 8 11 12 34 16 ,,	115:19,21,25:116:5,17	23; 86:10; 87:6;88:8;
’	smoked 15:20;28:25;	«9:12;96:24;97:21;
44 12 46-8 473-50 11' , „	29:2,8,9,14;44:11,23:	98:15; 101:23:108:12;
I! 5Sl,17-^7	Seni0M4;2	46:4:53:10	109:21:111:25:118:7
55 24 56 6 11 57 25-	sense 27:4; 28:7;74:13;	Smokeout 114:5,6	specifically 19:5; 31:23;
TO.U, 11, 3/,£3,	T7'?V V 1 I	22-1 I
59:25;60:16;61:4,5.24. i l'!	smoker 53:16,24; 56:10,	3il1.
25-62-17 63 19 66:4;	sensrtlve 9:24	10;76:16;84:20; 85:10,	specify 7:24
7l:8;74:20, 23;78:20,25;	sensitivity 9:18	13;86:22;87:15, 22	speculation 82:25;
79:10;81:15;84:10,25;	separate 113:13	smokers 53:8.16; 57:23;	86:19; 107:13
85:2,7, 22;89:20;92:17;	series 13:5; 29:3	77:14,15;86:4, 25; 105:21	speculative82:24,25;
97:5; 107:2; 109:23;	seriously 80:23; 86:18	smoking 8.16; 15:4,10,	83:24; 106:13.24	■
117:5,9; 118:8	service 13:9	13.17,21,25; 16:11,14,	speech44:4
risky U7:|l	Services4:14	speeches95:21
. road 12:15,17	SESSION91:2	36:11:37:4.16:38:9:39:2,
Rockville 13:17	set 106:7	15; 40:12,23; 41:9,22;	split 113.19
role 14:22;15:10;27:10,	seven 42:25;43:16;	44:7,13;45:5,7,14.20,	spoking 45:24
13,18:29:20	44:17	21,21;46:3,10;47:3:	spread 114:10
n' luphQ.,n	seventies 57:3,6; 82:10;	50:12; 51:5; 53:11,17;	stance 80:22
112:17; 115:10,11	54:18,20,23:55:24; 56:6,	starting 15:16
•	-P■ ' -	~~-*******	start 6:4;81;t9; 97:2
Rosenbjatt 116.7	100:19; I0C2}: 105:18	^£22.61 15.M.U,	start«IK:17;«:2<;
rotating 118:9	Shannon 5:10 s Ys 20	43:9:44:17;48:l6:64:20
Rubin4:13	SHAPE 110:5,11:112:4	23’23'74:20 23'’	State 10:25; 23:14; 25:8;
supported 115 5	. ,	topics 96:25; 97:2	/G;i7i!w4
7*:21: sure 49;15;<S6:15;71 :<j;	testifying 60:5	toward 23:13;97:11	used9:6; 11:11; 12:25;
72:11:73:10; 88:23;	testimony 7:4,4,10;	tracts 1117	43:2; 65:20; 76; 18; 102:^
38;5, 89:10; 93:23; 105:24;	10:16,18; 11:23; 14:15;	Trnd<*6<X7	11,12:113:14
>083, 109:17; 11*23; 119:22	23:20; 24:3; 25:8,23; 26:3;	using99:13
Surgeon 3VI9;38:16;	MIS, 16; 4ifc5; 51:3.10;	#«lnln96.6,7,18,8.20,	---
i: 10; 54;13 25 67:5 9 22'	53:8,15; 66:18; 67:13,18;	-*
75’21' 79’21 * 80' 17 21'	68:13:72:18; 79:4,7,8;	transcript 107:17	lr
82:17; 106:17 ’	89:1'G. 18; 91:23; 94:4;	transcripts 14:5; 15:3--:-
5:11; Surgeons 38:18,19	^n^^n^Via.0^18’	,rend62;6	V5:l4
surveyed 10110	104:5:108:2,6.13,14	trial 10:18; 19:10; 20:9;	Vanderbilt 14:15
, '	textbook 100:17; 101:25	24:3,5,7,10,11,12,13;	varies 87-24
Swear 12	textbooks 11:10	31:20:59:22:72:19:96:7	^
sworn 5:16	.	.	j..,	variety 85:18
system 14:4	herapeutic 98:23:99:4 M **	various 9:8:12:23;
----thereby 118:25	'	57:10; 61:9; 109:18
Therefore 20:23; 38:12;	59.14,76.6,116.21
’	T	43 17 20 44 23-88 21-	Truman9:23	vasl 81.12
----------_	43.17.20,44.23.88.21,	veracity 41:6:65:11
talk 6:15; 21:4; 48:1 2;	therefrom 11:20	truthful 38:25:39 14	versus 4:7; 47:11; 52:2
50:15; 52:7; 62:15	thereof 27-3	trY7*20	Vickery 115:4
,3( talked 45:10; 59:10	Thereupon 5:13	trying 63:24;64:23;	^0 4:1^104:5.9,10.
talking 10:17:17:15,16;	thlnklnn 8R 1R	110:24; 114:25	105:3,7; 107:16,18
1,5 24:4,5 16,18:34:7;	Thlinutit 07 in	Tuberculosis 11:6	VIDEOGRAPHER4:4,
102:4; 107:5,6; 119:22	Tnomas4 5, 5:14:97:18	tumors34>23	13; 5:12; 46:13,16; 50:5,
taught 10:13:69:12	thoroughly 45:7; 46:10	'	7:90:5,91:4; 111:8,10;
teacher43:13:44:18	though 41:4,-43:ia	wi2X*U*i*6 11-	'if17.'1*1,20*
teaching 10:5:73:22	26:19;27:5,21;28:21,24;	P® ,S,
technical 39:25; 40:6	JSiiom	29:9.11,13,16,25:30:6,	Vietnam 97:23
1:10; teetlaoe7i.4	103.6,110.25	8,15:31:7	View23:12;46:8;51:17;
teenaSers 29:17-30:17-	*ousand* >,6:*	TVs 15:2	74:13:103:12
318 70 24 ’ ’	j ,^??aL22 * 113' :	two 22:16,22;23:24;	viewed80:23
* Telephone 111:17	thlls21;20	24:24; 61:16; 76:12;	^
K television 11:7:14:21;	tiwut.n.wiiWQ	: „	vewsil.18 19
26:6,17,24; 103:2	,W0'p8r1292	vigorously 67:4
}?■ tailing 88:14	Ik™ "»	«"»»
•	tells 83:18	!LT°1	type 52:8:71:4; 109:7;	Vincent 4:19
ten 85:16;86:5;87:15	Tobacco 5 2 6 11-	1 .....	Virginia99:5
tend 74:19	n:12; 2?6; 23:i l 24	110:18_ Virginian 99:3
.9.4. tenor 106:3	24:17,19; 28:8;29:3;37:9,	-wr	virtually 44:20; 55:8, 22
lV ’ tenure 103-4	13,15,21,22:38:8,24;	U	virtue 9:16,18; 22:17;
7:2,4; term 45:17; 52:14,15;	39:24; 40:7; 45:19; 59:25;	---------26:23:83:5:102:20
>4:4, 59:18;65:16;76:11,12,	65.20 67 3,8,16,25,	unaware6l:5	vision 35.5
12	13,17:102:4,9,10,12	undersigned 5:15	voice 43:15
0S* “‘VJSVii.	ft™***®	understands 64:22	_______
47ii-	11,15;81:23; 82:18; 83:9;	understood 66:16
2-2S-'	1r\Ait	86:13:87:8:88:10,13.19;	undertake 15:6	W
’ 39'9 42■ 2-45 10 50 13■	91:11,15,16,25:92:20;	undertaken 100:23	--------------------------------
; 51:25:52:22; 54 6,9 11:	'5	U",0n 104:22	Watki"9 118:12
22; 55:18;59:15,17,20;62:7,	7^24; lOl^^ ,2;	Unltedl00:17	War7:23;53:13;97:24
12,20; 12;^:^:1':^:25’	20; 106:7,21; 107:6; ' '	University 13:12; 22:18,	warning 17:22;28:4;
£ '	108:2,9,15; 115:19.21	19,20;44:4; 102:23;	43:l6;44:17
101 7 22 24-m^	today 6:2; 10:17; 16:4;	103:4.8:104:6,12'	warnings 17:14; 28:7;
5:6 106:18; 111:16; 113:15;	26:. 3; 49:14; 55:23;	unlikelI3:20	118:5.9
11717-118 2 7 13	56:10; 94:20; 96:11;	untruth 39:5	wary69:13
testified 5:16; 23:24;	up 12:13:55:23; 75:15;	waste 47:14
, 24:2.7.11,13.22;25:6.	91:20; 102:15; 109:10;	watch 29:10; 110:9;
’	10,13;81:16; 82:7; 94:20;	I12,20; 118:22	1N:14	112:14
25 95:11,14:96:11; 108:19;	i°aays4:9	upon 7:5;8:6,9,13; 12:9;	watehed29:l3
117:11; 119:15	told 34:17; 50:17;88:15;	68:16; 69:14:73:17,22;	wav	7v?v
15:15; lu:y; J6:15,16;
44:9; 45:10; 73:23; 95:22;
98:19;??:12; 111:21;
118:4,6
York 111:14,20 young 102:11 youngeM5:12
■ ■
■ ■ ■ . 1 -
ny name is^rnomas v. uibacco, ana i am troiessor tmeritus, witn a icialization in American history, at American University in . shington, D.C. Graduating with a B. A. (with Highest Distinction) from Llins College in 1959, I received my M. A. in History (1962) and Ph.D. History (1965) from American University where I was invited, upon ;eipt of my doctorate, to accept a full-time position in the jartment of History. I remained at American University until my :irement in 1999, progressing from an assistant professor to a tenured .1 professor. In 1977 I accepted en invitation to teach in the .versity's College of Business Administration which was present-ented in its curriculum and limited in the extent to which its idents were exposed to values, attitudes, and trends that punctuated
*	nation's history. Until my retirement in 1999, I taught lergraduate and graduate courses in the Kogod School of Business linistration that focused on the historic relationship of business, rernment, and society.
I	have published four books and more than 2,000 articles in idarly or popular form regarding American historical subjects. Many these articles have appeared in numerous newspapers, some nationally stributed, others in leading newspapers in the nation's 50 states, ly of these articles have focused on popular attitudes regarding a ie variety of topics.
My expert testimony will focus on public attitudes toward tobacco iducts in general and cigarettes in particular as they relate	'
storically to the risks of disease, death, addiction, habituation, and s difficulties of smoking cessation. I will testify that since the rliest times in America, and especially during the last 50 years, aims of health risks associated with smoking have been well Dlici2ed, have been and are common knowledge. My testimony is based t only upon my education, teaching, and research over 34 years, but
loaiowing: nauonaiiy-aiitfjuutetj aiiu oibli; iicns^a^c^, wwrw, iphlets, newsletters, and similar publications written to reflect temporary accounts of the subject matters under consideration imary sources) or books, pamphlets, newsletters, and similar lications that reflect research and provide an historical analysis of subject matters (secondary sources); periodicals, both popular and olarly; federal and state repositories and sources, with particular erence to statutes and education data such as textbooks, curricula, films used in public schools; movies, popular culture os revealed in ges, coined phrases, verse, symbols, music, cartoons, and similar plays; public opinion polls; television entertainment and television s and public service programs, and radio entertainment and radio news public service programs; government documents; religious materials; manuscript sources.
Long before cigarettes were manufactured, residents on both sides the Atlantic Ocean were aware of the health risks attributed to acco. Bartholomeo de las Casas, who was instrumental in the lection of Christopher Columbus' journals, noted that the great >lorer instructed his own sailors not to partake of tobacco; Columbus :orded that their response was that "they were unable to cease from .ng it." English King James I, three years before the Jamestown , itlement was founded, issued a critical account, Counterblasts to . jacco (1604)„ that pointed out, among others adverse health charges, it smoking was dangerous to the lungs and that coroners performing :opsies had found that heavy smokers wsre conspicuous for their oily j sooty innards. Colonial Philadelphia physician Benjamin Rush and i>lic servant Benjamin Franklin railed against tobacco usage for health ssons. By the nineteenth century, schoolbooks, and Horatio Alger's jhly popular novels for young people, urged youngsters to stay away am products such as tobacco that harmed the body. Early American
rmful substances. The stance of notable Americans added to the areness chorus: William Lloyd Garrison, the famous abolitionist, and esident Abraham Lincoln were against tobacco usage. Even the vice-Lrking John Quincy Adams confided in a letter dated August 19, 1845 to ; Dr. Cox, a leader in the temperance movement/ that he was "addicted tobacco in two of its mysteries, smoking and chewing, for many >rs." There was also author Mark Twain's famous lament about the Fficulty of stopping smoking. "Quitting is easy," he said. "I've le it hundreds of times.''
If tobacco products in the form of cigars, pipes, chewing tobacco,
J snuff ignited public awareness about the risks to health, the rise J proliferation of cigarettes by the late nineteenth century ■idified public attitudes. Petitions deluged Congress by 1892, urging
>	body to ban cigarettes. Although the Senate Committee on Epidemic teases believed "that cigarette smoking is more injurious, especially youths, than the use of tobacco in any other form," it concluded that lacked the authority to prohibit the product in states. By 1899, <ever, anti-cigarette forces were successful in establishing the Anti-jarette League, which became a potent force in getting states to :law cigarettes, enact legislation to restrict sales to minors, and sseminate educational information. Numerous other organizations, both :ional and local, were allied with the League, including the No-jacco Army, No-Tobacco League, California Anti-Cigarette League,
Lvation Army, Young Men's Christian Association, and the Women's ristian Temperance Union. From 1892 to 1930, 37 states and rritories had considered laws banning cigarettes and 16 states were lually successful in prohibiting cigarette sales.
By 1930 every state in the United States had passed laws requiring struction in schools with respect to the adverse health effects of
luded under the legislation. Many of these laws had been passed in decade between 1080 and 1890 when cigarettes for the first time had n mass-produced and widely distributed. Textbooks, many published by ding firms in Massachusetts and New York, arose to meet the state uirements, as illustrated by Trances Gulick Jewett, Control of Body Mind: Book Five, the Gulick Hygiene Series (Boston, Ginn and pany, .1908}:
. You must not smoke cigarettes. It stunts your development, ures your heart, and spoils your wind.'
. . . To go into the matter a little more precisely-what are some the most noticeable marks and signs, badges and blights of the axette smoker? . . . Marks of the cigarette smoker who has damaged body: chronic hoarseness, lack of appetite, pallor from impaired 3d, rapid and intermittent pulse, pain in the region of the heart, ficulty in breathing, disinclination for healthy, athletic exercise, dache, mental weariness, slowness of thought causing muddled ideas, active memory, impatience, irritability. No smoker endures withip self all these woes at the same time. Some of them, however, he is sly to have; for boys in every land suffer the same misfortunes from same causes.
New York state and New York City required teachers to instruct jents about the health risks of using tobacco. As early as March 10, i, a law was passed that not only made it compulsory for students in ry grade to study physiology and hygiene, but specific reference was ae made to the effects of alcohol, stimulants, narcotics, end tobacco ^ the body. Another part of the 1884 law required teachers to pass examination in these areas in order to be certified. Subsequent islation mandated that the Regents examination have questions on acco. New York City published yearly reports which stressed that alth education is a required subject in every school" and delineated tain topics on tobacco to be covered in the various grades.
A junior-high textbook (Junior Health Horizons, O'Keefe et al) lished in I960 and adopted for use in New York state was just one Tiple of the state's carrying out its awareness education on tobacco:
.e easily man one tnat 15 not irritated. inete nas never ucen any search which shows that smoking is in any way beneficial to anyone. :ently the literature contains numerous reports that deaths from lung icer are much more common in people who are heavy cigarette smokers in in nonsmokers. Why pick up a habit that is as expensive as >king? Why make yourself look common? That is what adults and many your own friends will think of you if you smoke at your age.
A study of 125 health textbooks used in elementary, junior high,
1	high schools during the period from 1915 to 1955 indicated that the ;t frequently cited subtopic (112 of 125 books) dealing with tobacco erenced its qualities as a "poison, nicotine, narcotic."
Popular periodicals such as Reader's Digest, touted as "The Id's Largest Circulation Magazine," began an even more sophisticated ack on cigarettes by the 1920s. In November 1924, Reader's Digest ried an article that concluded that smoking led to numerous maladies, haps no other best-selling magazine was more consistent and tinuing in its anti-cigarette focus, providing readers with gestions on how to quit smoking {February 1935, August 1938), licting nicotine as a poison (December 1941), and pointing to the gested relationship of smoking to cancer (December 1952).
By the 1950s, a series of studies heightened public awareness over issue of cigarette smoking and disease, specifically, lung cancer. 1950, Evarts A. Graham, a St. Louis chest surgeon, and Ernest Wynder, tedical student, attracted national attention in an article in the irnal of the American Medical Association) noting that lung cancer ients they surveyed were almost all heavy and longtime smokers. (In i6 Greater New York's Blue Cross and Blue Shield would sponsor Pr• ider's appearance in a television program dealing with "Cancer: Is it sventable?"] Then in 1952, two British researchers, Richard Doll and Bradford Hill, concluded in their investigations that the association :ween heavy cigarette smoking and lung cancer was "real." As for ieral public awareness of these developments, numerous public opinion
That widespread public awareness increased as illustrated by >ongs, movies, and broadcast media reflecting the popular mood. No tune popularized tobacco's depiction as an addictive and deadly product >etter than 1947's number one song, "Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That ligarette," which sold two million records. The title phrase was ollowed with the words, "until you smoke yourself to death." In one erse, a smoked-out and dead victim had to keep St. Peter on hold until e had one more cigarette. Cartoons, such as "Wholly Smoke" (1936), Popeye Meets William Tell" (194 0), "No Ifs, And or Butts" <1947) eaturing Buzzy the Crow, and "No Smoking" (1952), starring Walt isney's Goofy, reinforced the anti-cigarette sentiment. The latter artoon found Goofy as a heavy smoker feeling the adverse health effects f his activity and the difficulty of quitting. CBS News examined the atter of smoking and lung cancer in a two-part series in 1955, hosted Y Edward R. Murrow in his "See It Now" program, the "60 Minutes" of its ay. CBS continued to run regular news clips and features on updated sdical research. And perhaps the most popular American of the era, resident Dwight D. Eisenhower, gave the anit-cigarette movement a big sost in 1957 by offering during a news conference his own method for iving up cigarette smoking. "I really believe," said the President, if persons turn their mind to something else and quit pitying hemselves about it, they won't find it nearly as hard to quit smoking s they think it is." Physicians were also beginning to advise their atients about the health risks of smoking, as illustrated by a February , 1958 article in the New York Journal of Medicine.
During the next three years, more medical studies argued that eavy smoking caused lung cancer, and like those developments before, hese studies were reported to the American people in newspapers and agazines they read, in televisions programs they watched, and on radio
j w	e w-i.uuiuax ali ^uui j.l aunvui o f iiau UiUdUJlCU tjl“
jarette-lung cancer issue as early as 1948 when initial scientific idies surfaced. Subsequently, the magazine ran 16 different stories the subject before the first Surgeon General's report was issued in luary 1964,
Perhaps no health report in the twentieth century, or even in trican history, received as much publicity as the 387-page report,
'kino and Health, released by U.S. Surgeon General Luther Terry on uary 11, 1964. Not only did major newspapers, and even small-town s, carry the report as its major front-page headline, but icipation of the report's release provided both magazines and spapers with fodder for news stories for months earlier. Moreover,	,
earch that played a critical part in the report's conclusion been well publicized earlier, including the studies of Oscar Auerbach, a New Jersey pathologist who had looked thousands of slides of lung tissue that led him to conclude t the more a person smoked cigarettes, the greater the damage lung tissue.	.
Then, too, the message of Smoking and Health was clear: "Cigarette king is causally related to lung cancer in men; the magnitude of the ects of cigarette smoking far outweighs all other factors. The data women, though less extensive, point in the same direction." The ort was followed by not only regular updates by the Surgeon General, by efforts from various groups--from public health agencies and tes to the Heart Association to the Tuberculosis Association to the rican Cancer Society, medical societies, even dental groups--to tinue to disseminate the antismoking message. The New York State rnal of Medicine, on June 1, 1964, set forth the medical steps that sicians in the state should take in an article entitled "The sician's Obligation in the Smoking Issue." "These steps can be taken
kjj. nit; liiuutiuidLC ena iony*i.eim	euecis OZ SmOKing. XH
>68, Blue Cross Association followed in the direction of concerned lysicians by employing pollster Louis Harris to conduct a health irvey, two questions of which acknowledged the deleterious health 'fects of smoking, as well as the difficulty many smokers experienced
i	quitting;
Question 13 c:
"Even though you know it is bad for your health, do you ever
-	smoke too much?"
Question 19 c:
"Is this something you feel you should talk over with a ctor or not? - - Unable to stop smoking."
Additionally, in the 1960s, curricular guidelines of states were rengthened with respect to teaching about tobacco, and educational lms were devised to bring the antismoking message to students. And e television and radio media did the same for a much wider audience.
After the first Surgeon General's report, public awareness of the verse health effects of smoking was also advanced by government, siness, and healthcare organizations; the 1965 passage of the Federal garette Labeling and Advertising Act, which mandated the first health rning label; the banning in 1971 of all broadcast advertising for garettes; the insertion in 1972 of the Surgeon General warnings in all garette advertisements; and the initiation in 1981 of lower insurance tes by insurance companies for nonsmokers. An article in the New York urnal of Medicine on September 1, 1971 reinforced physicians’ mmitment to give the smoking message to their patients. "There is a eat need for physicians," concluded the article written by three New rk physicians, "to give forceful advice to their smoking patients in effort to convince them to stop. . ," By 1980 Blue Cross and Blue ield of Massachusetts cooperated with The Medical Foundation, Inc. to velop a publication, Lifestyle and Health; The Physician's Guide to tient Health Behavior, that stressed that even though "after more than
e doctor's attitudes and beliefs about the patient's ability to quit have an important bearing on the process of giving up emoking. The ysician's confidence that people can stop smoking completely, based on belief in the lifelong human capacity to learn, can be contagious." is same advice was presented three years later (December 1983) in an tide in the Hew York State Journal of Medicine ("Helping patients thdraw from smoking"). By 1973, smoking cessation clinics for ployees were conducted at certain divisions of Hughes Aircraft, ' neral Telephone Company, Prudential Life Insurance, and Blue Cross.
1977 various Blue Cross Associations were focusing on "preventive alth care” in which tobacco usage was proscribed; in the same year the tional Association of Blue Shield plans produced a motion picture You can't buy health") that stressed lifestyle changes; in 1970 the ard of directors of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Greater New York ok note of the use of a new book, Take Care of Yourself - A Consumer's lde to Medical Care, that was "being offered as only one of several fferent health care educational and cost containment programs being onsored by the corporation this year." Empire BC/BS had a Health ucation Center and this is the typo of information, such as Take Care Yourself, that was distributed to its subscribers. Four years later, ue Cross and Blue Shield Associations published a Guide to Staying n that acknowledged that "an unhealthful lifestyle can be directly sponsible for many of our health problems today, such as. . . tobacco.
. " Smoking cessation clinics for many BC/BS subscribers and others re in force by 1982. And in October, 1988, Blue Cross and Blue Shield the Rochester (NY) area, announced to subscribers the beginning of a lealthy Choices" program that would assist subscribers in health and llness programs that included, among others, smoking cessation. A -ar later Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Central New York initiated a small
snge their lifestyles so as to promote good health.
Government efforts in the 1970s and 1980s also added to existing nmon knowledge about the risks of smoking. Legislation signed and slemented in 1969 strengthened the warning label on cigarettes/ and )5 saw the emergence of additional rotating warnings on labels.	,
seph A. Califano, Jr., Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare ler President Jimmy Carter, was a strong antismoking advocate, and ie Great American Smokeout," a November event in which smokers tried quit for a day or more and in which Blue Cross and Blue Shield ;ociations, especially those included in the Empire state rubric, iyed prominent sponsoring roles, was initiated in 1977 and continues this day. From 1977 to 1990, the government-supported Public tadcasting System ran 60 different features on smoking and health, liction, advertising, Alton Oschner, warning labels, kicking the dt, and Surgeon General C. Everett Koop. Moreover, the 1988 laration by Surgeon General Koop that cigarette smoking was addictive ame another front-page story.
As with other Americans, Blue Cross and Blue Shield subscribers oss the nation were not only aware of the health risks of smoking as ustrated by the above-cited history, but were even more exposed to ;h risks through publications ranging from newsletters to pamphlets cifically written and printed for their use by Blue Cross and Blue eld administrations. Indeed, Blue Cross and Blue Shield Associations e conduits of consistent smoking and health messages to their tscribers that stopping smoking would improve health and decrease its.	.
In sum, from the evidence I have examined (only a small portion of ch has been cited above), claims of health risks and the habit-ming nature of tobacco products have been well-publicized from liest times in America. Early American literature not only
h the cigarette's mass production in tne :ace nineteentn century, with the rise of medical reports in the twentieth century suggesting arettes' harmful effects, the public awareness campaigns became so espread--thanks, in part, to more and widely disseminated forms of munication—that the linkage of tobacco in general and cigarettes in ticular to health risks and habit-forming dangers became common wledge.
I	am continuing to review depositions and case-related materials ch may be identified in a supplemental exhibit list.
I	have been deposed in two cases involving tobacco-company igation, to wit, Norma R, Broin et al vs. Philip Morris Companies,
., et al (Case No. 91-49738 CA 22) in the Circuit Court of the venth Judicial Circuit in and for Dade County, Florida; and Howard A. le, M.D., et al vs. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company et al (Case No. 9473 CA 22) in the Circuit Court of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit in for Dade County, Florida.
For my services as an expert, I am paid $75.00 per hour for earch; S90 to a maximum of SI 10 per hour for meetings, depending on paration necessary for same; and $125 per hour for appearances in ositions and trials.
-7^0,1
mas v, DiBacco, Ph.D. e: January 2000
THOtW V. DiBACCO, PH D.
Ofio* Th* Amartcam Untawy *400 MaM*cfw*«ea Amu*, N.W.
Washington, D.C, 20014 202-8*5-1060
Horn* 1203 North U>k* Way P*tm Batch, Florid* $34«0
TMetan*:
foe SU-W14666
iKcttJon:
K.„ wfth Hghert distinction,, Roltin* College, 1959 A., WlD., The American Udvertity, 1962.1965
ipkrnMat fflitorjr;
ff Aitisuat, (WuWu^ton, D.C.) U.S. S«tttor Speuanl L. Holland (Tt), 1059-64 tntaof, Uonrrnty of South Florid*, 19M-65
Profttior, Tbs American Ontvw^ty, 1963-49; Anodtfe Proftstor, 1969-77; t>«» fiw Faculty Afi*ir», 1974-81; Profiwwx, Kogod Cotkge of Bunoew AdmWjtfttktt, J977-
MkhtSfMcUhiH]
ited SutesHbtcxy toty of ElUtuveif and ItchnoJogy, Sooiil uid Economic Ifijtory
Uktti***;
trBook*.
« rcocnt: Hittarv fifth* XUhtA Rtf^ (>007,	Vfiffllw), > Mgh
textbook.
Myfrin tttc .UJ5 A, The ISflory gj Araorkaltt ByjiiKff (19B7.Htrper KjOw); two tadtack printing) with ptper cdMoo iuued in March 1988; tbo Uahod SuttM Infonncdon Agency purchased the rights to tmukte 20>000 copies h Cbioetc.
ScUr
*	X.00Q aniclw to scholirfv md popular fora, including H&rvncfi Burinen Hinofv
Mat. JoufMl -pfPoStia teurftiKfcn Aantrty. SMLSttwt Jmrad.
AlMton 1W Chtitth* aW# MabW WJI^Mnth IhmtW	OWv. &^«v. Chicago Tribune B*temofC Sufl. Bilftnnre Evftnw S»m Chicago Sun-Tfrnes i AmA* rimw rhfrtrtiVlr rf h;b1ib- frhi^hn	S*n Frttriion Ohrtmirift
bmm/i Tim^	Mimi	fffrfl frftfih Pfttt v>TIP,liT*PSLri*i ,brtfaH
urn. Pittsburgh Pott GtzeQe. Iiytit'uvJU Sur WuhintiOfl Tima*. Orfindo fontinol Louii Pod-EKnwtcfa. KidmoodKmr^Uwkf.
Page % (Dibicco)
Donsnkaat Activities:
\merican Council on Education
iusineis CouncO for International Understanding
'onasn Scrvice Institute, U.S. Department of State
faiotul Endowment for the Humanities
ntwnational Iastitm* of Education
"taidiatt House International
tationalGeogrtphic Society
J*don*l Sdeooe Foundation
U.S. Informal oo Ageocy
Vashinstoo, D.C. business firms
latioowidc Fortune 500 business funs
ifedU ActfvHk*!
.egular radio and television participation, Including Good Morning Amerk*, Today ihow, IBC NigHtfy New*, CNBC.
eatured speaker Jn University of Notre Dame's film, "Today’s Life Choices; Legislating loraKty,” Golden Dome Productions, 1996
request speeches and panel discussion participation
fonors and Special Recognition:
t«t Professor, The American University, selected by Senior Class. 1971 ihsinmsn, Umvtmty Faculty Senate, The AoKrican University, 1973-74 America, the Second Century* television series (one segment with Robert Hettbrooer)-wiiufer of the Rronw Medal, New York Fflm and Video Festival, i960 Looon Convocation Awards, Kogod College ofBuiincAs Administration,, The American IWwnitjf, Outstanding Program Development (1981) and Scholarship (1982) >irting\il$bed Ahimnui Award, Rollins College, 1983
isniedj, 195P, Maffie Z. Rowe, Ph.D.
>wo children: Deborah, JPaii*-based attorney, and Thomas, ABC (Washington, D.C.)
TV editor and producer Tiree gwdctJhJrcn