A	Yes.
Q	You read your deposition, you read the
complaint. You say you pulled -A	And I did look at my, some of the California material that I had in my files, that I hadn't reviewed in a while.
Q	Which material would that have been?
A	Some of the materials on my California
reliance list that we talked about this morning.
MR. FINE: I already have this marked Exhibit A. You want to re-mark? And guys, I only have one extra copy.
MR. ROSENTHAL: That's fine. So this
would be -MR. FINE: A.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit A.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Oh, I see. So we're going
off - -
MR. FINE: We're going off the double, because I marked them myself.
MR. ROSENTHAL: This is going to throw me off, but okay.
MR. FINE: I don't have -- actually, we're all messed up with the numbers, because there's numbers all over the place. Doctor, that is a list of individuals that were on TIRC, CTR, TI and tobacco companies. Do you know what TIRC is?
THE WITNESS: TIRC, I think it's T-I-R-C.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes. I'm sorry.
A	Yes, Tobacco Industry Research Committee.
Q And would you look through that and tell me whether you interviewed anybody on that list. The individuals on this list were all members of the tobacco company or on the boards of directors of those
A	The only person I see that I have met is
Charles Wade. But I met him as an undergraduate when he was chairman of the board of trustees of Duke. But we did not talk about any issue relating to this case. Let me just keep on checking through in there to see.
Q	Take your time.
(Witness reviewing document.)
THE WITNESS: I think that's the only one that I have met. And your question really was have I interviewed anyone, and I haven't. But I have met, I did meet Charles Wade. I assume this is -- yes, he's
Reynolds. I assume it's the same person.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Now an interview would be a primary
source?
A	No. It's standing in a line and saying
nice to meet you.
Q	I understand that. But you didn't interview
any of these individuals for anything regarding any opinion you may have about the Brown case?
A	No. That's correct.
MR. FINE: Okay. I'm going to mess you up more, because this is A-l. As I was going through it,
I found it, and this is where it belongs. Sorry about that. It's a news release from 1988.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit A-1.)
(Witness reviewing document.)
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Is that contained within your reliance
documents, to the best of your knowledge? I couldn't find it.
A	No. May I ask you what is this document?
It's a news release.
Q	It's a news release from --
A	From what?
Q	The Tobacco Institute.
A	Oh I'm sorry. Here's your clip.
Q	Okay. News releases generally
would add to public awareness.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: It has to do with tobacco companies, and that's not what my assignment was in this case.
MR. FINE: Okay. This one is B. Okay. Take a look at that. Exhibit B, that's a "frank statement." Are you aware of what's commonly called a frank statement?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit B.}
THE WITNESS: I am.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes. I couldn't find that in your
reliance documents.
A	It's not. There's something else.
Q	Oh/ I'm sorry. That's --
(Simultaneous discussion.)
THE WITNESS: Is that something you're going to show me later?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Well no, that's nothing actually. That's
one page that1s --.
A	I'm sorry. I keep on taking your paper
clips.
Q	Well, that's okay. That was from the New
York Times.
A Was it? I didn't even notice.
Q	I'm pretty sure. Frank statement, as I
understand it, was published in a lot of newspapers.
A	It was.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Is that C?
MR. FINE: This is C. Okay. Doctor, would you take a look at C? I think it's a letter from a Mr. Dwyer, referring to a newspaper program "Two Days in January," which contradicts Secretary Califano and the American Cancer Society.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit C.)
(Witness reviewing document.)
THE WITNESS: Now I haven't read this.
This is not something I believe that you had as a document supporting your complaint.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Well, I'm asking you whether it's in your
reliance documents.
A	I don't think -- well, I'm sure it's not
in the reliances. I have never, I have never seen this, no.
Q	So okay. You finished reviewing it?
A	Well, to review it, I'd have to read it.
I mean do you want me to read all of this?
Q	No. I want --
MR. ROSENTHAL: Is there a question pending beyond all that?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	The question is, is it in your reliance
documents?
A	It's not in my reliance documents.
Q	That's the question.
A	I didn't know if there was another
question.
Q	Sorry. Well, the next question would be
wouldn't this be something that would be part of the public awareness?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it looks like it's coming from the Tobacco Institute. I've not included it in the Tobacco institute, because I've been looking at what the public health community, and I don't know what -- I don't think the Tobacco Institute is part of the public health community.
However, as you know, I had not read that document because I've never seen it before, so I don't know what's in it. It looks like it has some testimony from Congress in there, which would be part of the public record. But I just don't know.
MR. FINE: Yes. This would be D. Doctor, would you take a look and see if that's in there?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit D.)
MR. FINE: D, which is a memo regarding the public relations program, whether that was contained within your reliance documents?
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. FINE: And would a public relations program have anything to do with public awareness?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: I was looking at particularly what the public health community was
saying. I didn't look at Tobacco Institute documents. I mean I certainly have seen some over the years. I don't know whether I've seen that one or not.
(Pause.)
MR. FINE: This is E. Take a look at E if you would. It's a memo from TI, which apparently was published. Is it contained within your reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit E.)
(Witness reviewing documents.)
THE WITNESS: No, it's not.
MR. FINE: Would the public health community have to respond to something along those lines?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The public health community certainly had a lot to say about a number of the issues that are headlined in there, and certainly public opinion polls show that the public was absorbing the public health message. I don't know whether members of the public health community responded to that particular advertisement or not.
MR. FINE: Members of the community?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
MR. FINE: Members of the community?
THE WITNESS: What community?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	The community of California, the class
we're talking about.
A	Oh, I'm sorry. I don't know whether that
particular ad played in California, and I don't know whether the public health community within California made a response.
MR. FINE: This is F, "The Cigarette Controversy," which is an action program to influence public opinion. Is that part of your reliance documents, Doctor?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit F.)
THE WITNESS: No, it isn't, but I could just -- let me just page through. I'm not sure that I have seen this.
(Witness reviewing document.)
THE WITNESS: And I don't know. I mean the answer to your question specifically is no. It's
not on my reliance list. I'm not sure I know the document. I mean what -- who wrote it or -BY MR. FINE:
Q	The Tiderock Corporation.
A	I don't know what the Tiderock Corporation
is.
MR. FINE: Did you move my paper clip?
MR. ROSENTHAL: I don’t see it.
MR. FINE: I think I have more. Don't worry about it. All right. Okay.
(Pause.)
MR. FINE: This would be G. That might only be a piece. Why don't I give you this? Thank you.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit G.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: There are four versions of what's there.
MR. FINE: It's a different version?
MR. ROSENTHAL: No. I'm just checking to see if there was one more piece.
MR. FINE: Okay, and just for the record, this is not -- you're not allowed to -- now that's a
publication for the cigarette controversy. Is it contained within your action, I'm sorry, within your reliance list?
THE WITNESS: No. Now if you're going to ask me any question about the content of this, to review, I'd have to read it.
MR. ROSENTHAL: No question pending.
THE WITNESS: I know. I'm just -BY MR. FINE:
Q	I understand.
A	But it's not on my reliance list.
Q	It's not on your reliance list, and you
haven't reviewed it for your reliance list.
Is that correct?
A	That's right.
Q	And that's what I understand about
everything I've handed you so far, is that you -A	Right.
Q	Not on your reliance list and you haven't
reviewed it?
A	I haven't seen it before, with the
exception of the referring statement.
Q	Which is not on your reliance list?
A	It is not.
Q	And it's not part of the basis of your
opinion?
A	Right. But I've seen it.
Q	But you have seen it, okay.
MR. FINE: This is H. You've got the clip. H is a memo regarding youth initiatives. Is it in your reliance list?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit H.)
THE WITNESS: This particular memo?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes.
A	No.
Q	Have you ever seen it before?
A	No, I don't believe so.
MR. FINE: Okay. Exhibit I.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Hopefully you don't go up
to double A.
MR. FINE: No, they go to Z.
MR. ROSENTHAL: 26?
MR. FINE: Nope. I ran out of letters when I got to Z, and I didn't feel like telling my secretary to go find another one. I thought that was enough. Now this is from a Mr. Kornegay --
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit I.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Actually, it's from Mr.
Panzer.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Panzer. I'm sorry, to Mr. Kornegay. Have
you ever interviewed either of those gentlemen?
A	No.
Q	Okay. Do you know who they are?
A	I think they're executives in that -- I'm
not sure who Mr. Panzer is. Mr. Kornegay is an executive of one of the tobacco companies, I think.
Q	You're correct.
A	Okay.
Q	And is that part of your reliance? We're
looking at I, the three-pronged attack on the cigarette controversy?
A	No.
Q	Okay. Have you ever seen it before?
A	Yes. It was one of the documents that you
cite in your report. Actually, you don't cite it, but you refer to it. So I have seen it before.
Q	Okay, but it's not included as part of
your opinion whatsoever?
A	No.
Q Because you weren’t asked, to look into Tobacco Institute?
A	I haven't looked -- my assignment is
looking at the public health and scientific communities.
But 11d be willing to respond, and I certainly -- even though I haven't looked in an exhaustive way and sort of like written a book on it, I've seen many documents, and if you want me to comment on one, 11d be happy to.
Q	But this one is the only one that you've
seen?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Wait. Let him finish his answer. I think you stopped him. Were you finished with your answer?
THE WITNESS: No. Like I say, if you want to look at one, I could -- some of these I haven't seen. I have seen that particular document before.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Because it was referred to in the
plaintiff's complaint?
A	Yes.
MR. FINE: Okay. This J is in regard to
distribution of booklets state by state in 184 and '85, specifically in California too. Have you ever seen this before?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit J.)
THE WITNESS: I don't know what booklets
are these.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	It's "Helping Youth Decide."
A	Well, the answer to your question is no,
I have not seen it.
Q	Is it part of your reliance documents?
A	No.
Q	Have you seen the booklet "Helping Youth
Decide"?
A	I don't believe so.
MR. FINE: This would be K.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit K.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you. MR. FINE: Sure, no problem. I'm handing
you Exhibit K, which is a memo regarding a mass mailing for -- to media reps, regarding Two Days in January, which was the -THE WITNESS: Isn't this the same one or close to one you've already given me? I mean I -BY MR. FINE:
Q	Well, it's the memo and certain footnotes
which were distributed back then. Are they reliance documents?
A	No. Some of the materials in the
bibliography I have seen before. These are in the published literature.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I'm not sure there's a question pending.
MR. FINE: Yes, right. I've asked him if there's anything contained, and he says some of it is in the published literature. But so far as the program to counteract that, you haven't seen that before?
THE WITNESS: I haven't seen that memo before, I don't believe. But I think it's very similar to what you showed me earlier.
MR. FINE: This would be L. Again, this is another memo regarding the cigarette controversy, and my question is, is it contained within your
reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit L.)
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	So it's not part of your opinion, of
course?
A No. I haven’t read the document and I haven't seen it, so I have not relied on this document, no.
MR. FINE: Thank you, sir. Now this is a brochure on the Tobacco Institute's activities. Have you ever seen that before?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit M.)
THE WITNESS: I don't believe so.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	So it's not part of your reliance
documentat ion?
A	No.
MR. FINE: Thank you. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm
getting ahead of myself here. We're skipping over N. It's not relevant. I mean it's relevant, but in a different context. It's just a depo cut.
This will be 0. Okay. Doctor, we just gave you 0, which is a TI publication list. Is that contained within your reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit 0.)
THE WITNESS: Is this particular list part
of this?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes.
A	No.
Q	How about any of the documents on the
list? Are any of them familiar to you?
A	Some of the smoking in the workplace, I'm
not -- I mean I can't really tell from the titles, you know. "Is Your Workplace Making You Sick Somehow?"
I'm not sure who wrote that document.
I've seen documents that have similar titles in it. "Smokers' Rights in the Workplace," I may have seen that. But I don't know whether I've seen one -- I assume all of these are Tobacco
Institute documents?
Q	Yes.
A	So I've seen something with titles similar
to that, but I don't know whether I've -- so I probably have not seen the document they're referring to.
MR. FINE: I think we need to take a break for five minutes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Wait a minute. Finish the
answer.
MR. FINE: Oh, we have five minutes left.
I thought you wanted to take a break.
MR. GAY: Five minutes left.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I'm just going to --while I'm finishing this document here, so he wouldn't stop in mid-document.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Is there a question
pending?
MR. FINE: Yes. I asked him if he's familiar with any of these documents.
THE WITNESS: Any of those on the list
here.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Okay. I thought you -THE WITNESS: I don't believe so, no.
MR. FINE: Okay. Maybe we ought to stop,
so we can - -
MR. GAY: The time now is 1:16, and we are going off the record at the end of Tape No. 2.
(Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record at 1:16 p.m. and resumed at 1:22 p.m.)
MR. GAY: The time now is 1:22. We are back on the record. This is the beginning of Tape No.
MR. FINE: Doctor, I'll be handing you Exhibit P in a second. This is a public relations program budget proposal for 1967 from the Tobacco Institute. Now would this be contained within your reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit P.)
THE WITNESS: No, it is not. I don't know whether you have two.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	I think it's just one.
A	Just one, okay.
MR. ROSENTHAL: In my book, there's just
one.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Do you have any budget proposals in your
reliance documents from the Tobacco Institute, CTR or TIRC?
A	I have read the annual reports of TIRC and
CTR. What I can't recall is whether they are, whether there are budgets in there or not.
Q	Are any of these contained within your
reliance documents?
A	No.
Q	Are any of the -- any documentation from
CTR, TIRC or TI contained within your reliance documents?
A	I don't think so as such. Some of the
state of the art articles were co-sponsored by TIRC, and so there could be some attribution of that. But no specific documents by TIRC or CTR.
MR. FINE: This will be Q. Oh, you don’t need this. Irrelevant. Strike Q.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Can you tell me what it is, but okay?
MR. FINE: I know what it is. It's the incorporation document for TI in Pennsylvania. See what happens when you get old heads in here? I worked on the Barnes case too. This is going to be Exhibit
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit R.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: So we're skipping Q?
MR. FINE: We're skipping Q.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Oh yes. Q is what you just showed him.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	You can keep it, you can throw it away,
whatever. Just so we're clear on the record, I'm marking all these for identification as we're going through this. This is Exhibit R, which is a report of the president of TI in 1973. Is that contained within your reliance documents?
A	No, it is not.
Q	Are you familiar with that?
A	I don't believe I've seen it.
Q	Have you seen any of the reports of the
presidents of TI?
A	I don’t believe so.
MR. FINE: This will be S. Do you think it would have assisted you in your research, to have an idea as to what, how the tobacco industry was responding to the public health of individuals?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit S.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I have some knowledge of that, not necessarily from the TI documents themselves, but in newspaper reports, especially before the Surgeon General's first report in 1964. Oftentimes in newspaper reports, there would be a comment about what the tobacco industry was saying.
So I am aware of it from those sources. Those figured fairly prominently if before 1964; they tended to dwindle after 1964. But there are certainly
MR. FINE: The comments dwindled or what
comments - -
MR. ROSENTHAL: Let him finish his answer.
THE WITNESS: And so there's less material on the tobacco industry in the periods after 1964. I think this sort of reflects my opinion about the state of the art, in that when the public health and scientific communities were struggling with the issue of the relationship of cigarette smoking with serious disease, that there were a lot of materials that were
being presented in the press by scientists such as Ernest Wynder and others, and also the responses to that by spokespeople of the tobacco industry.
I think once the Surgeon General made his determination in 1964, that the public health community just sort of came behind that decision, that cigarette smoking caused dangerous diseases.
Of course that changed as the time went on. Different diseases were added, and so the reports didn't really, I mean news reports didn't really say very much about the tobacco industry response.
Sometimes they'd be included in a sentence or two towards the end of the article, but not in any substantive way.
Q	You don't think that the health industry,
looking at low tar and a safer cigarette, it would have been better had they received some of the information that the tobacco industry had held back?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, there's a number of parts to it. I'm not sure what you mean by "health industry." What's health industry?
MR. FINE: I don't think I said health
industry.
MR. ROSENTHAL: You did.
MR. FINE: I thought I said tobacco industry. I'm sorry, strike that. We'll just move on to S. This is a newspaper article published in the 1990's, a newspaper article concerning an attack on the American Cancer Society by TI. Is that part of your reliance documents?
THE WITNESS: So I assume this is not an article. This is an ad. I assume it's an ad. You said it was an article. I don't think it's an article. I think it's an ad, but -BY MR. FINE:
Q	Is it part of your reliance documents?
A	It's not. I do know something about the
background. It talks about the beagle study, and I have read some things about that, covered I think in some of the Surgeon General's reports. But to answer your question specifically, this newspaper ad is not in my reliance report.
MR. FINE: The next one's going to be U. That's Mr. Kornegay's report on the AMA meeting. Is it part of your reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit U.)
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. FINE: The next one marked for identification is V. This is a TI statement about tobacco and health. Is it part of your reliance documents?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit V.)
THE WITNESS: It's not, but it's one of your documents in your complaint.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes. So you've seen it before?
A	I have seen it before.
Q	But it's not part -- it doesn't form your
opinion. It has nothing to do with it.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I did not look at -- I certainly have seen lots of TI documents, but this does not alter my opinion about the public health message that Americans were receiving.
MR. FINE: Mark this as W. Thank you. Could you take a look at this? It's regarding long-range -- it's about TI's plans from 1958. Have you seen that before?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit W.)
THE WITNESS: I don't know. I mean, it's not one of the documents in your complaint, so I haven't reviewed it in this case. I can't tell if I've never seen it before, but I don't remember it.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Okay. So it's not part of your opinion?
A	I have not read it.
MR. FINE: This will be X.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit X.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Three more?
MR. FINE: I probably could have a thousand more, but why do that, right? This is the Tobacco Institute's long-range summary plan. Is that part of your reliance documents?
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. FINE: This is Y. It's different ads from TI in different publications. You ever see them before?
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit Y.)
(Witness reviewing documents.)
THE WITNESS: I don't believe so.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Part of your reliance documents?
A	No.
MR. FINE: Z.
(Whereupon, the document referred to was marked for identification as Deposition Exhibit Z.)
MR. ROSENTHAL: Thank you.
MR. FINE: You're welcome. Would you take a look at an exhibit marked for identification as z.
Is that part of your reliance documents? These are the minutes of the 19th meeting of the Board of Directors of the Tobacco Institute.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Have you seen the minutes of any of the
meetings of the Board of Directors of the Tobacco Institute?
A	I don't believe so.
MR. ROSENTHAL: So now we can go into that
pile?
MR. FINE: This is our pile. This is marked. Oops, wrong way.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Oh, okay.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	So as I understand it, your assignment was
not to look at industry records whatsoever?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: No. That was not my assignment. My assignment was to look at what the scientific and public health communities were saying, state of the art, and then looking at the story of low tar cigarettes, and also to assess how the public understood the message of state of the art, and just to be clear on that, the conclusion that cigarette smoking causes serious disease and kills.
I don't think that any of the Tobacco Institute documents really speak to that issue, so I did not look at it. But I was not instructed not to look at it. I guess that's the point of my response there.
Q	Well, when Mr. Rosenthal would make
suggestions to you, did he ever suggest to you that
you should look at ads, cigarette ads?
A	Certainly I have seen a lot of cigarette
ads, but I am not a marketing person or an advertising expert. So I certainly have seen them, especially when I was going through magazines and newspapers and of course I lived through this period, as you did. So I've seen ads. But I'm not here to offer a professional opinion on them.
Q	On the effect of ads on public awareness?
A	I simply -- that's not something that I
have any expertise in assessing.
Q	On the effect of ads on public awareness?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Same thing. I think that there are experts who spend their lives trying to talk about what ads mean and how customers view them. But that's not something that I'm here to do.
BY MR. FINE:
Q And the public relations programs, some of which were in these exhibits, that's not part of the tobacco industry? That's not part of what you were looking at?
A	No, I have not studied those. I have
looked at public opinion polls that certainly seem to reinforce the opinion I have, is that the American
public understood what the public health community was trying to tell it.
Q	From your perspective, based upon your
reliance documents?
A	Well, what the public health message is,
I think, is quite clear, and the documents that I reviewed permit me to know what the public health message is. I don't think that there is a controversy about what the public health message was.
The issue is what did the public understand, and certainly public opinion polls and also what the Surgeon General said, you know, reported repeatedly was that the American people understood what the public health message was, at very high levels.
I mean, 90 percent of the population believed that smoking caused diseases and even specific diseases such as lung disease and heart disease. I mean that's, those are very high polling numbers.
Q	The Brown class. Do you know what the
Brown class is?
A	My understanding of the Brown class is
that it spans the years 1993 to 2001, and is all people in the state of California who smoked at least
one cigarette, and who were exposed to tobacco marketing or advertising.
Q	You did no research on tobacco marketing
in California?
A	No.
Q	You did no research on advertising in
California?
A	There are some statements about tobacco, about
advertising that occur in public health documents from the state of California. So I have some knowledge from reading some of those documents. But specifically, I have not done studies dealing with tobacco advertising or marketing in California.
Q	Which documents?
A	Well7 some of the review documents by the
state health authorities about the success of their tobacco program after the passage of Proposition 99 in
1988,	talk about tobacco ads and they also talk about the success of the public health community, as well as high levels of awareness among Californians.
Q	What polls in California have you
reviewed?
A	Well/ let me just put it this way. Gallup
polls, national polls take into account all states, including California. There is, I believe, some
polling data that's included in the state of California review of the educational program that was put in after Proposition 99 passed.
Those reports were also prepared in part by the Gallup organization. So I don't know whether they're responsible for those. But they would be contained in those particular documents.
Q	Okay. So contained within the 440 pages
of lists that you gave us, what documents are you talking about that you relied upon?
A	Wait a minute. Are you talking about for
the - -
Q	For the state of California, 1993 to 2001.
What documents are you talking about that you provided us in your lists?
A	Well, some of the documents are on my
California reliance list, and those deal with those.
In dealing with general polling data, I'm relying on the Surgeon General's report, particularly the one in
1989,	where Surgeon General Koop discusses the overwhelming public health campaign and its success in reaching Americans. So that's on my reliance list.
Q	Okay. Here's the California exhibit. It
looks like it's GG or CC. Would you find -MR. ROSENTHAL: California is GG.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Could you find the documents that you're
referring to that support your position in California/ the polls that you've just finished talking about?
A	About the review of the --
Q	Yes.
A	Okay. Those are, I'm looking for the ones
that have "Wave 1" and "Wave 2" in the titles. I'll give you the primary one here. Hold on. All right.
This one right here on page seven is the main one, but I don't want to limit it to just one, because most of the articles, there's also the final report, which is on page eight, but most of these --
Q	Can you tell me what you're reading?
MR. ROSENTHAL: You've never identified and said which one you described for the record.
THE WITNESS: Okay. Interim report, independent evaluation of the California Tobacco Control Prevention and Education Program, Wave 2 data, Wave 1 and 2. That's one.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	On page seven?
A	Yes. There's also Tobacco Control:
Who's Winning at the War. That's an important one.
"Final Report," which is on the eighth page top.
But really many of the articles in here talk specifically about aspects of the tobacco control program that was in the 90's in California, and it's interesting that the Surgeon General, the federal obviously Surgeon General in 1994, talked about the California program at some length, and called it a model of the state.
In 2 000, the Surgeon General of the country reviewed programs and thought that by far, the most comprehensive program in the country occurred in California and talked about it also extensively, and many of these articles here talk about various aspects of the tobacco control program.
Q	Which ones?
A	I think most of them do in some ways. Not
all of them necessarily -- I mean some of them talk about some of the things that tobacco companies did, and I mean so it's -- but I think all of these in one way or another relate to California in the period of this class, maybe a few years before and a few years after as well.
Q	But you don't have a single document from
the tobacco industry in your reliance documents that indicate what their actions were in California during the time period?
A	Some of these articles here talk about
what the tobacco -- from the public health point of view. Remember, I'm focusing on the public health point of view.
Q	Just so I understand, from August of this
year until now, you've worked on the Brown case, today, five hours last Friday, and you had a couple of conversations?
A	I think the earlier question was contact
with attorneys.
Q	Yes.
A	No. I've spent more time on that, because
you know, reading, locating and reading the documents in the 10th amended complaint, that took a while to do, and then reviewing some of the articles in the California reliance list that I hadn't looked at for a while. That took some time as well.
Q	Okay. So basically you just read -- other
than the 10th amended complaint, you redid, you looked at your California reliance articles?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: That, and also I should mention that because the amended complaint has a lot of material about low tar and I reviewed the public health community's view about low tar cigarettes and
its campaign to foster that. So I spent some time reviewing those as well.
MR. FINE: You say you have an opinion in
this case?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What my general opinions
are?
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Do you have an opinion in this case, based
upon the 10th amended complaint, and that you've read those documents that you pulled in the 10th amended complaint. The documents, the lists that you have generated, except for the California list, which you say was partially -- you said it was partially the Bullet case?
A	Some of those I generated for the Bullet
case, and some are probably even for this case. But it's been too long ago since I can't remember which cases I was working on.
Q	Okay. Based upon those documents, and
excluding all the ads, because you weren't asked to go into that, excluding all tobacco industry documents because you weren't asked to go into that; is that correct?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, not because I was not asked. I did not see that as important to my project.
MR. FINE: And taking Mr. Rosenthal's suggestions on some articles, taking the research group1s suggestions and giving you articles to look at, that they had culled from, on the various newspapers. Based on that, you have an opinion?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: Okay, I do have an opinion, but I think you've mischaracterized what I said about all of the AP and some of the New York Times articles, in the sense that they weren't suggesting which, what I should put on my reliance list. They were just pulling all the documents dealing with tobacco. So that's not quite -- I don't, I just want to make sure we're on the same page.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Okay. Well, let me ask you.
A	But I don't want to lose sight of the basic
part of your question, is do I have an opinion?
Q Yes, we’ll get to that.
A	All right, okay.
Q	Just so I understand, on those newspaper
articles, you said "Get me everything on tobacco, or low tar" and things like that. Then you let the
research group go out and find the titles.
They're the ones that went out and brought you the hard copies of all these different articles. Then you chose the articles out of the six boxes, seven boxes, one box, whatever it was that they gave you; is that correct?
A	Well, first of all, they didn't look just
at titles. They actually looked at the words. But I think that's a different -- but basically they came up with the universe, and then I selected documents from that universe.
Q	I agree with that. You allowed them to
make the initial selection, and then you culled out of that selection, so that you could come to your opinion.
A	Yes.
Q	You allowed Mr. Rosenthal to make
suggestions. Were there any other attorneys that made suggestions of articles that you should look at?
A	I can't remember, but there may well have
been. But yes. I mean there were some articles that people suggested.
Q	Okay. Would it have been perhaps in the
Bullet case or the DOJ case or any of those other types of cases, they may have suggested that?
A	Could be some. I think that's probably
less than five percent.
Q	Okay. And some of these reliance articles
that you're relying upon, may or may not exist in your office anymore because you may have tossed them?
A	I'm not sure how -- most of the scientific
articles remain. Whether all of the media articles remain, I'm not certain. I think key ones certainly remain. I just can't be sure about all of them.
Q	Now when you say "media," you mean media,
excluding advertisements, excluding cigarette advertisements, excluding whatever TI, CTR, TIRC, whatever they did?
A	Okay.
Q	You don't have those?
A	I thought we were referring to my reliance
lists.
Q	I am, but I'm asking you. You said media,
so I just want to be sure -A	The media I'm talking about are the media on those lists we discussed some this morning.
Q	I don’t mean to speak over you. I'm
sorry.
A No, no, no. I just wanted to make sure we were talking about the same things.
Q	I'm waiting for the court reporter to
holler at me for doing that.
A	He's not listening. He's plugged in
somewhere else.
Q	Now this -- who else was in the room with
you during that five hour meeting besides Mr. Rosenthal?
A	In the room? Just the two of us.
Q	Oh. I thought there were other attorneys.
A	There were, but they were on the phone.
Q	Oh, I see. Just like our Liggett friend.
Are you still there?
MS. FISCHER: I'm here. I'm always here. MR. ROSENTHAL: You're under no obligation to answer questions, by the way.
MS. FISCHER: We're not under oath
either.
MR. FINE: That's funny. And other than the two, the couple of sentence blurb that was --we went through earlier today, what is it Exhibit A perhaps?
MR. ROSENTHAL: The one written for this case, the 2010 one? That is, I think, double E.
MR. FINE: Double E.
MR. ROSENTHAL: One paragraph.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Yes. You think but you're not sure
whether you have made any other kind of declaration in this case, other than double EE?
A	That's the only one that I'm aware of.
Q	Okay. You're not sure about the original
one, the double C, the declaration that we had filed initially?
A	You know, it doesn't have any name on it.
When you first said I did --
Q Well, it has your name on it.
A	Oh, I wrote it. There's no question that
I wrote it, but the question was, was it submitted in this case in 2002. That -- before 2002, and that's what I think you and Mr. Rosenthal have difference of opinions on that, and to be quite honest with you, I don't remember. But I certainly wrote that report.
Q	Now, you're going to tell me an opinion
within a reasonable degree of historical certainty or medical certainty, or what is your standard that you're giving me?
A	I'm here as a historian of medicine, and
so I'm not here as a pediatrician. Certainly having a medical degree permits me to read medical articles in the past, and perhaps gives me insight on what some of the issues are. But I'm not here primarily as a
physician. I'm here as an historian of medicine.
Q	And it's your opinion as a historian of
medicine. So what is the standard that you're holding yourself to in giving this opinion?
A	As a historian, that I've been
comprehensive, that I have read extensively. I've consulted, that I’ve asked good questions, that I've consulted the appropriate literature to answer those historical questions.
Q	Did you interview a single person for this
case?
A	No. You're referring to the class you're
talking about or I should be, before I answer the question, I should --
Q	Did you interview anybody in the class?
A	No.
Q	Did you interview anybody in the public
health system?
A	No.
Q	Did you interview any of the authors of
any of the articles that you have read?
A	No.
Q	Interview any of the people in any of the
articles that you have read, other than Mr. Ward, who you met?
A	Mr. Wade.
Q	Mr. Wade.
A Oh no, no. But that was not in the context of any kind of tobacco case.
Q	Okay. Yes, I understand that. Did you
interview any tobacco executive whatsoever?
A	No, I did not.
Q	Any executive of any of the defendants?
A	No.
Q	TI?
A	No.
Q	Center for Tobacco --
MR. ROSENTHAL: Research?
MR. FINE: Research, yes.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	CTR. It's been a long time. Council for
Tobacco Research, that's right. So you interviewed nobody?
A	I did not interview anybody.
Q	You did not review any polls specific to
California?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection.
THE WITNESS: As I mentioned, I think that there are some polls within the public health
documents that are listed in, within the California. There's also the Centers for Disease Control has an article from that time dealing with California-specific materials on smoking rates, and I did review that as well.
MR. FINE: You didn't review any of the publications, the thousands of publications that TI mailed or distributed in California?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know whether TI published thousands of documents, pardon me, thousands of copies or fewer than that. But I haven't read those.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Any of them?
A	Well, I don't believe so, no.
Q	What's your opinion?
A	Well, from reading your complaint, or the
plaintiff's complaint, there are a number of issues that come under the unfair competition laws, and some of them, I think, relate to me and some of them don't relate to me, because they cover areas that I don't have expertise in.
But one of the issues deals with low tar cigarettes, and whether low tar cigarettes were a
fraud that the tobacco companies knew that they were a fraud, that they misrepresented them in ads and all of that. Where I see my testimony and where defense attorneys see my testimony coming in there is recounting the information matrix of the public health community about the value of low tar cigarettes as one of the means of diminishing smoke-related, the risk of smoke-related diseases.
And in that, part of that is that the public health community believed, I think for almost 50 years, that -- and based on the science of the time, that smoking cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine provided a benefit, a lessened disease risk, at least for lung cancer and in some studies, for heart disease as well.
That they made this recommendation knowing from the very beginning that compensation existed, that some smokers could defeat the benefits of low tar completely, but they believed, based on the epidemiological studies, that on average that smokers -- that compensation, even though it existed, was not going to make a difference. They made the recommendations despite the existence of compensation.
They did this, at least, the recommendations for low tar cigarettes, always as a
third tier, that you know, the first message was of course "Don't smoke." The second message was "Don't start." The third message was "Low tar." They made this from, I think, as a public health community from 1996 through the end of the 20th century.
Of course, when we're talking about low tar, we're of course always talking about it as it is -- as measured by the FTC method or the Cambridge method or the Ogg method, depending on the terminology you want to use. But that was -- that the FTC put forth in the mid-1960's.
Q	That's your opinion in the case?
A	Okay. That's in the low tar case.
Q	Okay.
A	There's also issues in this case dealing
with issues about somehow misleading the public about whether smoking causes disease and kills, whether there are -- and issues generally of understanding, of addiction or the difficultness, difficulty in quitting cigarettes.	That's also part of the
compensation stories. These opinions overlap, and again -- well, where I see my contribution and what the defense attorneys have told me was that telling what the public health community understood about these issues, about the growing concern that cigarette
smoking caused disease, what the Surgeon General and other public health authorities said about whether smoking caused diseases such as the Cancer Society or the American Heart Association, and then the assessment of the educational campaign put forth by the various governments, and the voluntary public health organizations and the polling data, indicating that the public overwhelmingly understood that cigarette smoking was a danger, that it killed, it caused certain diseases, that that would fit into this case.
I mean, ultimately what the attorneys and judges do with that information is certainly not something I know --
Q	That's what the defense attorneys,
something you talk about? That's what you said.
A	No. What they said was that they thought
providing the background of what the public health community understood would be a benefit in this case. Then in a California-related situation is that what I can see, and they were on the California reliance materials, is that California is just like the rest of the country.
In other words, that if anything is further ahead of the country. In other words, that fewer
people in the 90's who were smoking, fewer children who were smoking. The rate of decline of smoking in the 90's in California was greater than the rate of decline in smoking in let's say other parts of the country.
That the public health awareness campaign, the educational campaign, according to the Surgeon General in '94 and 2000, said that California was a model, that it had the best public awareness program of any state in the Union.
Then when the California public health authorities measured this, they were able to show that 90 percent of school kids had seen various educational programs. 87 percent of adults had seen it.
So it shows a measure of effectiveness, both of the lowering of the smoking rates, as well as the penetration of public health messages. So those are my opinions in this case.
Q	That's all your opinions?
A Well, I mean as I sit here today, those are the major ones. There may be some collateral ones .
Q And what collateral ones would there be?
A	Well, what I would mean is there might be
a follow-up question from either plaintiff's attorney or a defense attorney that might want me to clarify something, and I'd be happy to do that.
Q	Well, this is all based upon, you say,
what the public health authorities information they're distributing, and not at all what the tobacco industry was distributing whatsoever, the advertising? That's not what you were asked for?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
MR. FINE: So if there was an ad for a pamphlet or a NASCAR race or something along those lines, you're not considering that whatsoever in the rate of smoking?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think a public opinion poll, a person when they're asked a public opinion poll, they say "Do you think smoking causes disease?" They don't say based on what your doctor is telling you or what the public health authorities, do you believe that?
So I think when people respond, they are taking in all the sources of input that they have received. So -- but I have not specifically studied tobacco advertising -BY MR. FINE:
Q	In California?
A	Right. But I do think that the public
opinion polls would gather the bottom line of that, but not specifics, no.
Q	So the third prong of what your statement
was as to low tar and nicotine, that the public health community had been pulled into that, saying that that was actually a safer cigarette,- is that correct?
A	Well, I would not use the word "pulled
into it." I think the public health community led on that, and that was based on science that went back into the 50's, tar, skin painting experiments that Ernest Wynder did, that when the tar had less and less tar in it, the percentage went down, the skin tumors didn't form.
That suggested to him in 1957 that if you could produce a cigarette that had, I think he gave it a number of 40 percent less tar and nicotine, it would be perhaps a health benefit to public health. This 40 percent was picked up in the 1950's in a number of places.
I think it's also interesting, especially from a historical point of view, is that Wynder in that very first 1957 paper said that his idea of lower tar or nicotine cigarettes having a benefit would be
negated if people smoked more cigarettes.
So here in the very first study there is an issue, both of what the science, the public health suggestion, 40-percent reduction, and the worry that compensation might defeat it. But let me just mention. You said the public health maybe was somehow tricked or drawn in. That's my interpretation of what "drawn in" is.
The public health community wasn't drawn in. The public health community embraced this as what Wynder said. Other people called it a managerial approach. You know, engineer a cigarette a little differently and you can -- maybe you could cut down on risk.
This was an enthusiastic, widely shared opinion for decades in the United States.
Q	You mean like the ventilation holes?
A	The ventilation holes? I mean ventilation
holes are great. I mean the public health community touted various smoke-dilution devices as the most effective way of cutting down on tar and nicotine.
The Tobacco Working Group, that was one of their recommendations. Porous paper and ventilation filters. I mean they aren't villains. Those were very important public health measures.
MR. FINE: You all right?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Yes. Didn't take my amoxicillin apparently.
THE WITNESS: If I get strep throat from sitting next to you -BY MR. FINE:
Q	As a pediatric physician, you should be
immune. All the strep throat you see.
A	The unfortunate thing was I was, up until
I stopped, I mean I was really, I had -- I can't even imagine my antibody response. But now that it's been five years, you know, it's waning.
MR. FINE: All right. I need a couple of
minutes.
(Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record at 2:14 p.m. and resumed at 2:23 p.m.)
MR. FINE: Doctor, as I understand it, you were tasked with the public health community's response -- not response, but impact on public awareness; is that correct?
THE WITNESS: In part.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection, form.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Okay. Well, maybe you could articulate it
better than I can.
A	Well, I was also interested in how the
scientific and public health community -- the growing awareness among scientists about the issue. I've also been interested in looking at how the public health community did view the science of low tar cigarettes as well.
So it’s not just on the public awareness aspect, there's also looking at the scientific -- the science itself, especially in the pre-1964 period.
And I was also interested in the public health community's educational programs. So it's a little bit broader than your question.
Q	Okay. Well, when you talk about public
awareness and you were talking about at least sections of the Gallup polls and things like that -- and you meant across the board the general public, not just the scientific community?
A	Well, there's -- these are different
problems. In other words, in the 1950's, there was a growing number of scientific studies that implicated cigarette smoking in major diseases. I read those scientific studies, and so I have an idea about how that grew.
Some of these studies also were covered in the news media, and I do have a sense of -- and some
of them were even polled on have you, were you aware of the American Cancer Society's study on this particular subject?
So there are a number of aspects to your question, all of which I did. One is the development of science; two, how the public health community used that science to make recommendations to the public. Three, was the actual science communicated to the American public, and I think in the pre-'64 period it was.
And then a measurement of what their understanding of those attempts at education. I've done some of that as well. So it's more than just the public awareness. It's really --
Q	Okay. Well, Doctor, we may have
miscommunicated. I don't think I really got a response from what my question was. Let's go back towards more of the class period, from '93 to 2001. Again, you were tasked with -- part of what you wanted to do was the public awareness. That's why we talked about the Gallup poll, that's why you talked about cigarettes in California being diminished, those types of things.
So -- and how do you define, you know, and we talked about this. You say that the Gallup poll
basically is public awareness. How do you define public awareness?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I want to make one caveat here, is when we're talking about my general opinions here, I was talking about public awareness in terms of the basic message that smoking was dangerous and causes diseases. I'm not going to enter an opinion about how the public understood an ad that said lower tar and nicotine.
In other words, low tar awareness. I am not doing that. I want to be clear that I'm separating out that how smokers interpreted that particular message, because that's not something that I'm offering an opinion on.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Okay.
A	I mean that's part of public opinion, but
not part of the public opinion that I'm going to be talking about.
Q	So what do you -- what is your definition
of public awareness? That's what I'm trying to get at.
A	Well, it is -- when a public health
community wants to communicate something, they have a
message, and the message is cigarette smoke, and the question is how do they, you know, is there evidence that the public understands that message?
And so a public opinion poll is a fairly good way of doing that. I mentioned the Gallup one, but the Surgeon General in '89 reviewed all of the polls that had been taken, you know, in the area. So it's not just the Gallup, but that's an important polling organization.
Q	Okay. So but I want to talk about, not
the public health community. I want to talk about the public awareness, the public in general, the class, if you were. Are you prepared to talk about that, or are you saying I'm not going to talk about that?
A	Only -- I'm going to talk about the class
as just a subset of the national polls, because Californians are part of the national polls.
Q	And you've already described how you've
discerned out certain Gallup polls that you say that -- contained within your records, there are California polls, you think?
A	Yes, and that's what -- and that's the
kind of information I'm going to be using.
Q	Okay, and that's how you gauge public
awareness is those particular Gallup polls which are
contained within your reliance documents, is that correct?
A	Yes.
Q	That have a component that is separated
out, that's California residents during that time period?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: And as how the public health community within California registered its success.
In other words, the California tobacco program in the 1990's was very interested in assessing its, whether they were -- if they were a success or failure.
And so people would be basing it on their own assessments of whether they were able to reach Californians of various ages.
MR. FINE: So if I were to tell you that light cigarettes, for example, was the most cigarettes that were consumed in California during the period of time from 1993 to 2001, would that be a piece of information that would fit into your module of public awareness?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure it would be public awareness. Certainly, the pattern of cigarette smoking preferences in this country has shown a steady
increase in light cigarettes. And we're going to -in a public health sense, it would be low tar cigarettes.
Then let's say the public health community has generally defined that somewhere around 15 milligrams, but there's been a -- or less. There has been a steady increase in smoking low tar cigarettes in this country, in California, from I would say roughly -- probably the late 50's up until the present time.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	And whether that was based upon a
descriptor of light cigarettes or ads, or other types of media representations, you have no opinion as to that?
A	Well, how the public understood light as
a descriptor or lower in tar, I don't have an opinion on. What I do have an opinion is that the public health community encouraged smokers to choose a low tar cigarette if they were unable or unwilling to do the first two prongs, which was stop or don't start smoking.
Q	So if something is described as a light
cigarette, and based upon either compensation or smoking or whatever, it really is the same amount of
low tar, the same amount of tar and nicotine that you would get from a full-fledged cigarette, you have no opinion as to that?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Oh, wait a minute, wait a minute. I want to be sure here. Now the public health community was well aware of compensation, and the public health community told Americans, you know, warned them about this.
MR. FINE: Doctor, we're talking about public awareness, not the public health community.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Actually public awareness was nowhere in the question as framed.
MR. FINE: Well, that's what I'm asking. Public awareness, not the public health community.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Let's just start, re-ask the question then, because I'm lost at this point as to what the question is.
MR. FINE: If there was an increase in using and consuming light cigarettes, based upon the descriptor of light or media advertisements of light cigarettes, or other media advertisements during the class period, you have no opinion as to the public awareness, as to what light cigarettes were in reality? I mean --
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I entirely understand your question. Certainly -BY MR. FINE:
Q	I can rephrase it. Go ahead.
A	Well, let me just struggle with it and
then you can -- I always start with the public health community, because that's what I know, and certainly the public health community was well aware of compensation. They knew that some smokers could completely compensate, might even overcompensate.
The Surgeon General in a '79 report told Americans that it was possible to get more from a cigarette than the FTC rating that was in Newsweek and the Consumer Reports and it was in all sorts of educational materials about that.
So the idea of compensation was no secret. I mean it was covered very -- it was covered in the public health literature. What I can't tell you is, you know, the consumer perception of that, because that's not something that I've studied.
Q	Okay.
A	But I can certainly tell you what the
message was, and I can tell you the various ways that the public tried to make that message.
Q	But -- so you're not factoring in the
tobacco industry's plans for use of the descriptor of light cigarettes, is that correct?
A	I don't know what the tobacco industry
meant by those descriptors. So that's not something that I was studying.
Q	You're not factoring in any marketing
budgets?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
BY MR. FINE:
Q	Is that correct?
A	You know, I haven't studied marketing
budgets. I'm not a marketing expert, so I have not looked at those things.
Q	You don't factor in what the consumer
actually perceived a light cigarette, which has an advertisement on the front, "low tar and low nicotine," what that consumer understands that to be?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I have read some things as reflected in Surgeon Generals' reports about how consumers understood that. But I'm not a consumer perception expert.
MR. FINE: I don't have any further questions today.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Okay.
(Whereupon, the above-entitled matter concluded at 2:34 p.m..)
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the foregoing transcript
Deposition of: Peter English
In the matter of: Brown v American Tobacco
Before: Superior Court of California
Date: 12-14-10
Place: Washington, DC
were duly recorded and accurately transcribed under my direction; further, that said transcript is a true and accurate record of the proceedings; and that I am neither counsel for, related to, nor employed by any of the parties to this action in which this deposition was taken; and further that I am not a relative nor an employee of any of the parties nor counsel employed by the parties, and I am not financially or otherwise interested in the outcome of the action.
Court Reporter
PAGE LINE CHANGE
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
REASON _
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF DEPONENT
I,_, do hereby
certify that I have read the foregoing pages, and that the same is a correct transcription of the answers given by me to the questions therein propounded, except for the corrections or changes in form or substance, if any, noted in the attached Errata Sheet.
PETER ENGLISH, M.D., Ph.D.	DATE
Subscribed and sworn to before me this
_ day of _, 2 0_.
My commission expires:_
Notary Public