IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF KANSAS
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	)
)
Plainti ffs,	)
)
VS.	) CASE NO. 94-2202-JWL
)
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO.,)
)
and	)
)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
}
. Defendants.	)
DEPOSITION OF JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D.
(PART 1)
February 23, 1996
Job No. 32291
Page
stipulations	11
Appearances	11
Testimony of JAMES KIRBY MARTIN,	Ph.D,
Examination by Mr. Leyh	13
Signature	386
Certificate	387
Exhibit No.	Page
1	Burton Report, written	68 by James Martin
2	Burton Report -- Draft	68
3	General Presentation,	68 November 16, 1995
4	Summary of medical-related	68 articles -- Draft
5	Case File -- David Burton	68
6	Notice of Deposition --	227 James Martin
7	Deadly Medicine: Indians	231 and Aleohol in Earlv America,
by Peter Mancall
8	Springfield News and Leader.	233
1955-1960
9	Springfield Leader & Press.	23 7 1/55-6/59 and 1/60-12/60
10	Kansas City Kansan.	237 1954, 19 5 7, 1962, 1964 .
11	Kansas City Star.	242 1954, 1957, 1962, 1964
12	Kansas City Times,	243 1962,1964 .
13	Emporia Gazette,	243 1954-1955 and 1961-1967
14	Articles on Lucy Page Gaston 244
15	1919 Newspaper articles,	244 Lucy Page Gaston
16	1920 Newspaper articles,	247 Lucy Page Gaston
17	Articles on Lucy Page Gaston 249
18	1921 Clean Life Movement,	250 Lucy Page Gaston
19	923 Newspaper articles,	251 Lucy Page Gaston
20	1924 Newspaper articles,	252 Lucy Page Gaston
21	Anti-Cigarette League	253 articles
22	International Anti-Cigarette 253 League documents
23	Library of Congress search 254
24	WCTU Literature	256
25	Health magazine articles	257
26	Lookout magazine articles'.	258 (Part 1)
27	Lookout magazine articles	258 (Part 2)
28	National Tobacco League	259 statement, '919 -
29	International and National	259 Anti - Cigarette League documents
30	The Libertarian. Magazine	260 articles
31	"The Anti-Tobacco Crusade	261 after World War 1, 11
January 1970
32	Materials from, various	262 textbooks
33	Miscellaneous articles	264 dealing various anti-tobacco groups
34	"American Literature	265 Awareness Survey,"
by Dr. R. Harp, 10/27/86
35	American Cancer Society	267 anti-smoking public service announcements, 1966-1987
36	CBS News "See It Now"	267 (Parts 1 and 2) Videotape
37	CBS News coverage of	267 Surgeon General's report,
1/11/64
38	Congressional Record, 1929	271
39	Blatnik Hearings	273 7/18/57-7/26/57
40	1964 Surgeon General's report 275 "Smoking and Health"
41	Summary of anti-cigarette and 276 tobacco statutes and laws
from various states
42	Gallup organization survey 277 questions	.
43	Gallup Poll of Public Opinion 290 1935-1971
44	Television program	293 transcripts
45	Listing of American Cancer 294 Society public service announcements (Exhibit 35)
46	1860-1970 Production	295 Statisti s (tobacco products)
47	Circulation figures for	295
The New York Times and various magazines, 1950-1965
4a	Aver & Son's Directory	2 9 6
title pages only, 1965
49	Kansas City Times	2 97 Circulation figures, 1962
and 19 64
50	Kansas City Kansan	297 Circulation figures, 1954-1957, 1962 and 1964
51	Springfield News and Leader 297 Circulation figures,
1955-1960
52	Springfield	Leader and Press 2 99 Circulation	figures,
1955-1960
53	Kansas City	Star	299 Circulation	figures, 1954,
1957, 1962,	1964
5	4	Ebony and Jet	3 00
Circulation figures,
1957 and 1960
55	Kansas City Kansan	301 Circulation figures,
1956-1963	.
56	Kansas City Star and Times 3 01 Circulation figures, 1960
57	Emporia Gazette Circulation 302 figures, 1954-1965
58	Life Circulation figures,	302 1950-1965
59	Newsweek Circulation	302 figures, 1950-1965
60	Time Circulation figures,	303 1950-1965
61	The New York Times	3 0 3 Circulation figures,
1950-1965
62	Reader's Digest	3 0 3 Circulation figures,
1950-1965
63	Miscellaneous Anti-Cigarette	303 materials
‘ 6 4 Science Newsletter article	3 04
6	5	Consumer Reports articles	305
4/51-10/65
66	Total Television: A	3 06 Comprehensive Guide to Programming from 1948-1980
67	American Thesaurus of Slang 3 0 6 1942, 1947, 1953
68	Ladies Home Journal	307 November 1961
6	9	To Smoke or Not to Smoke	3 0 7
70	Deposition of David Burton,	308 Volumes I and II, First Amended Notice, Memorandum and Order, Answers t~o First Amended Complaint
71	Benjamin Rush's essays	326
72	A Counterblaste to Tobacco	3 2 7 by King James I
73	Notes of trip to Arents	328 Collection, 7-13-94
74	Mr. Fowler's Disquisition on 3 3 0 the Evils of Using Tobacco
by Orin Fowler
75	Tobacco; It's History.	3 31 Nature jand Effects on the Body and Mind, by Joel Shew, M.D.
76	Thoughts and storing, on	331 Tabacco for American Lada
77	"A Mediation on Tobacco,”	332 November 1855, Nat i ona1
78	"A New Counterblaste,"	333 December 1861, Atlantic
79	"Tobacco: It's Use and Abuse," 333 November 1862
80	The Use of Tobacco and	3 3 4 the Evils... Resulting
Therefrom by John Griscom, M.D.
81	"Tobaccophagoi and	334 Tobaccophagism," 1870, by
John C. Draper
82	"Our Fashionable Narcotic," 335 1870, by Rev. Fry
83	The Use of Tobacco vs.	3 3 5 Purity- Chastity and Sound
Health. by John Cowan, M.D.
84	The Tobacco Plug and Cigar	3 3 6
85	Tobacco: Its Physical, Mental 3 3 6 Moral and Social Influences
by B, W. Chase
86	Anti-Tobacco	337 by Abiel Livermore
87	"The Injury of Tobacco and Its 337 Relation to Other Durg Habits"
by Charles Town
88	"The Truth about Tobacco"	338 by F. C. Walsh
89	The Little white Slaver	3 3 8 by Henry Ford
90	The Brown God and His	3 3 8 White Imp
DEPOSITION PAGE NOT RECEIVED
2NENJ: Aim
E NAME:
ENO:	_J____
106	Notes of 8-28-95 telephone	347 conversation with Shelley Bookspan
107	Reader's Digest articles,	348 1924-1963
108	Life Magazine articles	349 from 1950s
10	9	Ebony magazine articles,	349
1962 and 1964
110	Good Health Magazine articles 349 1899-1929
111	Good Health Magazine articles, 350 heart references
112	Good Health Magazine articles, 350 1942-1953	.
113	Good Health Magazine articles, 35 0 January 1930-May 1942
114	Newsweek articles	351
115	T±JBJ1 articles	351
116	The New York Times articles, 351 Miscellaneous Indiana material
Deposition of JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D., taken on February 23, 1996, beginning at 9:00 a.m., at the Marriott Hotel Intercontinental-Airport, 18700 John F. Kennedy Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77032, before DONNA J. HOWSON, Certified Shorthand Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, taken pursuant to notice, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and stipulations of counsel as set out herein.
APPEARANCES:
Mr. Gregory Leyh Humphrey, Farrington & McClain 221 West Lexington, Suite 400 Independence, Missouri 64050 Counsel for Plaintiffs
Ms. Sydney Bosworth McDole and
Mr. Stephen J. Kaczynski.
Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue ‘
2300 Trammel Crow Center 2001 Ross Avenue .	Dallas, Texas 75201
Counsel for Defendant
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
APPEARANCES (Continued):
Mr. James Mirro (VIA TELEPHONE) Chadbourne & Parke
30	Rockefeller Plaza New York, New York 10112
Counsel for Defendant
The American Tobacco Company
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D., called as a witness, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified upon his oath as f o1lows:
EXAMINATION BY MR. LEYH:
Q.	Good morning, Dr. Martin, my name is Greg
Leyh and I - -
MR. MIRRQ: Greg, can't hear what you're saying.
MR. LEYH: Okay. I'll stipulate that any of R.J.'s objections are American's objections and you can just hang up, if you like.
MR. McDOLE: I wish you would stop raising your voice to the witness.
MR. LEYH: Oh, here we go.
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) Dr. Martin, have you given
a deposition before?
A.	No, I have not.
q.	I'm sure you've been instructed as to what
some of the grounc. rules are, but let me just highlight a few of them for you.
A.	Okay.
Q.	If you don't understand any question I
ask, will you stop me and say I don't understand the question?
A.	Yes, I will,
Q.	If I don't hear that from you, I'll ■
understand that you did understand it; is that fair?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. If at any time you want to consult
a document in order to give an answer, please feel free to do that.
A.	Okay.
Q.	If you need a break at any time, please
feel free to let me know you need a break and we will take one.
MR. KACZYNSKI: Do you want to tell him about your back?
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) You have a bad back?
A.	Sometimes it acts up, and I had a bad day
yesterday; so we'll see what happens.
Q.	Okay.
A.	If I need to get up, is it okay if I just
stand up?
q.	Sure, stand up, walk around, do whatever
you want; just so we can be heard, that's all .
It's important for the court reporter's ability to take down a clear record that you and I not be talking at the same time. I'll try and pay you the courtesy of allowing you to finish answers before I begin the next question and ask that you give me the same courtesy. Okay?
A.	That's fine.
Q,	Your book, Drinking in America ends with,
what, to me anyway, is a provocative idea; and I want to draw your attention to these closing sentences on page 195 of this book and ask you about them.
You write there, "The alcohol question will not be a matter of eliminating alcoholism, for that seems unlikely in the modern American social context, but if keeping drinking within limits society can tolerate," then you have parenthetically, "{We hope with at least some steps taken to mitigate the appalling drinking-related mayhem or. the highways.) This attitude, no matter how
unpalatable the sum, may represent the new consensus on drinking in America. In many ways, it may also reflect a more flexible return to the orderly communal ideals of the past. 11
Do you want to look at that?
A.	No.
Q.	Let me begin by asking if your reference
to the "orderly communal ideals of the past" is a reference to republicanism, small "r."
A.	Small "r" republicanism?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Both yes and no.
Q.	We're off to a good start.
A.	Because we talk about puritanism and the
puritan ideal of the community, and that is pre-republican.
Yes, in the sense that part of the republican ideal is to have an orderly community in which individuals have the right to pursue their own liberties but within the context of that broader social order.
q.	is it your opinion -- strike that. Are
you a small "r" republican?
MR. KACZYNSKI .* Object to the form; vague.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Do you know -- you know
what a small "r" republican is, I trust.
A.	Maybe you should give me a definition.
Q.	Do you know what a small "r" republican
is?
A.	Well, according to the definition in that
book, a small "r" republican would be someone who would be concerned about good . order in the community while preserving individuals, the right of individuals to pursue their own liberties and to have some freedom in their lives.
Q.	Is it not the case that republicanism --
for the sake of tnis conversation, we're always talking about small "r" republicanism. Okay?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Io it the case that republicanism has a
long and distinguished heritage?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is the republicanism about which you write
in the book Drinking in America that
republicanism which extends back through Machiavelli to Aristotle in one form or another?
A.	Yes, in one form or another.
Q.	Is that the same republicanism about which
Pocock has extensively written, for example?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
form .
A.	I would say generally, yes.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Given the definition of
republicanism you just provided and the contextualization of that definition and the history of ideas however briefly we just did that, are you a small "r" republican?
A.	Well, let me answer this way: I have
certainly believed in the need for good order in the community, and in turn, I very much believe that individuals should have certain basic fundamental rights 2nd freedoms to pursue their lives as they would choose to pursue them.
Q,	To me, correct ne if I am mistaken, th.it
generally sounds like you are a small "r"
republican. Would that be a misdescription, of your views?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. Now, you agree, do you net,
professor, that one of the central ideas in republicanism throughout its history, including its history in America., is a notion of virtue in the community?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And what do you understand the notion of
virtue in the republican ideology to mean?
A.	Serving the greater good of the whole
community; that is, shall we say, putting aside at certain times one's own self-interest to serve the greater good of the whole community.
Q.	So is it fair to describe republicanism as
an ideology that balances commitment to the social good, memorialized through this notion of virtue in part, with a commitment to individual liberties and right s?
A.	Yes.
q.	is it fair to fay that republicanism as an
ideology in America contrasts with
negative liberty models?
A.	I think you would have to tell me what you
mean by "negative liberty models."
Q.	Do you know what "negative liberty" means?
A.	I don't think I'm familiar with that
concept.
Q.	Are you familiar with Berlin's article,
"Two Concepts of Freedom"?
A.	No, I'm not.
Q.	Okay. Do you know what "libertarianism"
is?
A.	Only generally.
Q.	What is your general understanding?
A.	Are you talking libertarianism with a
large "L" or the small "1"?
Q.	Let's keep it small.
A,	Keep it small?
Q.	Yes, keep it small.
A.	Well, a small "1" libertarian would put
the emphasis upon doing as one pleases.
Q.	A small "1" libertarian would be more of
an individualist than a republican; is that fair to say?
A.	Yes,
Q.	Small "1" libertarian would be more likely
to emphasize the right of the individual to exercise free choices than would a republican; correct?
A.	Yes.
Q,	A republican would want to balance the
right of individuals against what virtue requires; correct?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Okay. Now, given that understanding, what
role did republicanism play, if any, in your understanding of prohibition?
A.	Of prohibition?
Q.	Uh-huh.
A.	Well, republicans, with our small "r,"
argued that it was in the best interest of the corr.rauni.ty for no one to have alcohol available to them.
Q.	Did they argue anything else that was
relevant to understanding prohibition?
A.	Well, they predicated that on a group of
ideas that come together that alcohol and alcoholism resulted in poverty, crime, and various other kinds of social problems. After all, behind, as the prohibitioni.st would have it, every good tavern was a
house of ill repute; so we could put vice into this category.
So they argued that if you eliminated alcohol, you could eliminate a whole host of problems for society. You could make society, American society, a much better place in which to live.
Q.	Did, in fact, and I guess we're talking
about the first third of the century here, just for the sake of -A.	Yes, national prohibition from 1920 to 1 933 .
Q.	Okay. Let's talk about 1920 to 1933.
Did, in fact, the use of alcohol in America contribute to poverty?
A.	In some instances, yes; in some instances,
no .
Q.	Can you generalize about whether or not
alcohol was a significant contributor to poverty in the United States from 1920 to 1933?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
form.
A.	Could you repe?; the question?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) ifes. Are you able -- and
if you're not, just say you're not. Are you able to offer a general statement about the extent to which alcohol contributed to poverty in the United States between 1920 and 1933?
A.	what I can tell you is that
prohibitionists argued that drinking fathers would dissipate the family income and bring poverty to their household.
Now, whether, indeed, that was a measurable reality in the 1920s is somewhat difficult to determine because alcohol, at least early on, wasn't readily available.
The decade of the Twenties is known as an era of enormous prosperity. The terrible Great Depression began in 1929, and I doubt whether alcohol was 'the cause of the Great Depression.
Q,	if we loosen up our historical parameters,
just about the twentieth century, does that change your answer with regard to whether or not you believe alcohol contributed to poverty in America?
A.	Well, I really haven't studied the
question of whether alcohol contributed to poverty in America; rather, I have looked into what prohibitionists felt about alcohol.
Q.	You don't have an opinion on that question
then, the one I just asked?
A.	Well, I haven't studied the question.
Q.	Okay. Do you have an opinion on whether
or not alcohol between 1920 and 1933 contributed to crime in America?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What is that opinion?
A.	That opinion is that after two or three
years of the so-called Noble Experiment, individuals made up their minds. They wanted alcohol and became very inventive in the ways to produce and to distribute alcohol, and that became a source of crime in the United States that was not alleviated until the end of national prohibition.
Q.	What about vice between 1920 and 1933?
Did alcohol contribute to vice in America?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
f orm .
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) You used the word "vice, " I
think, earlier -A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	--in reference to prostitution.
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	Did you mean it more broadly than
prostitution, or did you mean to limit it to that?
A,	I would say probably prostitution.
q.	Let's talk about prostitution.
A.	Well, investigating and looking into
crime, which is a very common subject with respect to national prohibition because of the rise of organized crime, some would argue, some historians have argued there was actually a decline in prostitution because of the production of alcohol was far more profitable than, let's say, continuing -- you would, for instance, turn a bordello into a distillery.
q.	is that an argument to which you subscribe
an opinion?
A.	In some instances, yes.
Q.	In what instances?
A.	I was thinking about Chicago in particular
and the crime syndicates in Chicago. They did make a shift.
Q.	X take it that not all prohibitionists
were republicans, were they?
A.	No.
Q.	So that the body of thought that supported
prohibition included ideas that republicans didn't share; is that a fair statement?
A.	I'm not sure how to answer that question.
No example is coming to my mind.
(Ms, McDole left the deposition room.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) I'm trying to distinguish
if there's a distinction to be made, you tell me, between prohibitionists as a group and republicans as a group.
Obviously, there's a significant overlap; correct ?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	Are there differences of opinion as to the
role of alcohol between prohibitionists and republicans?
MH. KACZYNSKI: The world of ■	alcohol and what; in any one of
these categories that you described?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} The world of alcohol in
society generally?
A.	I think that traditional small "r"
republicans definitely lean toward or favored the order side of the continuum, good order in juxtaposition to free reign, do as you will, enjoy your liberties without restraints.
Q,	In that sense, are they distinctive from
prohibitionists? Are they any different than prohibitionists?
A.	No, I was saying that I think that was a
common characteristic of prohibitionists.
q.	Are there differences between republicans
and prohibitionists as they relate to the role of alcohol in society?
A.	I would have to say that depends on the
particular prohibitionists and what they might choose tc emphasize.
Q.	All right. Give me some examples of what
particular prohibitionists emphasize that you think a republican wouldn't or cidn't subscribe to.
A.	Well, I think I'm saying the exact
opposite that a good republican was a very likely -- that a good republican would be probably a good prohibitionist.
Q.	But a good prohibitionist wouldn't
necessarily be a good republican?
A.	A good prohibitionist?
Q.	Would not necessarily be a good
republican?
A.	A good prohibitionist was very concerned
about the alleged disorderly aspects of drinking and alcohol in society. So I would say, a good prohibitionist; would have some significant streak of republican thinking - -Q,	Right.
A.	-- in the back of their minds or
ideologically. q.	or at least a streak of thinking about
social order whether they -A.	Social order, yes. q, -- understood it to have its -A. That's right. q. -- roots in republicanism?
A.	As a perception.
MR. KACZYNSKI: Let him finish his question before you answer.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) I'm still unclear. Forgive
me, I don't mean to belabor this, but can you think of any particular prohibitionists who subscribed to ideas about alcohol and society to which a republican would not be likely to subscribe ?
A.	Yes, I can give you one example, Carrie
Nation,,
Q.	Okay. What ideas?
A.	Well, Carrie Nation believed that if need
be you had to literally rip the bars down. So in an effort to bring order to the community, she was a source of disorder, and that would be inconsistent.
Q.	Do you see analogies between the prohibition
movement we've been discussing -- strike that.
Do you see analogies between, the role of republicanism in this prohibition movement we've been describing and the anti-tobacco forces at any time in the
twentieth century?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Would you describe what you take to be the
analogies, please?
A.	I think that various individuals; ranging
from John Harvey Kellogg to Lucy Page Gaston firmly believed that if you could eliminate tobacco from people's lives, that would enhance the health not only of the individual but of society more generally.
Q.	Any other analogies that corn* to your mind
between the republicanism in the alcohol movement as compared to the republicanism in the anti-tobacco movement?
A.	Yes, I think that there was a general
attitude on the part of reformers that they had an obligation to society to help people improve their lives.
Q.	Can you think of any other analogies,
professor?
A,	Yes, One of the themes of the
anti-tobacco ir-ovement in the early twentieth centv:y, a theme that comes cut of the nineteenth century if not running
farther back, can be encapsulated in the "Don't let a good boy go bad," in that phrase. I should put quotation marks around that, "Don't let a good boy go bad. "
Q.	What does that mean?
A.	That means that if a young lad started to
use tobacco products, he would probably find those tobacco products habituating; and that he would probably lie about using those products because it was well known in society that youngsters shouldn't smoke; and that the boy probably would start, or at least this is what the individuals would argue, a life of thievery and crime in order to support his particular habit.
Q.	Okay. Can you think of any other
analogies?
A.	Well, one of the themes in the early
twentieth century has to do with mental efficiency. Let's take our hypothetical boy, and the boy by virtue of using tobacco and by virtue of the nicotire he would be getting in his system would start
to have physical problems, possibly develop a very common term "tobacco heart," polluting the circulatory system, constricting the vessels, the capillaries, the arteries; and in turn, this would stunt his growth, stunt his mental development, affect his physical capacity such as participation in athletics.
These would be the kinds of -these would be the kinds of things that would be related to that theme. And obviously, such a lad could not be as good a citizen and as good a servant to the Republic if he was short, mentally deficient, and physically enfeebled.
Q.	Is that as many analogies as you can think
of, or can you think of others?
A.	Well, I could give some other examples,
but I would say in items of analogies, that wouId - -Q.	That's a pretty good list?
A.	-- that would represent --
Q.	I'm sorry. Go ahead.
A.	-- I was just going to say, what I can,
rather, at this particular time.
Q.	Sure. And I realize you can just only
remember what you can remember. If you think o£ some later while we're talking, well, share them with me, will you?
A.	Okay.
Q.	Mental deficiency, then, refers to those
physical symptoms you described, vessel constriction, tobacco heart, stunting growth, and so on; correct?
A.	That's correct.
q.	Do you know, and I realize that you're not
a medical doctor, but do you have an understanding of whether, in fact, one actually gets stunted growth from smoking cigarettes ?
A.	No, I don't have an understanding of
that. I was simply giving you what these individuals stated.
q.	So you don't know whether or not those
things are true: One's growth is stunted, or one's mental development is stunted from smoking?
A.	No, I don't.
q.	Do you believe them?
A.	Well, I haven't studied the issue, and
since I haven't studied the issue, it would be a personal opinion. X would say probably not.
Q.	In fact, isn't it fair to say, professor,
that there are lots of examples from the early twentieth century of alleged diseases caused by activities that we later learned were not actually caused by those activities?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the form; vague.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Is that fair, sir?
A.	Well, you're asking me for my personal
opinion, and I honestly don't know.
q.	Well, are you familiar with statements in
the early twentieth century that suggested masturbation causes physical prcblems?
A .	Yes .
Q.	Do we not know that many of those
statements are mistaken?
A.	That's what some people say.
q.	is that what you believe?
A,	i don't have an opinion on that subject
one way or the ^ther.
q,	So you don't know whether or not
masturbation will cause a person to go pale, for example?
A.	It's not an issue I've studied. I don't
have an opinion.
Q.	Okay. Don't know one way or Che other,
then; is that right?
A.	I just stated I don't have an opinion.
Q.	All right. Fine. Now, the list you gave
me of analogies was preceded by your reference to Kellogg and Gaston; do you recall that?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	Is it fair to say, Professor Martin, that
the list of things you gave me and as I wrote them down there was an emphasis in the anti-tobacco movement eliminating smoking in order to enhance health, I think you said; the reformers felt they had an obligation to help people improve their lives; "Don't let a good boy go bad"; and mental deficiency?
A.	Yes, s i. r .
Q.	Do those four themes -- ie it fair to call
them themes in the anti-tobacco movement in the twentieth century?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Is it fair?
A.	Well --
Q.	I'm sorry. Go ahead,
A.	In the early twentieth century.
Q.	Only in the early twentieth century?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Where would you say the cutoff was when
they no longer became prominent themes in the anti-tobacco movement?
A.	I would say in the period from the 1930s
to the 1950s.
Q.	Is when they began to recede?
A.	Recede, decline.
Q.	Okay. All right. So prior to the point
at which these themes receded, would it be fair to describe them as themes which are anchored in both some sense of what medical realities might be from smoking as well as moral realities; is that a fair thing to say about these things?
A.	Yes.
Q.	So they combined moral and medical
judgments; correct?
A .	Ye s .
Q.	In fact,, somebody like Gaston was a
moralist; correct?
A.	Well, she wasn't a physician or a trained
scientist.
(Ms. McDole entered the deposition room.)
Q-	(BY MR. LEYH) All right, In fact, she
was primarily concerned, as were many others in the anti-tobacco movement at this time, in rooting out what they took to be the evil character associated with smoking; is that a fair statement?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. And does that apply to Kellogg as
well, that he was, although not exclusively concerned with moral judgments, significantly concerned with moral judgments about anti-tobacco?
A.	Kellogg less so than Gaston. Kellogg was
a trained medical doctor; and Kellogg, I think the emphasis with Kellogg would be placed more on achieving the best possible health.
Q.	But you're not suggesting that Kellogg was
not also concerned about improving
character by getting people to quit smoking, are you?
A.	NO.
Q.	Is the reason y^u associate these themes
with republicanism because of the moral content of these themes?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. Why then do you associate these
themes with just because there's a generalized notion of doing good for society?
A.	Well, I think themes evolve, and if one is
going to do good for society, there are different ways of doing good for society at different times. And questions relating to good health become far more prevalent within the context of republicanism in the nineteenth and into the twentieth centuries. Political questions, perhaps, resolved recede more to the background.
Q.	All right. Do you believe that Kellogg or
Gaston or any of the other leaders in the anti-tobacco mo /ement at this time understood themselves to be republicans?
A.	They might not have described themselves
in those terms.
Q.	Do you have any information to suggest
they actually thought of themselves as republicans, consciously?
A.	I don't recall specifically at this
moment.
Q.	You would agree that republicanism is a
distinguished tradition in America?
A.	Certainly a prevalent tradition in
America.
q.	Do you think it's not distinguished?
A.	No, I said it was a prevalent tradition.
Q.	My question was, is it also distinguished?
A.	That calls for a value judgment, and I
would prefer not to make that value j udgment.
Q.	Well, I mean your earlier remarks about
the passage I read from your book,
Drinking in America. I thought included -well, let me strike that.
You say here, for example, 11 (We hope with at least some steps taken to mitigate the appalling drinking...)"; you're making a value judgment there, are
you not?
A.	I think we're commenting on an observable
fact, and that's a reference to Mothers Against Drunk Driving in the rise of the anti - drinking and driving movement during the 1970s and the 1980s.
Q.	So when you say, you and your coauthor
say, "We hope some steps will be taken to mitigate," that's not a judgment you're making; it's just a description?
A.	It's a description. I would say that it's
a description.
Q.	Do you think it would be a good thing if
steps were taken to mitigate the appalling drinking-related mayhem on the highways?
A.	I think everybody would think that would
be a good thing.
Q.	And you would include yourself in that
category?
A.	Yes.
Q,	The medical component of these four
themes, let's t?.lk about that for a moment.
A.	Okay.
q.	All right. Did the medical information
upon which the anti-tobacco reformers relied, you know, in the early twentieth century include ideological information, information about cigarette smoking causing specific diseases?
A.	I would say, yes.
Q.	Okay. Give me some examples of that
medical information.
A.	There are probably lots of examples. I'll
try to give you a couple that I can remember. Dr. Benjamin Rush writing about tobacco problems in 1796 observed a person with pulmonary problems who was a heavy tobacco user, and he surmised that the tobacco had caused the person's death.
There was a pamphlet in 17 -- I'm sorry, 18 - - approximately 1883 by an Abiel Livermore, and he talked specifically about tobacco constricting blood vessels and that could lead to various kinds of health problems and death.
More generally in the pamphlet literature in the nineteenth century and carrying into the twentieth century, the
pamphleteers, whether they were physicians or whatever, would increasingly begin their pamphlets by stating that tobacco is a poison; and increasingly over time, they would state specific diseases or health conditions that could shorten one's life.
So	yes, there is a pattern in the pamphlet literature carrying from the nineteenth into the twentieth century.
Q.	Okay. Now, let's talk about that pattern
a moment. Are the examples that you just gave anomalous, or did the medical community of those points in time share the views you attributed to those individuals, Rush and Livermore and so on?
A.	Did the medical community?
Q.	Yes, physicians. Let's say, physicians at
those various points in time.
A.	Well, I haven't studied physicians
necessarily at the various points in time, and at that time, I would say it would depend on the physician, different attitudes.
q,	So you're not a«are of any consensus anong
physicians that Rush's views were correct
and Livermore's views were correct and the pamphleteers views were correct at the various points those views were expressed?
A.	No, I'm not aware of any consensus.
Q,	One of the articles you cite in your
source material which you attached to your expert report in this case is an article by John Burnham on physicians. You know the one I'm talking about?
A.	Yes, I believe I do. There was one
Burnham essay.
Q.	Have you read that recently?
A.	I vaguely remember it, probably within the
last six months.
Q.	If I told you that Burnham says in that
article that there was no consensus about any specific etiology, consensus of community physicians prior to at least the mid-Fifties, does that sound like what you recall reading in Burnham's article?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I don't recall that. What I do recall
from the article is that Burnham discusses models of understanding, and he said the model of understanding with respect to
tobacco in the late nineteenth century was a model predicated on the notion that tobacco was a poison and that what he calls a physiological model becomes more prevalent in the early twentieth century moving into the 1920s encapsulated by the terms "tobacco" and "mental efficiency."
Q.	Does he say, if you recall, that
physicians believed in the poison model?
A .	I don't recall.
Q.	You don't remember?
A.	I don't remember,
Q.	Okay. We'll get to this specifically
later, but let me just ask the question since we're talking about Burnham now.
That source material section of your report, are those materials upon which you relied in writing your report?
A.	Are you referring to the full
bibliography?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Yes.
Q.	So those were materials that in effect
went into the formulation of your opinion as expressed in your report in this case,*
is that right?
A.	Those are materials that I looked at, but
whether any one particular article, book, or whatever played into that formulation is difficult for me to say because obviously not all of them agree on all points.
Q.	Right. We would have to take them up one
by one I guess to find out; is that right?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Do you recall -- well, let's strike that.
Is Burnham a reputable historian in your judgment, John Burnham?
A.	I think he has his strengths and he has
his weaknesses.
Q.	Well, I am going to have to follow that
up. What would you regard as his strengths as a historian, as a social historian?
A.	I think he has opened up some very
interesting avenues of inquiry.
Q.	What are they?
A.	Well, I'm trying to recall, and it's been
years since I read it, a very interesting article by Burnham on the prohibition
movement; in the 1920s in which he argued that at least early on the prohibition movement worked; and that was very different from what other historians had argued up until that time.
Q.	And did it work because it helped to
regulate the consumption of alcohol?
A.	Early on, that is his argument, yes.
Q.	Do you agree with that argument?
A.	Within certain parameters, yes.
Q.	What other strengths do you think Burnham
displays as a social historian?
A.	I would say that he has the capacity to
deal with interesting questions.
Q.	is that rare among historians?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Too rare?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Are any of these interesting
questions with which you think Professor Burnham has the capacity to deal related to tobacco, the history of tobacco?
A.	Yes.
Q.	what are the in_ere3ting questions that
relate to tobacco history?
A.	I thought, to go back to the article we
were discussing, his comparison of the 1964 Surgeon General's report with the 1929 statement of the Surgeon General was both very, very interesting and very misleading, and I think that's Burnham's weakness as a historian. The two are in no way comparable.
Q.	Tell me, if you can recall, what his
comparison of the '64 report with the '29 statement was.
A.	Well, I think he equated them as
co-equal. The '29 statement is very much couched as a very brief statement, and it is very much couched within a concern, perhaps a moral concern, relating to health concerns about not wanting young women to end up like young boys who smoke. We don't want to make a young woman go bad.
Q.	That's the '29 statement?
A.	That's the '29 statement, yes.
Q.	And so you're telling me, I think, that
the misleading part of Professor Burnham's analysis is in making co-equal --
A.	That's correct,
Q.	-- what in fact is not co-equal?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	And these two statements, the report and
the statement, are not co-equal in your opinion because the '29 statement was a ‘	moral concern about women or reflected a
moral concern?
A.	Reflected a moral concern about women,
rather than focusing specifically on the issue of smoking and health, which is the obvious concern of the 1964 report.
Q.	The '64: report was more focused on medical
issues; is that fair?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Was it focused at all on moral issues
related to smoking?
A.	1 think there is some evidence to that
effect,, ye s .
Q.	What is that evidence?
A.	The report makes allusions to literature
studying smokers and nonsmokers, and in virtually all of the studies going back to the Thirties, smokers were always the more intelligent focus -- I'm sorry. I said
that backwards. Nonsmokers were always the more intelligent, the better students. Smokers, of course, were at the other end..
Q.	Do you recall what those studies were that
led the authors of the report to draw that conclusion?
A,	The authors of what report?
Q.	Surgeon General. Aren't you describing
the '64 report?
A.	The Surgeon General's report notes that
literature dating back to the 1930s.
Q.	Okay. And in your opinion, that reflects
a moral judgment on the part of the Surgeon General's report; is that right?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection,
A.	I really don't know.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) okay. So you're ‘not saying
that there's any moral content by design in the '64 Surgeon General's report; is that correct?
A.	I can't answer that question. I don't
know.
Q.	Okay. So all you're aware of that is in
the '64 report is medical conclusions and
facta; is that a fair statement?
A.	No, I just described other kinds of
material that was there.
Q*	All right. Then the nonsmokers as more
intelligent material, whatever that is.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is that a significant part of the '64
Surgeon General's report?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	Well, all I could do would be to offer you
a personal opinion.	•
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) That's what I'm asking for,
professor.
A.	I would say probably not.
Q.	You're here to give your opinions today;
do you understand?
A.	Yes.
Q.	In fact, the opinions in your report are
your personal opinions; are they not?
A.	Based on the study of an enormous
documentary record, yes.
Q.	I understand you've examined materials and
then formed opinions, and that's: what you're here to ,alk about; is that your understanding of why you're here?
A,	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Now, is there any empirical data
that you're aware of to support the conclusion that nonsmokers are more intelligent than smokers?
A.	There were a number of such studies
conducted in the early twentieth century into the 1930s. Whether we would consider them empirically valid, I can't say. ■
Q.	You don't have an opinion on that?
A.	whether those studies are empirically
valid?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I've never looked at them from that point
of view.
C.	So they might be?
A.	They might not be.
Q.	Okay. Now, just to tie up your comments
on Professor Burnham, you indicated initially that he had opened some new areas of inquiry. Are any of those new areas related to tobacco use in America?
A.	Yes, we just discussed his article.
Q,	Okay. Any others?
A.	Yes.
Q,	What are they?
A.	Burnham is the author of a book called
Bad Habits.
Q.	What is that book all about? I can guess,
but why don't you tell me.
A.	Let's see. I can't remember all the bad
habits he got into, smoking, drinking, swearing. I'm sure vice must be in there, et cetera, et cetera.
Q.	And that's a new area of inquiry?
A.	No, I think of that as much more synthetic
work than a new area of inquiry.
Q.	Is this part of his capacity to probe
interesting questions?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Do you recall what his general
thesis is, if he has one, in that part of the book which addresses smoking'?
A.	I think that Burnham in that book argues
that our society in breaking free of various kinds of nineteenth century shackles went off in various hedonistic directions in the twentieth century, and that concerned nim greatly as a historian and as an individual.
Q.	Does he say in his book why - - I'm only
interested in whatever of it deals with smoking.
A.	Al1 right.
Q.	Does he say in that part of the book that
deals with smoking why he's concerned that we're going off in hedonistic directions?
A.	No, not to my recollection.
Q.	Do you know why he's concerned about that?
A.	Do I know why?
Q.	Yes,	*
A.	I haven't looked at the book for years. 1
really don't remember.
Q.	Maybe he's a republican?
MR. KACZYNSK.I: Objection.
A .	I don't know.
Q.	(BY MR. IiEYH) Okay. Does he in the book
talk about hedonism?	'
A.	Well, in a generalized sense, yes.
Q.	Can you give me a little more information
about the way he talks about hedonism in a generalized sense?
A.	Well, that society supposedly had been
through a very rescrained period with respect to behavior, forms of behavior,
and that Americans were determined to break free and live out the more little "1" libertarian side of the equation. .
Q.	Is that a misleading characterization of
that part of American history?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	As a personal opinion, I think it's an
overstacement.
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you say that Bad
Habits, that part of B?d Habits that deals with smoking, provides the reader with a misleading understanding of smoking in the United States?
A.	I think it's one of the weakest parts of
the book.
Q.	Okay. And have you told me all the
reasons why you think it's weak?'
A.	I thought he was very poorly informed on
the subject and had done very little research.
Q.	What in particular did he miss in terms of
his research?
A.	Well, he hadn't -- and again this is
something, this is a book that I haven't
looked at for three or four years. I don't remember that got into the pamphlet literature that was widely available. I don't believe that he made much of an effort to read the information that was constantly circulating through newspapers both national and local. I don't recall that he looked at popular culture sources. I don't recall that he in looking -- did I say newspapers? I'm sorry, I meant magazines, popular magazines. He made no attempt: to determine how pervasive those materials were in society, if they were pervasive at all. Those are some of the things that I recall.
Q.	Stepping away from Professor Burnham, I
want to move into another subject in a membership, but I want to ask one last question about what we've talked about for the last hour. Do you believe, professor, that the debate about tobacco and health in the United States in the twentieth century has been influenced significantly by political ideology, by which I mean the sort of republicanism, libertarianism, and
those sorts of isms that we've been discussing?
HR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
form.
A.	I would say it would be one among other
factors.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) How many factors are there
that have had a significant influence on the content of the debate about tobacco and health in the United States in the twentieth century. Is it a short list or a long list?
A.	Well, it's very difficult for me to
categorize. It depends on how one constructs one's list.
Q.	Construct it in any way you think
appropriate. You're the expert here.
A.	Well, I do think there were common themes,
and we've talked about those earlier. And I do believe that health questions as I indicated earlier tend to become more predominant over other themes as we move through the twentieth century. Certainly health, per se, as a subject produces one large story after another in the twentieth
century. Some who argue the cancer scare of the Fifties being perhaps the largest health story of the twentieth century. Those would be some of the things.
Q.	When you talk about health as being a
theme throughout the twentieth century, are you talking about more than what physicians thought at any given time about the risks of smoking. Was there a broader concept than just that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What else does it include? I take it, it
includes what physicians thought?
A.	Yes.
0*	Okay. So that's one part of what you mean
by "health." What other parts are there to that?
A.	Well, we talked about the mental aspects;
we talked about the moral aspects. I'm referencing back to Lucy Page Gaston.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Making a good boy go bad, making a good
girl into a sinner, et cetera.
Q.	All right. So tha;: when you say "health
questions," are you talking about views of
the physicians, moral views as they relate to health, and mental efficiency; is that accurate?
A.	Well, mental efficiency when we include
physical efficiency withiri the rubric of mental efficiency.
Q.	Okay. That all falls into the rubric of
health themes?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, stepping back one level of
generalization, we've got health themes that are a factor in the debate about tobacco, cigarette smoking, and risks in the twentieth century; that's one factor. We've got politics, by which I mean republicanism and views of free choice and all that; is that correct? Is that another factor?	‘
A.	Yes.
q.	Is that an acceptable way of describing
that, or do you have a better way of describing it?
A.	No, that's f ina.
Q.	Okay. Now, are there any other
significant factors that influenced the
the physicians, moral views as they relate to health, and mental efficiency; is that accurate?
A.	Well, rr.ental efficiency when we include
physical efficiency within the rubric of mental efficiency.
Q.	Okay. That all falls into the rubric of
health themes?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, stepping back one level of
generalization, we've got health themes that are a factor in the debate about tobacco, cigarette smoking, and risks in the twentieth century; that's one factor. We've got politics, by which I mean republicanism and views of free choice and all that; is that correct? Is that	-
another factor?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is that an acceptable way of describing
that, or do you have a better way of describing it?
A.	No, that's fine.
Q.	Okay. Now, are there any other
significant factors that influenced the
content of the debate about health and smoking in the United States in the twentieth century?
A.	Yes, certainly the fact that we are an
industrializing and urbanizing society will raise certain issues that in turn relate to smoking. The factory belching forth its polluted fumes, the internal combustion engine.
Q.	The ability to mass produce cigarettes?
A.	That may havn been a factor, yes.
Certainly the rise of the modern chemical industry, the production of certain toxins as another form of potential pollutants in an industrialized world. These factors would all relate to health and in turn perhaps relate to questions about smoking or use of tobacco more generally.
Q.	Okay. So by my count, we've got three
main factors so far; industrialization or the industrializing factor, the political factor, and what you call the health factor as contributing to the content of the debate in the twentieth century. Are there any others?
A.	I'm trying to back up because I'm not sure
where moral issues went, mental efficiency or physical efficiency, physical health.
Q.	Health, that's where you put them.
A.	Okay.
Q.	if you want to put them somewhere else,
please tell me. They are accounted for, though.
A.	Well, I guess tnat's what I can think of
at this particular time.
Q.	Okay. As it relates to those three
general categories, you said that the health questions, I think you said, tended to become more prominent as we moved through the twentieth century; j,s that a fair description of the case? Is that right ?
A.	Yes.	'
Q.	All right. In the early part of the
twentieth century, which of these three factors was the most important factor in determining the content of the discussion about tobacco and health in America?
A.	Let's review the factors so that -- I
haven't necessarily put them together in
my mind. Could you just review what you think, the three are.
Q.	I have under health, the physician's views
of tobacco and health, mental and physical efficiency, and moral judgments about health; and that's where you think you mentioned Gaston,
A.	Yes.
Q.	Then in the second category, we've got
political republicanism and libertarianism, whatever you think about order and choice, and all of that.
In the third category, industrializing of society, factories, combustion engine, mass production of cigarettes, rise in the chemical industry is what my notes reflect.
A.	Okay.
q.	So those are the three general factors.
The question again is in the early part of the twentieth century, how would you rank these three in terms of their importance as contributors to the content of the debate about tobacco and health?
A.	Could I just back up and say that I do
think an important factor, I guess we would put this under the health category, is the rise of the scientific community.
Q,	Okay,
A.	So we can include that there. In the
early twentieth century, I would say our health category would be preeminent.
Q.	What would be the next most important
factor at that time?
A.	The political.
Q.	Okay. And generally how much more
important was health than the political factor in the early twentieth century?
A.	It's very difficult for me to say because
the two in some instances, perhaps in many instances, would be working together, so it's difficult to say at any particular point in time wnether it was Factor A or Factor B.
Q.	Fair enough. Within the health category,
which you have said is preeminent in the early part of the twentieth century -A.	Okay.
q.	-- which of the subparts, and again I've
written down physicians' views, mental and
physical efficiency, the moral judgment, and then the rise of the modern scientific community as its four subparts, which of those four in the early part of the twentieth century is most important in determining the content of the health theme ?
A.	Well, again they work together at various
points, but I would say that the health theme with respect to tobacco that is emphasized in the early twentieth century is that, tobacco is a poison.
Q.	Is that part of mental-physical
efficiency? Is part of -A.	Yes.
Q.	Is it - -
A.	Well --
Q .	I'm sorry.
A.	Yes, if you're being poisoned, that's
going to affect you mentally and physically.
q.	I am just trying to keep these organized.
A.	I am, too.
Q.	Okay. Is the poison theme one that the
majority of physicians accepted or
believed in in the early twentieth century?
MR. KACZVNSKX: Objection.
A.	I haven't really investigated that
quest ion.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Okay. Would it be fair to
say that in the early twentieth century, of these four subparts of the health . theme, that the rise of the scientific community would be the least important at this point in time?
A.	Well, as we would define it, yes. As we
would define that community today with organised sponsored research, that would be the least significant.
Q.	Okay. Now, how long is this order of
things, health, political, industrializing effects, a valid ordering in the twentieth century? When does the order change, if ■ at all?
*
A.	Well, if I saw a factor receding, and it's
very, very difficult, again, because these all work together, it would be -- probably the political would be pushed more into the background, would be less self-evident
as we move through the twentieth century. That doesn't mean it's not there.
Certainly, scientific research, as we define it, would become more prominent, organized research would become more prominent with a big burst after the Second World War into the Fifties and the Sixties.
Q.	When generally does the political begin to
recede ?
A.	I think that prohibition was a very
serious blow to the kind of republicanism that we have been discussing; that is, a blow in the sense that prohibition seemed to produce the very opposite of what these individuals wanted in that by the late Twenties and the early Thirties, it seemed there was more crime, more vice. And again with the qualification I don't think the Great Depression had anything to do with the elimination of alcohol, some individuals implied as much that that was yet another reason because poverty didn't solve those prjbleir.s. So that was a blow to that kind of mentality that perhaps --
that kind of mentality, it's become less prevalent.
Q,	Has republicanism recovered from that
blow?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I really can't evaluate that. I haven't
studied that, per se.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) All right. Do you know if
it's become more prominent, or is it at the same point when it receded after prohibition in terms of its level of importance in the debate?
A.	I would say that there is there, but it
has receded.
Q.	At any point in time since prohibition,
has it reemerged as a strong and vital force in the debate about health and tobacco?
A.	I think there are occasional expressions
along that line, yes.
Q.	What are they; can you give me examples?
A.	Well, these are groups I don't know very
much about. I haven't studied, but I think some of che more shrill anti-tobacco groups.
Q.	There are shrill anti-tobacco groups?
MR. KACZYNSKI: It's hard to believe.
A.	I know that it's difficult to believe. I
think they do represent that kind of noblesse oblige, we're going to take care of everyone and solve our problems in the process.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Do you have any names?
A.	No, I don't.
Q.	Individual groups?
A.	Individual groups, there are lots of them.
Q.	I don't know who you are talking about.
A.	Okay. I'm not thinking of any one
particular group, but I know there are various groups out there.
Q.	Are they fringe groups?
A.	They certainly don't have significant
membership the way they are organized, as I understand it, but I don't know very much about them.
Q.	Other than those shrill groups, none of
which you can recall right now, are there any other expressions in the receni yec.rs of this reemerging republicanism?
A.	Not that I can recall at this particular
t ime ,
THE WITNESS: Can we take a break in about five:?
MR. LEYH: We can stop now, if you like.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
(Martin Exhibits Nos. 1 through 5 were marked for identification purposes.}
MR. LEYH: Let's go back on the record.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Professor, I'm handing you
a folder that contains what we've marked as Exhibit l. Would you identify what is contained in Exhibic 1, please?
A.	Exhibit 1 is the report that I prepared on
the David Burton case.
Q.	And there's a binder clip. There's two
binder clips. Does the first binder clip contain the report, your source material information, and your CV, maybe not the CV?
A.	It doesn't incl ;de the CV.
Q.	Okay. It's the source material and your
report ?
Q.	All right. What is Exhibit 2?
A.	Exhibit 2 includes the penultimate draft
of the report faxed to Jones, Day on January 8, 1996; and a final version of the source materials, I guess this would be the penultimate version of the source materials, faxed to Jones, Day on, according to the transmission slip,
January 11, 1996.
Q.	Okay. Would you take a look at
Exhibit 1. I'd like to talk first of all about the source materials component of Exhibit 1. Would you locate that, please?
A.	Okay.
Q.	This is a seven-page document; is that
correct, professor?
A.	Yes, and in addition, there is a listing,	<
<
i
a general listing of source materials on
o
Page 15 going to nearly the bottom of	Jj
Page 16 .
Q.	Of your expert report?
A.	Of the report, yes.
Q.	Now, with regard to the seven-page
document you've called "source materials11 -A.	Yes.
Q.	-- how did you select the documents that
you included as source materials here?
A.	These were materials that I read as
historical sources and as background information in preparation for writing the report.
Q.	Okay. So you read these materials
sometime after you agreed to serve as an expert in the Burton case?
A.	No, I can't, say all of them were read
within the last five months, if that's the correct number of months since August of 19 95.
Q.	When you said that you read these in
preparation for your report in this case -A.	Yes.
Q.	-- what did you mean?
A.	Well, in some instances, I was already
aware of the material and/or had read it and re-read it. In other instances, I read the material for the first time.
<2.	Is there a case where you had read
previously, some time back, an article on this list but didn't re-read it for the purpose of writing the report and so haven't read it since you were engaged in the Burton case?
A,	Or haven't looked at it?
Q.	Right. Haven't looked at it; haven't read
it .
A.	No .
Q.	So everything here you have at least
looked at in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Some things you looked at more casually
than others,- is that correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	I take it your list of source materials is
not designed to be an exhaustive and
comprehensive list of all materials on	,
t
tobacco?	c
A.	That is correct, no.
q.	These are things you thought were
particularly worthwhile?
A.	In helping me form my opinions for this
case, ves.
Q.	Okay. So you relied on the materials in
one way or another?
A.	Yes.
Q.	I would like you to look, if you would, at
the third page and in the subheading, actually it is at the bottom of Page 2. It's "Modern Books and Articles.”
A,	uh-huh.
Q.	And we will go over to Page 3, and I want
to ask you about a couple of items. Starting with the Gideon Doran book, Smoking Paradox. Do you see that about halfway down?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you recall what the major thesis of
that book is?
A.	Well, what I remember about the book is it
was heavily quantitative, and it was an a11 empt to expla in the modern rise of public regulation in the cigarette industry.	'
Q.	Which is its subtitle, Public Regulation
in the Cigarette Industry.
A.	That' s correct.
Q.	is that one tha_ you looked at in the last
five months?
Q.	Did you read it casually or carefully?
A.	Casually.
Q.	Do you recall anything about its theme
other than it was delivered in a quantitative way?
A .	No, I don't.
q.	okay. The next book I would like to ask
you about is Fritschler's Smoking and Politics . Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you recall what the major thesis of
that book is?
A.	Well, it's actually designed as a -- I
would describe it this way, as a textbook for political science courses trying to demonstrate to students the important role that regulatory agencies play in modern policy formulation, public policy formulat ion.
Q.	Have you read this book or looked at it in
the last five months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Casually or carafully?
A.	Casually.
in reaching your opinions in this case?
A.	This book, as I recall, focuses on the
Federal Trade Commission and the role of the Federal Trade Commission in movement toward the Cigarette Labeling Act of 1966.
Q.	Is that significant subject matter in your
opinion?
A.	Well, 1 think that it certainly relates to
the questions that I was asked to consider having to do with smoking and the understanding oL general awareness of health issues related to smoking and the increasing role of the government in defining itself as an agency which would play an increasingly large role in informing the public that there may be health risks associated with smoking.
Q.	Would that be consistent with the
republican theme of government's role?
A.	I don't necessarily associate republican
thinking with large government.
Q.	I see. So you're talking about here,
about large government? Fritschler is, in
your opinion?
study in the expanding role of regulatory agencies in public policy formulation.
Q.	Does this book cover that role or subject
material that predates the Sixties?
A.	I don't recall whether there's much
background information at the beginning of the book. If it does, it's not a consequential part of the book.
Q.	Most of it would be like Seventies,
Eighties?
A.	No, as I remember the book, at least the
materials that I read from the book in going through it, the emphasis was on the Sixties. It does carry through into the Seventies .
Q.	Okay. Is Fritschler a political"
scientist?
A.	Yes, I believe so.
Q.	is there -- you're at the University of
Houston now?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is there at the University of Houston £
special, department of political philosophy
or is that contained in either philosophy or political science?
A.	That's contained within the political
science department.
Q.	Are you familiar with the people who teach
political philosophy in the political science department?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Are they straussians?	.
A.	I'm not honestly sure. I would say yes
and no because there are two of them, but that would be a guess on my part.
Q.	Do they tend to emphasize the immutability
of idecis in the history of western literature; do you know?
A.	I would have to call it a split, one and
one. I have not sat in on their courses, and I don't know them that well.
Q.	Well, the next book I'd like to ask you
about is the Troyer and Markle book.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Can you describe for me what that book's
thesis is, major thesis?
A.	Troyer and Mark1e concern themselves with
the way government and society go about
the process, sometimes with plan and sometimes with no plan whatsoever, of defining deviant behavior; and they use cigarette smoking as their focal point. They offer varieties of information into the process whereby society has, shall we .	say modern American society has; more or
less defined the smoker as a deviant.
Q.	Generally, how is the term "deviant" used
in that book?
A.	Deviant in the sense that those
individuals have lost rights and have been . placed more on the periphery of society.
Q.	Those individuals being smokers?
A.	Those individuals, yes, being smokers.
Q.	Okay. So Troyer and Markle suggest in
this book that today smokers are deviants?
A.	That they are treated as deviants. In
other words, if a smoker tried to light up over there in that building I'm looking at, the individual would possibly be arrested and fined $200.
Q.	And has smoking behavior in terms of this
deviant model -- that's a. bad question.
I'11 withdraw that.
Prior to modern times, have smokers been regarded as deviants in America?
Q.	So this is a new thesis?
A.	This is a model that they present.
Q.	Okay.
A.	That is the concern of the book.
Q.	And does the book suggest when smokers
began to be considered deviants?
A.	Yes.
Q.	When is that?
A.	As I recall, and this is a guess on my
part, beginning in the 1970s.
Q.	Okay, Is that a thesis that you agree
with, the Troyer thesis on cigarette smoking and deviants?
A.	Not necessarily.
Q.	Do you think today cigarette smokers are
perceived as deviants?
A.	On the part of some people, yes.
Q.	On the part of the majority of the people
in the United States?
A.	I have really no way of knowing. I don't
have any information on that one way or the other.
Q.	Do you think they're perceived as deviants
on the part of any particular subpopulation of Americans, like the medical community or government agencies or some other subpopulation?
A.	That's possible.
Q,	Do you think it's the case?
A.	Well, I'm not coming up with any specific
examples, so all I can say is it's possible.
Q.	But you can't identify any subpopulation
that today in your opinion perceives cigarette smokers as deviants?
A.	I can't think of any. Perhaps,
anti-smoking groups.
Q.	The shrill ones or all of them?
A.	I really don't know. It's not a question
that I've really investigated.
Q.	Okay. The next book I want to address
with you is the Robert Smith Bader book called Prohibition in Kansas.
A.	Yes.
q.	Is this a book that deals exclusively with
a 1cohol?
A.	That is the focus of the book, yes.
Q.	Is there any information on cigarette
smoking in Kansas in that book?
A.	That book helped me get a better sense of
prohibitionists' thinking in Kansas as it existed in the early twentieth century.
Q,	Again, prohibitionists' thinking about
alcohol; right ?
A.	That's the primary focus of the book.
Q.	Well, is there any information about
attitudes in Kansas towards cigarette smoking in this book?
A.	I don't recall that there is, and I found
that as a point of great disappointment because Kansas had an anti-cigarette law on its books for approximately 18 years.
Q.	And you. thought it .jould be covered in
this book?
A.	Well, I thought it might be, yes’.
Q.	Who is Robert Smith Bader?
A.	He is, if I'm not mistaken, he's a
historian of Kansas. He does Kansas history, and I believe he teaches somewhere in Kansas. He may be recently retired.
q.	He's an academic historian, you believe.
A.	Yes, I believe so.
Q.	Sylvia Noble Tesh, Hidden Arguments. Do
you see that reference?
A.	Yes.
Q.	what's that book about?
A.	That book is various theories of: disease
causat ion.
Q.	Who is Tesh?
A.	As I remember, I’m not sure whether to
describe her as a, I think, and this is very much a guess on my part, medical sociologist.
Q.	Did you read this book carefully?
A.	No, this was read very casually.
Q.	But read casually within the last five
months ?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you recall what diseases she addresses
in her book?
A.	She does not -- she concerns herself more
with -- again, it's a book like Bader where I thought there might be something else there. She concerns herself more with various explanations that have evolved through time with respect to the
origins of diseases, such as the germ theory of disease, or the environmental theory as opposed to a hereditary theory, that sort of thing. That's what I remember about it.
Q.	Do you recall anything specifically about
tobacco?
A.	I think she had a few mentions, but it was
like Bader, a disappointment along that 1 ine .
Q.	Nothing very substantive about tobacco in
this book?
A.	That's right.
Q.	Do you know why the title. Hidden
Arguments?
A.	I believe that title refers to what she is
saying which is that different individuals develop different, I hope I'm using this word correctly, etiological explanations because of the value systems that they have as opposed to what some time might be better explanations as to the origins of disease.
Q.	And do you have an understanding of what
she meant by "value systems" in that
context?
A,	Personal beliefs.
Q.	Is that different than, for example, our
discussion of ideologies?
A.	Well, ideologies can well be a reflection
of personal beliefs.
Q.	Do you have an opinion as to whether her
thesis with regard to the role of values in etiological explanations is correct?
A.	No .
Q.	Burnham we've already discussed, I
believe. Allan Brandt, what's that article about?
A.	This article deals -- well, it's a review
of using the 1964 Surgeon General's report. It's a review of the history of tobacco in the twentieth century in which in the Surgeon General's report I remember him very specifically talking about how inadvertently this elevated what had heretofore been perceived as a not terribly consequential office -- his thesis, this isn't my thesis -- into a powerful position in Washington.
Q,	The '64 report did that according to
Brandt?
this up with another article.
Q.	Is that the primary thesis as you recall
it in the Brandt article?
A.	That's what I walked away from the article
with. Whether that's the primary thesis, that's what I remember this morning,
Q.	Okay,
A.	Four or five or six months after I read
it .
Q.	is this one you read carefully or
casual ].y?
A.	I read the whole thing.
q.	More carefully than you read some others?
A.	There are a lot of things that we read
because we think there may be something in them, and it turns out they aren't all that relevant to what we're doing or what we’re working on, so we put them aside.
Q.	Disappointed again?
A.	On this one?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Well, this was ■"ore historical than the
others turned o”.t to be.
Q.	Who is Allen Brandt?
A.	I'm not really completely sure. I don't
know whether he's a historian, but I think he is an academic.
Q.	Do you know where he teaches, if he
teaches?
A.	I can't say for sure.
Q.	On the next page under the "Medical and
Medical-Related Articles," I am referring to the second entry there, The Bayard Horton "The Outlook in Thrombo-angiitis Obliterans" article.
A.	Uh-huh.
Q.	Did you read that one casually or
care fully?
A.	I read that one very casually.
Q.	Do you recall what its thesis was?
A.	It was a summary study of cases that
doctors at the Mayo Clinic had reported on with respect to this particular condition. This article was then picked up in turn and was covered in John Harvey Kellogg's Good Health Magazine, and that's I believe, I took a look at it because Kellogg had an article on it.
Q.	Do you know if the medical community in
1938,.the date at which time this article was published, understood thromboangiitis obliterans to be caused by cigarette smoking ?
A.	No, I do not.	.
Q.	Do you know at one point in time the
medical community, if any point in time, reached a consensus that thromboangiitis obliterans was caused by cigarette smo ki ng ?
A.	No.
Q.	Do you know whai, thromboangiitis
obliterans is?
A.	I know what it's called today, yes.
Q.	What it’s called today?
A.	Buerger's disease.
Q,	Do you know whether or not cigarette
smoking is considered a risk factor for Buerger's disease?
A.	I can't say for sure, but I believe that
some would say yes.
Q.	Why do you say that?
A.	Because article? about Buerger's disease
began to appear in outlets such as Good
Health Magazine, even in such widely disseminated publications as Consumer Reports in the Fifties, and that these kinds of references to circulatory diseases, circulatory problems were being presented to the public and were being associated with smoking.
Q.	In the Fifties?
A.	Well, this articles is in the Thirties,
but yes, in the Fifties.
Q.	So in the Thirties, Forties, and Fifties?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Were those public expressions an
association between cigarette smoking and circulatory disease based on medical and scientific studies?
A.	Well, this is a summary of work at this
Mayo Clinic involving, I don't remember, several hundred cases, so I guess we would call that medical and scientific; but in terms of circulatory diseases and tobacco, that kind of material was appearing in textbooks in the early twentieth century. Textbooks were used in school, in primary school,
Q.	Excuse ne. Were you finished?
A.	I was just going to say in primary school
textbooks.
Q.	When you talk about circulatory disease in
terms of any reference at all up until, say, 1955, does that terra include peripheral vascular disease?
A.	It may well,
Q.	Do you know particular expressions of an
association between cigarette smoking and circulatory disease that appeared in any of the magazines or organs you were describing that specifically mentioned peripheral vascular disease?
A.	There is a specific mention of peripheral
vascular disease in Consumer Reports in 1953 .
Q.	Okay. Can you think of any others?
A.	I can think of lots and lots of references
to circulatory problems and to arteries and capillaries and circulatory disease and atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis.
Q.	Do those specific references associate the
disease with cigarette smoking?
A.	By and large, yes.
Q.	What is atherosclerosis?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	Well, I'm not a doctor.
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) I'm asking for your
understanding, professor. I know you're not a medical doctor.
A.	I'm not a medical doctor.
Q.	Do you know what it is?
A.	It has to do with hardening of the
arteries usually related to the buildup of fatty deposits in the arteries into the capillaries.
Q.	Do you know what arteriosclerosis is?
A.	Hardening of the arteries.
Q.	Do you know if it's different from
atherosclerosis?
A.	I asked a friend of mine who was an oral
surgeon, he said to me he wasn't sure there was much of a difference. I have to stress I'm not a medical doctor.
q.	I understand that. Now, some of these
other articles in this section, we're on Page 4 of your source material document, is it fair to say they raise epidemiological questions about cigarette
smoking and health?
A•	Ye s .
Q.	How did epidemiology as a discrete
discipline affect the discussion of smoking and health?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	Well, I'm not -- what I can tell you is
that a number of epidemiological studies were undertaken beginning in - - I don't want tc put a fixed date on this because there is a buildup. Let's say if there is a critical study, it would be the 1950 Graham and Wynder's study listed here.
And this particular article studied 600 and some cases of cancer of the lung, concludes -- and this is a retrospective study looking backward at cases in hand -concludes that there is a very high correlation between heavy cigarette smoking and cancer of the lung, which in turn received enormous press coverage. It became a big story.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Do you know whether or not
epidemiological studies from 1950 forward have been a significant part of the medical
community's assessment of the health risks associated with cigarette smoking?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I haven't really studied that question,
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} So you don't know how
important epidemiological data has been to Surgeons General or others in the medical community?
A.	Well, I could only guess and presume that
over the long run, it's one form of study that has played a role in the thinking of the medical community and certainly in public awareness with respect to issues related to smoking and health.
Q.	Well, you've read the '64 Surgeon
General's report; is that right?
A.	I haven't read the whole report.
Q.	Do you recall anything in there about
epidemiological studies?
A.	A number of these studies are referenced
in the Surgeon General's report.
Q.	Have you read other Surgeons General's
reports?
A.	Probably the best answer would be no,
because my assignment in this assignment
was to go into the 1960s, '65, '68 in that time frame, and I think I somewhere maybe have a copy of -- I can't even give you the years. " There's a report in 1978.
Q.	What's it on; do you know the title?
A.	No.
Q.	okay.
A.	I haven't really cracked the cover of it.
q.	All right. You didn't look at it for this
case ?
A.	No .
Q.	Epidemiological studies on the health risk
of cigarette smoking began and continued after 1950; is that right?
A.	I don't want to put -- I would say there
was a very significant buildup after 1950. I'm just using 1950 as a general date .
q,	They weren't significant in the medical
community's views of the risk prior to 1950?
A.	I don't have any way of evaluating that.
I haven't looked at that question.
Q.	The Dorn article near the bottom of th\s
page ?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is that supposed to be mortality as
opposed to morality?
A.	Yes, I hope so.
Q.	I thought we were back to Kellogg there
for a moment.
A.	That's right. I hadn't noticed that. I'm
sorry.
Q.	Let's talk about your report if we can --
A.	Okay.
Q.	-- which is the other part of deposition
Exhibit l. As you pointed out a few minutes ago, professor, there's quite a range of historical information you reviewed in order to formulate your opinions; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	You, in fact, identify various categories
beginning on Page 2 with "A.) Laws... Relating to... Education," and you have "A.)," "B.)," "C.)," and I think there are - -
A.	Yes.
Q.	-- I counted eight separate categories?
Q.	Is that right?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Now, these are general categories of
historical sources and information that you believe are important to answering the two questions you were assigned?
A.	Yes.
q.	All right. Are there any other categories
of information that you think bear on the two questions you were assigned?
A.	I do not believe so.
q,	so you believe you've looked at all of the
relevant information for you to answer the questions about the public awareness regarding health risks and the public awareness regarding addiction?
A.	Generally speaking, yes.
Q.	Well, you said "generally speaking." It
sounds like a qualification. Are you qualifying it?
A.	There may be some document out there that
I	don't know about.
q.	I'm talking about categories, not a single
smoking gun document or something, just general categories of information.
A.	Yes.
Q.	You've got all of them read and reviewed
for this expert opinion; is that your testimony?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right. Let's look at the first page,
the first paragraph of your expert report. You say that you prepared it in response to two questions you were asked to investigate. Who asked you to investigate?
A.	Jones, Day.
Q.	By the way, I've got to back up a second.
The articles contained in the source material document we were just talking about, do you have all of those in the boxes that you've brought with you today?
A.	Yes, everything is there except for the
secondary source material, the books.
Some of the ones we were talking about aren't there because X got them out of the library and returned them.
Q.	Okay. When you say "secondary source
material," you're referring -A.	I'm referring to books like Susan
Wagner's -- well, the books that are listed here that would have in some cases not much but some history, Susan Wagner, Robert Sobe1.
Q.	So just here and there, there are things
that you don't have with you?
A.	Books; Bader.
q.	Oh, you don't have Bader?
A.	Bader is back in our library.
Q.	Okay.
A.	You mean is Bader here in the room?
Q.	That's what I mean; is Bader in the box?
A.	No, Bader is not in the box. Bader, I
took it out of the University of Houston Library. I can't remember when I returned it, a couple of morths ago, perhaps.
q.	Most of the items on this document that
you didn't bring are books; is that right?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Did you bring all the articles?
A.	We can look.	.
q.	Just give me your best recollection as you
sit here. We will look later.
A.	I would say virtually all of the articles
Q•	Okay. Thanks, Now, if we could go back
to your expert report, please.
Who at Jones, Day asked you to investigate?
A.	The two attorneys that I first spoke with
in this case are here in the room.
Q.	Okay. And did you receive a telephone
call initially?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	And were they both on the line at that
initial -A.	No, Mr. Kaczynski called me, it's in my
notes, on August 11th, 1995, and discussed this case with me.
Q.	Okay. Did you see those notes here, by
chance ?
A.	Yes, r saw them. Yes, they are there.
Q.	Are these them?	'
A.	Yes, those are all of the notes.
Q.	Let me hand you what we've marked as
Exhibit 5 and ask you to identify Exhibit 5.
A. ■ These would be my handwritten or typed notes of matters relating to this particular case.
Q.	And you've included notes of the telephone
call you received from Mr. Kaczynski on August 11th?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	All right. And feel free to refer to
those notes. What exactly did he say to you when he telephoned?
A.	He told me about this particular case,
provided me with some background information, and asked me whether I would be perhaps interested or would have the time to review historical questions with respect to thib particular case.
Q.	Okay. How long did you talk to him at
that time?
A.	I'm going to have to guess. I would say
we may have talxed for an hour.	^
<
Q,	Did you during the course of that	<
conversation share some of your ideas with him about the history of tobacco in the United States."
A.	Well, we had h?d conversations before,
many.
Q.	You and Mr. Kaczynski?
Q.	How long have you known him?
A.	I've known Mr. Kaczynski since May of -- I
first met him in May of 1994.
Q.	And what were the circumstances of that
meeting?
A.	He and another attorney from Jones, Day by
the name of Paul Koethe -THE WITNESS: Do you want me to spell that for you?
THE COURT REPORTER: Yes, please.
THE WITNESS: K-O-e-t-h-e.
A.	Flew down to Houston and talked with me
about the possibility of engaging in historical research relevant to tobacco issues.
<,
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) When they came to Houston	*
.	c
to meet you, did they talk to you about	c
K
particular cases in litigation?	2
o
A.	I don't recall particular cases, but I do
know that I recalx that they mentioned that there were cases.
0.	Do you recall if they mentioned any
particular cases by name?
A.	1 don't recall that they mentioned any
particular cases by name.
Q.	Did they review past or pending litigation
in which the tobacco companies were involved?
A.	As I remember, we talked very generally
along those lines.
Q.	Did they indicate what- the issues were
that were sometimes in dispute in litigation?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And what did they say about those issues?
What did they -- how did they describe them?
A.	Well, what I remember from that
conversation, it's been a while back, we talked about general issues having to do with public awareness, what the public would have been aware of at particular points in time, that sort of thing.
Q.	Did they tell you that public awareness
was an important legal question?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did they tell you why they believed it
was ?
A,	Well, I had some, I mean, I had some
background knowledge of this. It wasn't that this was fresh information.
Q.	Where did you get your background
knowledge ?
A,	Well, from a whole variety of sources.
One can certainly read about cases in
newspapers, and I've been interested in
product liability litigation as it relates
to questions having to do with drinking
and alcoholism. Drinking in America has
been cited in cases, so I've followed some
of that. And there was -- I guess that
would be the best example I could give
you. I mean, product liability litigation
was not a new subject to me.	r
c
c
Q.	Will you tell me, professor, what your	c
understanding was in May of '94 at the	oi
CO
time of your meeting with Mr. Kaczynski and the other gentleman, what your understanding was of the way in which public awareness was an important legal issue in litigation?
A.	Well, I'm not qjite sure how to answer
that question. Could you restate the question, please?
Q.	You indicated that you were generally
familiar with -A.	Yes.
Q •	-- how this product liability litigation
works and had some background. I'm trying to understand how you thought about it, public awareness, in the context of tobacco litigation?
A.	Okay. Well, it would be referring to
times before, historically speaking, before you actually had warning labels on various kinds of products.
Q,	And what's youi understanding of how those
references were important legally, references to warnings before the -A.	References to --
Q.	Public awareness before the warnings were
printed?
A.	Public awareness before the warnings,
well, my understanding would be that if the public wasn't aware that would have	j
one effect; if the public was aware, that would have a different effect.
Q.	If the public was aware, the legal effect
would be what in your understanding?
A.	Well, it would depend on the
circumstances, but if the public was aware and the public fully understood that would have a distinct effect on the outcome of
the cases.
Q.	What would that distinct effect be?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	Well, can't - -
Q,	What is your understanding of what that
distinct effect would likely be?
A.	The distinct effect would likely be that
it would be hard to prove that the individual did not know that using a particular product may be hazardous in some way.
Q.	And you knew that -- you believe that if -
an individual knew a product was hazardous and was suing for injuries related to the use of the product, that individual was more likely to lose; is that ricfht?
A.	I knew that probably wouldn't help that
individual's case.
Q.	Now, what's the nature of your interest,
other than your book is mentioned from time to time, in the product liability
litigation involving alcohol?
A.	Well, actually I was contacted about
serving as an expert witness in a case involving a person who drank herself to death, and that raised all sorts of liability questions. That was back, and I'm going to guess at the year, it could have been anywhere between '89 and '91.
And I met with attorneys dealing with that particular case in Austin, Texas. We talked about the issues, and in the end, that was the sum total of that particular situation,
Q,	Is that: a Texas case?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Who were the attorrsys?
A.	Baker fc Botts in Austin.
Q.	They represent the defendant; do you know?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you provide them with any written
materials?
A,	No.
q.	Did you just share your ideas with them on
one occasion?
A.	I met with them one time for about four
hours.
A.	I honestly don't.
Q.	You said that you had met or talked to
Mr. Kaczynski a couple of times prior to your August 11 meeting, and you told me about the May '94 visit.
A.	Yes.
Q.	When was the next occasion you had to
speak with Mr. Kaczynski?
A.	Well, I, can't really be sure, but I know
that it would nave been sometime during the summer because I believe it was Mr. Kaczynski who called rne about possibly doing research in regard to a case that was based in Indiana.
Q.	Did you ever do that research?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Well, I started to. Let me put that
qualifier in there.
Q.	Why did you stop?
A.	Because the attorneys asked me to stop.
q.	Do you know why they asked you to stop?
Q.	Was it research about public awareness of
the risk of cigarette smoking?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Was it generally the same kind of research
you've done for the Burton case?
A,	Yes.
q.	Did you tell Mr. Kaczynski back in May
of '94 when you met him that you believe that there were high levels of public awareness on the risk of cigarette smoking?
A.	No.
Q.	At any point in time?
A.	No. Did I tell him that in May of 1994?
Q .	Yes .
A.	No .
q.	Did you have that opinion in May of 1994?
A.	I didn't have an opinion in May of 1994.
q.	You had never looked at that question
before?
A.	Not that particular question.
Q.	Have you ever published anything on
tobacco?
A.	No .
q.	Have you ever presented a paper at a
professional meeting on tobacco?
Q.	You have a work in progress, however, on
smoking; is that right?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	What is the nature of that work?
A.	The nature of that work is to consider --
well, the working title o£ the book, which is far from being a book at this particular point, is Prohibitionism on the Nature of Coercive Reform in America, and I'm co-authoring that with Mark Lender.
We're going to carry forward on some of the themes that we set up in Drinking in America with what is a very parallel movement, as I learned in doing the Drinking in America research, having to do with smoking in America. So we're going to put those two subjects together and see what kind of patterns we come up with.
Q.	What do you mean by "coercive reform" in
the context -A.	Prohibitionism.
Q.	You mean laws prohibiting the use of
cigarettes?
A,	Laws prohibiting the use of any product.
Q.	Any?
A.	Well, cigarettes. The book will look at
tobacco products, of which cigarettes I guess today is the most common form, and with respect to alcohol.
Q.	Where in the American life do you see the
impetus for the laws prohibiting the use of cigarettes?
A.	You don't have to have an amendment to the
Constitution to have prohibition.
q.	I just asked the question: Where in
American life do you see the impetus for laws prohibiting the use of cigarettes. I didn't say it had to be a Constitutional amendment,
A.	Well, if you want a specific example from
today?
Q.	I would.
A.	I would suppose that some might say that
the Food and Drug Administration may --
Q.	Kessler is a prohibitionist?
A.	Yes, in his way.
0.	Okay. When you say "some might say,"
that, in fact, is your opinion; is that right ?
A.	I'm not sure whether I've made up my mind
on that. I would best leave it at that.
Q.	As of today, is it your opinion?
A.	As of today, is it my opinion?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Not as of today.
Q.	Can you think of any other, other than the
FDA, sources of prohibition as you put it with respect to cigarettes?
A.	Sources?
Q.	Yes, what's giving rise to the prohibition
that you're describing?
A.	I would suppose it wouldn't be all that
dissimilar from the kind of anti-cigarette laws that were passed by 15 states between the 1890s and the 1920s, one of which was Kansas. And that is, that there is a health risk concern, and that, as would be argued at that particular time and as is,
I believe, in some instances argued today, the government being aware of that risk whether it be at the state level or the federal level or perhaps even at the local
level, should abolish the use of those products.
Q.	Is it your opinion, professor, that the
Surgeon General's office at any time since 1957 has been prohibitionist with respect to cigarette products?
A.	Well, when you -- let me preface this by
saying, prohibitionist in the sense that they would like to see the product off the market?
Q.	Prohibitionist in --
A.	I don't mean in the Constitutional sense
when we're talking about prohibitionism.
Q.	You mean a kind of de facto prohibition?
A.	Yes, that's what I meant all along.
Q.	So it's? different than the alcohol
prohibitionist movement at least in that sense ?
A.	Well, the alcohol prohibitionist movement
proved that prohibition doesn't work.
Q.	But with respect to the Constitutional
dimension -A.	That's right. When I say prohibitionism,
I don't mean the prohibition amendment, the 18th Amendment to the Constitution.
A.	I mean, finding ways for all practical
purposes to eliminate the particular product from the marketplace. Well, it's difficult for me to say, but beyond David Kessler, the FDA, oh, I think there are some strong anti-tobacco advocates in Congress; Henry Waxman's name will come to mind.
Q.	He's a prohibitionist in this de facto
sense ?
A.	I'm sure if Waxman had his way, he would
find some means short of a Constitutional amendment to take the product off the	(
market, or legislate it out of existence	!
<
or regulate it out of existence, which	■
there are ways that this can be done.	1
Q.	Can you think of any other leading
prohibitionist of tobacco?
A.	Probably we would put Surgeon General
C. Everett Koop, those kinds of people.
Q.	Is prohibitionism in this de facto sense
necessarily bad?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	That's not something that we're going to
discuss in our book one way or the other.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Okay. Your book is
designed to offer an objective description of what you described as prohibition?
A.	Hopefully of the phenomenon in American
history,
0-	And is that the same basic goal you had in
Drinking in America?
A.	Yes.
Q.	That is, objective description; right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Not making value judgments about the thing
you're describing?
A.	I tried very hard not to make value
judgments.
Q.	And you're trying hird to do the same with
tobacco prohibitionism?
A.	Absolutely.
Q.	Do you have an opinion, however,
irrespective of what your goal is in the book as to whether or not tobacco prohibition would be a good or bad thing?
A.	I think that in a free society,
individuals should be given a choice ap to what risks they want to assume with
respect to their lives.
Q.	Okay. So you would as a personal matter
not support lots of regulation of tobacco; fair statement?
A.	I would -- no, I don't think that's the
case .
Q.	Okay. Why not?
A.	Well, I think this goes back to what we
were talking about before. If a person smokes and someone else objects to it, then the person who is objecting has rights in society, too. So the notion that someone should step outside to have a cigarette doesn't bother me in the least bit.
Q.	That seems reasonable?
A.	Absolutely.
Q,	That's an accommodation to the interest of
the general good?
A.	That's right.
Q.	There's a sort of republicanism that
supports that position; right?
A.	Well, I guess. I'm not sure I want to
elevate it to tnat level status.
Q.	All right. What other regulations of
tobacco do you think are reasonable as accommodations to the general good?
A.	I think it's been very good to, this is my
personal opinion, eliminate smoking on airplane flights within the continental United States, I think that's in everyone's best interest. I certainly would support legislation designed to limit the access of minors; to tobacco products. These would be examples that I could give you.
Q.	Why would you support that legislation
regarding minor*?
A.	Well, I think that individuals, a personal
opinion, should try to get a little bit of experience under their belts; and they should be informed of the possible consequences for themselves before they make the decision as to whether they want to smoke.
Q.	Okay. You believe cigarette smoking is a
risk-taking behavior, don't you?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection,
A.	Are you asking ne for my personal
opinion?
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Well, you said there are
consequences to minors. 1 assume they were the health risks.
A.	There are possible health risks, yes.
Q.	Those are the consequences you think
minors should be fully advised of before they make the choice to smoke?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	And you also believe, do you not,
professor, that adults should be aware of the risks in order to make an informed choice whether thev want to assume the risk?
A.	In our society, I can't imagine there
isn't an adult out there who is not aware that there may be some risk.
Q.	I'm familiar wi*-h your opinion in that
regard, and that's an opinion with respect to what Americans know at some point in time. My question is different.
A.	Okay.
q.	It's not about what Americans know in some
point in time. It's about as a general matter, do you think before one can be said to exercise a free choice in assuming
a risky behavior, they need to know what the risks are associated with the behavior?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Is that right?
A,	I guess that would depend on the
circumstances.
Q.	What circumstances?
A.	Well, if a person has been repeatedly told
in school over and over again smoking may not be good for one's health --
Q.	You're going back to the empirical word on
me. I'm trying to ask a conceptual question.
MS. McDOLE: I don't think the witness has finished his statement.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) oorry, professor.
A.	Well, I think if a person has been
repeatedly told in an educational situation smoking may not be good for his or her health, then that person has been informed; and ac that point, they ought to be in a position to make a logical choice --
A.	-- whether they want to assume whatever
risks they have been warned about.
Q.	All right. ■ Now, I want to ask you about
whether they are making a free choice about that same risk.
A.	Uh-huh.
q.	One year prior to the point at which
they're informed about the risks, at that point antecedent to their understanding of the risks, are they making a free choice in engaging in the risks?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I'm not clear. Are you asking ne about my
personal opinion on these matters, or what ?
q.	{BY MR. LEYH) I'm asking about your
opinions, yes, sir.
A.	Okay. So give me the question again,
then.
q,	I'd be happy to. You responded to the
last question by saying I believe that a person who has been repeatedly told about a risk understands what the risk is and makes a free choice in engaging in that
conduct.
My question now is how about one year prior to the time they're informed about the risks. If they engage in the conduct then, is that the same free choice?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	Well, in our modern society, it would be
virtually impossible because they are teaching children at preschool levels about the dangers alleged of various products.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) "ell, I don't care about
what historical epoch you want t:o talk about. I just want to talk about a general matter, and it is; Can you be ignorant of the risks and still exercise free choice when you engage in the behavior?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Is your choice a free one
if you don't know the risks of the conduct ?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I would have to -- this is strictly a
philosophical answer because it doesn't necessarily relate to anything other than the question. It is a free one.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} So it's fair to say one
need not know the risks in order to freely choose a conduct, in your opinion?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	That's not what I said.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) It'S not? How is it
different?
A.	I said that the choice is a free one.
Q.	How is that different from what I said?
A.	Well, what did you say?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Can I make an objection, and then you can go on. If not clear in his report, he's being tendered as an expert on the publ i c awar aness in the issues of smoking and health. So far he's been asked opinions on political philosophy, risk decision-making process, and medical questions about what the consensus in the medical community is.
You can ask him anything you
want just so it's understood in the record that's not what he's for and that's not what he's offered as, so with that objection -MR. LEYH: If you think what we've been talking about is not relevant to his credibility as an expert or his opinions in this case, then I suggest that you reassess your expert witness.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} Now, the question is --
THE WITNESS: Can we take a ten-minute break?
MR. LEYH: Would you mind waiting until closer to noon, since we have to break then anyway?
MS. McDOLE: I would welcome a break.
THE WITNESS: Take a two-minute break?
MR. LEYH: All right. Let's do that.
(A brief recess was taken.}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} Professor Martin, do you
know why you were asked to end your
research for the sake of this report in the 1960s, in the mid-1960s?
A.	I would have to assume that's because
cigarette warning labels began to appear in 1966.
Q.	Were you told that? I mean, were you told
that that's why you should stop your research in the mid-Sixties?
A.	I don't remember specifically that I was
told that specifically, but it was an obvious assumption to make.
Q.	Let me refer you to the first paragraph of
your report where you say, and you're describing the second question you were asked to address?	,
A.	Ye s .	(
Q.	You said that you were asked to consider
the subject of public awareness in regard to the alleged addictive or habit - forming qualities of smoking; do you see that?
A.	Top of Page 2?
q.	Well, we have different copies. I'm in
the first paragraph.
A.	Oh, okay.
q,	i think you restate the point elsewhere.
Q.	Now, for your historical purposes, are you
using the terms "addictive" and "habit forming" as synonymous?
A.	Well, it depends on the time and the
'	circumstance for historical purposes.
Q.	Okay. So at some point in time, they're
synonymous, and at other points in time they are not?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	At what points in history are those two
words synonymous?
A.	Well, if you want an example, when you use
an expression as was commonplace, and pervasive in American society in the early twentieth century, such as "addicted to the cigarette habit," I would say those terms are fairly synonymous. And when you -- well, let me just give you that as an example,
MS. McDOLE: Greg, can we go off the record for a second?
(Discussion off the record.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Can you tell me if
addiction and habit were synonymous as they were used in the context of cigarette smoking before 1950?
A.	Before 1950, generally, yes.
Q.	How about before 1960?
A.	Yes.
Q.	At what point in time did they begin to
mean something different from one another?
A,	I would say after 1960.
Q.	okay. Is there some particular event
after 1960 that was important in distinguishing addiction from habit?
A.	Yes, but that event occurred beyond the
period in time that I investigated.
Q.	What is the event?
A.	Well, the event that I'm thinking of is
the pronouncement that smoking is addictive in the late 1980s. I can't give you the exact date by the Surgeon General.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Which is different than what was presented
just 20-some years before that time.
Q.	And 20-some years before that time, you're
referring to the '64 report?
Q.	And it's your understanding the '64 report
says cigarette smoking is habit: forming but not addictive?
A.	That distinction is made in the '64
report, yes.
Q.	Do you have an opinion as to - - strike
that.
Do you know if there were medical organisations like the AMA or the World Health Organization that offered opinions between 1964 and 1988 on whether cigarette smoking was addictive or habit forming?
A.	Well, the AMA chose not to endorse the '64
Surgeon General's report, and I really haven't: investigated that question.
Q.	Do you know what the World Health
Organization's views of cigarette smoking as an addiction or habit or a dependence were between '64 and '88?
A.	Well, I have to state that I recall
reading some articles in which the World Health Organization was mentioned, and I would only be guessing at a date. That really doesn't have anything to do with the material that I was looking at.
Organization said about cigarette smoking as an addiction?
A.	Yes, the World Health Organization at some
point declared cigarette smoking addictive, but I can't give you a specific date. I won't give you a specific date because I don't recall. q.	Do you know if it was before 19618 when the
Surgeon General -A.	Yes, it was before 1988 as I recall.
Q.	So the Surgeon General's report wasn't the
first authoritative suggestion that cigarette smoking was addictive,- is that right?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I was not asked to look and investigate
the World Health Organization. ' q.	{BY MR. LEYH) So you don't know the
answer to that question?
A.	I don't know what you mean by the term
"author!tat ive. " q.	we 11, is the World Health Organization a
respected medical body?
A.	Depends on who you talk to.
A.	Okay.
Q.	I'm not talking to anybody else. Is it --
in your opinion is the World Health	.
Organization a respected medical body?
A.	Yes.
Q.	That's what I mean by authoritative,
A.	Well, I think we could argue the semantics
of respect versus authoritative for the next several days.
Q.	Why bother if I just told you for the
purpose of my question?
A.	For the purpose of my answer, I won't
equate the two.
Q.	All right. What's authoritative then, if
you want to argue semantics?
A.	Beyond dispute.
Q.	Beyond dispute?	‘
A.	Beyond dispute.
Q.	Give me an example.
A.	That automobile engines are a source of
air pollution,
Q.	Surgeon General's report in 1988 is not
authoritative in your judgment; is that right ?
A.	I told you what the Surgeon General said.
Q.	I'm just asking you a new question. Now,
will you tell me the answer to it?
A.	Well, I'm not sure; and the best thing I
can say to you about this, when someone says addiction anymore, that's a term that from my point of view has become so vague as to almost be meaningless in modern America.
Q.	Have you read the '88 Surgeon General's
report?
A.	NO.
Q.	Do you know what they said about
addict i on?
A.	No, I didn't read the report.
Q.	Do you know whether their definition was
so vague as to be meaningless?
A.	I don't know anything about what; their
definition was in the 1988 report because that was not what I was asked to investigate.
Q.	I'm not asking you about what you were
asked to investigate. I'm asking you about the '88 Surgeon General's reoort. Okay? The question relating to that
report is, is it your opinion that the '88 Surgeon General's report is authoritative given your definition of authoritative?
MR, KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I don't know.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Now, at the bottom of
Page l, as you're offering your general answers to the two questions, you say under "2.) A vast amount of information has been disseminated to the general public and has resulted in very high levels of public awareness and understanding with respect to potential difficulties in quitting smoking."
When you looked at this second question, which is what's the level of public awareness about addictive or habit - forming qualities of smoking, did you understand quitting smoking to be a measure of public awareness about addictive or habit - forming qualities?
A.	What I meant by that was that the people
understood it might be difficult to quit smoking.
Q.	And my question is, is it your
understanding that that difficulty is a measure of their understanding of the addictive or habit - forming qualities of sraoking ?
A.	Yes.
q.	Okay. Are they basically the same thing,
in your opinion, for the sake of your historical analysis here?
A *	Well, if something is, quote-unquote,
addictive or habit forming, that means it's difficult to quit.
Q.	In your opinion?
A.	In my opinion, it was certainly stated
over and over in everything I read, so I guess my opinion would reflect the materials that I read.
q.	Are you familiar with the state-of-the-art
science on smoking cessation?
A.	I'm not: a scientist and I'm not a medical
doctor.
q.	So there may well be many things that go
into whether or not it's difficult to quit smoking that you're unaware of, I assume; is that correct?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
doctor or scientist.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) But it is fair to say for
the sake of your historical report that it's your opinion if something is harder to quit, it's more addictive?
A.	If something is harder to quit, it is more
addict ive ?
Q.	Harder to stop doing, like smoking, then
it must be more addictive. That's your opinion, isn't j.t?
A.	More addictive if it's harder to quit
smoking ?
Q.	Yes, exactly.
A.	I don't know what that means.
Q.	Well, it means that if it's more difficult
for an individual to stop smoking, it's your opinion that smoking must be more addictive than less addictive?
A .	No .
Q.	It's not your opinion?
A.	I don't understand what you're talking
about.
q.	Well, I'm trying to figure out what you
mean by potential difficulties --
A.	What I mean --
Q.	Let me finish the question. What you mean
by potential difficulties in quitting smoking as it relates to measuring public awareness of the addictive qualities of smoking.
A.	Virtually every document I read from
primary school textbooks through newspaper articles that covered everything from methods to quit to, perhaps, various groups one might join to quit, all made the point that it -*as probably going to be difficult to quit once you started smoking and had formed the habit.
Q.	If smoking is harder for some people to
quit, did these sources suggest that it was more addictive?
A.	Do you mean for so.ae people it's more
difficult to quit than other people; is that what you're asking?
Q.	I'm asking if it's the case in these
sources you examined that if certain individuals have a more difficult time quitting smoking, does it follow that they are more addicted to smoking?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	I can't really answer that. That's
calling for medical information.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) I'm asking if the sources
just reported that. You just told me what they reported on something else. I'm asking if they reported on that.
A.	The sources report different ways of
quitting, and the sources make it clear that some people may have a more difficult time quitting than other people. That's what I can recall at this point.
Q.	Okay. Let me ask you about in the middle
of the page you've got "1.)" You say, "A wide variety of information has been disseminated to the general public and has resulted in very high levels of public awareness and understanding about the possibility of serious diseases... being associated with smoking," and J. left out a phrase there.
Now, is this information the sort of information we were talking about this morning under various headings like health and political and so on?
Q.	I'm referring to what you're talking about
here. That's the question.
A.	If we take the phrase "serious diseases,"
the serious diseases that are being referred to over and over again in newspapers, textbooks, pamphlets, tracts, whatever it might be, television programs, on and on and on, the serious diseases that are named are heart disease, circulatory diseases, or diseases of the circulatory system, and cancer.
Q.	Okay. Now, does your assertion here that
we've just read -(Brief interruption.)
MR. LEYH: Let's go off the record.	.
(A brief recess was taken.) (Ms, McDole was not present when the proceedings resumed.)
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Professor Martin, were you
asked to give an opinion on what David Burton understood about the health risks associated with cigarette smoking?
A.	I was asked to give an opinion on what
Americans were aware of with respect to hea 11 h risks,
Q.	Would you answer my question?
A.	I wasn't asked specifically to comment on
David Burton.
Q.	Your opinion as represented in your expert
report, Exhibit 1, does not specifically address what David Burton knew about the health risk of smoking, does it?
A.	No, it does not.
q.	Professor, we've been talking in general
terms today about various sources of information about health and smoking and the twentieth century in America. Is it fair to say that up until, say, 1960, that there were disputes about whether or not cigarette smoking was a health risk?
A.	Yes, there were some disputes.
q.	And is it fair to say that throughout the
period 1900 to 1960 there were those who communicated information to the public to suggest that cigarette smoking was not a risk-taking behavior?
A.	There were very few.
q.	is it fair to say that between 1900 and
1960, there were those who communicated to the public the following idea: We don't know whether or not cigarette smoking causes adverse health effects?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And were there a significant number of
those who said we don't know whether cigarette smoking causes adverse health effects or not?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to
form.
A.	Well, I'm not sure how to define
"significant number," but probably not an overwhelming number, no.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Who were these persons or
organizations that suggested between 1900 and 1950 that cigarette smoking -- it's not known whether or not cigarette smoking creates health risks?
A.	Well, based on the material that I went
through, and let me draw from the regional and local newspapers, the Kansas City papers, the Springfield papers, and the Emporia Gazette, that there were two types of comments that would be made.
One type of comment would be, we are not sure. We need more research.
Those comments would come from either a spokesperson of the tobacco company or in the Fifties from a person by the name of Clarence Cook Little who chaired the Tobacco Industry Research Committee.
And then the second category would be scientists and researchers themselves who would say we are not sure of the causal process.
Q.	Now, you prefaced your answer by saying,
"based on the material I went through."
Do you know if your answer would be the same based upon all of the material about which you have Knowledge?
A.	Yes, I would say it would be fundamentally
the same.
Q.	Okay. And if I asked about instead of
I960, up through 1960, if I asked about up through the present, are there people who say that we don't know whether or not cigarette smoking causes adverse health effects, would vour answer be the same or would it be different?
beyond the mid-1960s.
Q.	But you have some knowledge of materials
beyond then, don't you?
A,	Well, I've read a few things. I would
have to base it on what 1 read, and I would say fundamentally the same, yes.
Q.	Okay. So it's your understanding that
today the tobacco companies generally say that we're not sure if cigarette smoking causes health diseases, or diseases. We need more research. Is that your understanding?
A.	Well, I haven't studied that question in
particular, so anything like that would be a guess on my part.
Q.	What is your best judgment with respect to
that ?
A.	That, I can't be sure.
Q.	You don't know one way or the other?
A.	(Witness nods head.)
q.	Is that the same for scientific
researchers that you don't know whether or not there are scientific researchers independent of the tobacco companies who
today take the position that we. just don't know whether or not?
A.	I real1y don't.
Q.	Okay. Now, you mentioned Little and the
TIRC in the Fifties?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Were they doing anything to communicate
their views to the public, TIRC?
A.	Well, I recall a few news articles that
may have commented on research that was supported by the TIRC. And there were also news articles announcing the TIRC in early 1954 that appeared in various papers, and there was a statement, I think, that was in 1954, too, that was put out by the TIRC.
Q.	The Frank statement, is that what you're
talking about?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And what is your understanding of what the
Frank statement was?
A.	Well, the Prank statement, and I don't
have the document in front of me so this would be purely generalized.
Q.	Is it in your files?
Q.	You didn't look at it for the purpose of
this expert opinion?
A.	Well, if it appeared in The New York Times
in 1954, it would be there.
Q.	I'm sorry. I interrupted you. Go ahead
and tell me.
A.	My understanding of the Frank statement
was that it did two things. First of all, it reviewed a lot of the research that had been published and made aware the public over a previous peiiod of time, and then it said we need further research and we need mere information before we conclude one way or the other.
q.	Do you recall whether it said there is a
controversy, and we need to determine whether there's an/ merit to the claim that smoking causes disease?
A.	It said that there had been a number of
studies, and that in and of itself would suggest that there may be some differences of opinion.
Q.	That's basically the position that you
understand the tobacco companies have had
throughout recent history up until today?
A.	Through the mid-1960s, I've read comments
of which there are very few, by the way, in terms of the total numbers of articles and newspaper stories that are oat there in which individuals have said we don't know for sure and we need further research.
Q.	You're talking about, now, tobacco company
statements ?
A.	I'm talking about someone who a reporter
may have called up who may have been employed by a tobacco company.
Q.	Are you aware of any public relations
firms that work for tobacco companies and have contributed to public information about the health risks associated with cigarette smoking?
A.	I don't really know much about that, no.
q.	Okay. Do you know whether or not the
Frank statement was understood by the public ?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	r don't have anv way of knowing what the
public derived from the Frank statement.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Or from any other things in
the public domain?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection;
vague.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Well, let's be clear. You
don't have any way of understanding what the public derived from the Frank statement; right?
A.	That's correct.
Q,	Is your ability to ascertain what the
public understands any different with regard to the sources of information you discuss in your report?
A.	Well, yes, because in 1954, there was a
Gallup Poll that is discussed in the report; and I don't remember the exact wording, but it says something to the effect if you've seen or heard reports lately that cancer may be -- I'm sorry -that smoking may be a cause of cancer, and 90 percent of the American people said yes. So that would be an indication to me that a very substantial proportion of the population was aware of the issue with respect to cancer.
Q.	Well, were 90 percent of the American
people polled in that poll?
A.	I don't know of any polling that ever
polled 90 percent of anyone.
Q.	I don't know either. I take it that you
infer that the 90-percent response rate means that 90 percent of the American public would have an affirmative answer to that question?
(Ms. McDole entered the deposition room.)
A.	No, what it says is that the Gallup
organization, which claims to have a high degree of accuracy in its samples, says that 90 percent of the American people answered that question in the affirmative.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} That's what the Gallup Poll
says, 9 0 percent - -
A.	That's --
Q.	Let me finish. The Gallup Poll says
90 percent of the American people answered that question in the affirmative; correct?
A.	It says 90 percent of the respondents,
which is meant to be a representative sample of the American people, answered
that question in the affirmative.
Q.	Now, we aie talking about 90 percent of
the respondents, and you understand that to mean that it's a reflection of 90 percent of the American people; is that correc:?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	You understand that because you rely on
the Gallup organization as a reputable polling organization; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Now, was that information about lung
cancer in that '54 Gallup Poll question the only source of information the public had in 1954 about the risks regarding lung cancer from cigarette smoking?
A.	Excuse me, the only source of
information?
Q.	Well, that's a bad question.
Were there contrary opinions expressed to the public in 1954 about whether or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
A.	Contrary opinions?
Q.	Yes, contrary to the belief that there's
an association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A.	I think that's rather difficult for me to
answer. I'm going through the, as best I can, the various materials that I've read in 1954, and it would depend, I guess, on how one interpreted the --
Q.	Let me withdraw. I'll withdraw the
question.
You said earlier you weren't familiar with any tobacco-supported public relations work; correct?
A.	I've not looked into that issue.
Q.	So let me just talk about tobacco
companies' statements, statements made by employees or representatives of any of the tobacco companies. Are you aware of any such statements between 1950 and 1996 regarding the health risks of smoking?
A.	The period that I looked at between 1950
and 1965, 1966, depending on the cutoff date, there were statements made,- and I would estimate they would represent in terms of coverage 2 to 3 percent of the total volume of articles that were out
there.
Q.	Okay. And do you know if the public was
aware of those tobacco company statements?
A.	Well, i:: they read those articles.
Q.	Were they any less aware of them than they
are allegedly aware of the things that you attribute to the public awareness in the Fifties and Sixties?
A.	Well, this is a rough number, again, when
one in forty to fifty articles may have one comment by one tobacco representative, you're not talking a very significant proportion o£ the total volume of materials that wculd have been made available to the public through newspapers.
Q.	Okay. So you think -- as it relates to
tobacco company statements, you think it's pretty insignificant in terms of the overall public awareness?
A.	Absolutely.
Q.	All right. You think that largely, I take
it, because of the volume of statements about health and smoking -A.	There is a second factor, and that is that
many of these statements would not appear in the upper half or upper third or upper fourth of these articles. Many of them would be an, oh, by the way, we have yet further information from Hammond or Horn or whatever scientific group it was, and there would be a couple of paragraphs from the end what some person would say from a tobacco company. And they invariably would say, well, we need further research on this subject.
Q.	what's the Tobacco Institute?
A.	Tobacco Institute?
Q.	Yes.
A.	The Tobacco Institute was and is, if it's
still in existence and I honestly don't know, a trade organization based in Washington, D.C., founded, I'm going to guess at the date, around 1958, maybe it was 19E>9, late Fifties.
Q.	What was its purpose?
A.	Well, I suppose it's like any trade
organization based in Washington, D.C. It was interested in promoting its product.
Q.	Do you know whether or not it contributed
to, it being the Tobacco Institute, contributed to the public awareness about the health risks of cigarette smoking?
A.	Based on the materials I've looked at, I
would say it played an inconsequential role .
Q,	Okay. Do you know what its budget was at
any point in time?
A.	No, I don't.
Q.	Do you know if it had a message it sought
to communicate to Lhe public?
A.	No, I really don't.
Q.	Have you looked at any Tobacco Institute
documents to your knowledge?
A.	No, I haven't.
q.	Have you looked at any internal tobacco
company documents to your knowledge?
A.	No.
Q,	Do you have an opinion regarding whether
or not tobacco cigarette advertisements communicated to the public any information about the health risks of cigarette sraoking?
A.	Not really.
Q.	No opinion on that?
coursc of working on this case?
A.	Well, if I did, there were not many of
them.
Q.	Okay. All right. What I'd like to do is
ask you, if you can, to rank in terms of their order of importance as sources of information to the public about the health risks of smoking the eight sources that you identified in your report. You may want to take a minute to flip through them and refresh your memory as to what they are .
A.	Well, I think that I have to state at the
outset different sources will have different levels of importance at different points in time.
q.	That's a good distinction. Would it be
helpful if we spoke about sections of time and did it that way? Which section should we talk about?
A.	I can try. I wculd say if we would talk
about the nineteenth century and into the early twentieth -- let's just say
nineteenth century, books, pamphlets, and articles would be in the top. I think what I'm going to have to do is say in the top two or three. Anti-smoking organizations, and then certain kinds of government actions, such as state prohibition laws, and various -- well, that takes us into the twentieth century, so we'll leave that out. Just let me strike what I was going to say there. And also, I would say a portion of popular culture sources, and I'm not going to try to rank these.
I think I've given you fcur that would have been important, but certainly all sorts of expressions are coming into play; the most obvious being "coffin nail," which works its way into the American vocabulary by the 1890s, if not be fore.
q,	So we're talking nineteenth century.
You've identified books and pamphlets, the anti-smoking groups, certain state prohibition laws, and popular culture; is that right?
A.	Just let me review. Yes, that's right.
Q.	Would you care to add any others or should
we go to another period of time?
A.	Well, I can do this backwards. Obviously
television and radio didn't exist. The court cases that I reference are twentieth century, so they wouldn't fit. The newspapers and popular magazines I've looked at are primarily focused on the twentieth century.
Q.	Al1 right.
A.	I think that pretty much covers it
according to the material that I've looked at .
Q.	What's the next historical, period you
would like to bite off here?
A.	I think if we would go to the period 1900
to, let’s say, into the 19 -- let's just say roughly up to the Second World War, roughly 1900 to 1940.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Certainly book, pamphlets, and articles
will remain important, especially pamphlets, because some of this period is pre-radio and television; so pamphlets
would receive widespread circulation.
Some magazines are coming into play there, and I particularly point to the rise of pooular magazines like Reade r's Digest, Time. Newsweek are beginning to have a play. Anti-smoking associations are in decline really after about 1920.
Certainly what is very, very important and may be the most important factor in this grov.p would be the development of school materials and textbooks dealing with health issues, where states are adopting uniform standards with respect to what subjects should be taught in schools and what kinds of materials teachers should use in classroom instruction; and that is a very, very significant development for the twentieth century, and that process is going on in many states including Kansas by the 1890s. So I would say probably that is going to emerge as the most significant source of public information in the period that we are discussing.
And then finally, radio is basically lost to us. Popular culture sourccs, increasing public: awareness of the possible health hazards of cigarette by a broadening of a popular vocabulary about the cigarette in reference to "coffin sticks," "gaspers," "little white slaver," whatever else it might be.
Q.	That's popular culture?
A.	Well, I'm just putting in that general
kind of a category. We can say popular vocabulary; we can say popular expressions.
Q.	Are those the significant sources of
public information about cigarette smoking and health between 1900 and 194 0?
A.	Yes.
q.	Okay. What period would you care to
address next?
A.	Well, we pass over the World War II. We
go into the period, take the next 20 years, up to the mid-1960s. We would find at the base a host of studies, medica1 -re1 ated epidemiological studies, other kinds of experimental laboratory
studies such as the experiments with respect to where they would paint tar on mice and see whether tumors would develop. And what we find is that information very, very rapidly is disseminated through the popular press in newspapers, magazines, and also an increasing world of television in the general circulation of information.
In the meantime, public education continues. Information about possible problems associated with smoking will continue to be emphasized in the health courses at the primary and secondary levels, so this will be - - additionally, this will be a critical factor.
Q.	You're talking about, what, '45 to '65 .
here?
A.	Yes. And you also will have the Federal
government taking a more active role, especially in the 1950s. In the year 1957, Surgeon General Leroy Burney will make a statement to the effect that smoking may be a causal factor in the development of lung cancer, and he will
also make the point that he is using all the available resources to get that information to the public.
Q.	As to that statement by the Surgeon
General in 1957, was that disputed in the public domain by anybody to your knowledge ?
A.	It may well have been, but I don't
remember a specific article in terms of the ones I looked at.
q.	Do you recall, jumping ahead to the '64
Surgeon General report, whether or not there was a dispute about its allegations regarding the risks of cigarette smoking in the public domain?
A.	In the public domain?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I believe that a comment was made to the
effect that the Surgeon General's report, and I can't name the individual, the statement would have been made to the effect that the Surgeon General's report is a little more than a summary of what has previously been.known. It breaks no new ground, and therefore, we need to keep
How, who that statement was made by and who that person may have represented,
I would presume it may have been some representative of one of the tobacco companies. I remember reading a statement to that effect.
Q.	Just to be clear, do you take that
statement to reflect a dispute in the public domain about whether or not cigarette smoking causes disease in 1964 whenever the statement was made?
A.	Well, "dispute" is the term you've been
using.
Q.	Well, I'm just wondering if you -- do you
want to use another term?
A.	I presume the person was asked to make a
comment of that person's opinion about the Surgeon General's report.
Q.	Professor, you're the one who is telling
us about what the public is aware of. My question is, did they have information about a dispute with respect to the statements made in the '64 Surgeon General's report?
Q.	The public.
A.	The public?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Did they have information?
Q.	About a dispute concerning the allegations
that cigarette smoking causes disease?
A.	If they did, they were going to have to
look very deep in the newspapers.
Q.	You don't think there was easily
accessible information to challenge the '64 report; correct?
A.	I would say essentially that is correct.
0.	Okay. How about in 19S4? Was there
easily accessible information to the public challenging allegations that cigarette smoking caused disease?
A.	I would say that it was about the same to
go back to the figures I've given you before.
Q.	About the same as '64?
A.	The numbers?
Q.	In terms of the difficulty of finding
information.
Q.	How far back could we go and say that
'44, '34? I mean, where would you draw the line?
A.	Well, the newspapers that I looked at for
this in terms of the regional and local newspapers -- and that is the sample that I am drawing on, the Kansas City, Springfield, Missouri, and Emporia Gazette; -- begin with 1 9 54 and end in the mid-1960s.
Q.	Do you have any information about whether
or not prior to 1954 anywhere in the United States the public had access to information to suggest there was a dispute about whether or not cigarettes caused disease?
A.	Before 1954? Oh, I'm sure there must have
been someone somewhere who said something, but I can't recall anything specifically.
Q.	Is ic fair to say, given the way you
phrased that answer, that if somebody said something, it was not likely to have been a s igniL f leant part of the information available to the public?
A.	That's correct.
throughout the twentieth century that it's been a fairly one-sided presentation of information and evidence about the health risks of cigarette smoking?
A.	The overwhelming amount of information
that was being made available to the public based on the sources that I have reviewed was that smoking would be a source of health risks and that it could be difficult to quit.
Q.	And you have reviewed all the sources that
in your professional opinion you believe are relevant to answering the questions you were assigned, haven't you?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Okay. Now if we go from 1965 to the
present, is that a chunk of time we can talk about in terms of ranking these sources!?
A.	Well, I didn't really look beyond the
mid-l9<;0s, so that would be very difficult for me to do.
Q.	Okay. I'm looking at, in case you want to
The Laws and Materials Relating to Primary and Secondary Education."
Q.	Near the bottom of that page, half a dozen
lines or so up, you talk about, "These texts, dating back tc the early twentieth century, uniformly describe tobacco as habit-forming." You're talking about -then you cited Kansas curriculum bulletin in the next sentence.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is that in your file?
A.	The Kansas curriculum bulletin?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Yes, it is there, a complete copy,
Q.	What other texts are you aware of that
were used in Kansas that contained the health messages that you described here?
A.	Well, we have quite a good number of texts
that are --
Q.	In the file?
A.	In the file.
Q.	Okay.
A.	I hesitate to give you a number, but it's
a complete list of the textbooks that were
adopted by the Kansas Board of Education and that teachers in school districts could select from for classroom adoption.
Q.	What you have in your file is a list, not
the texts themselves?
A.	No, there are texts there, too.
Q.	Oh, really?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Do you know whether or not any of the
texts that you have identified as texts used in Kansas were used in the schools that David Burton attended?
A,	I don't know whether they would have been
used in his particular school, but I would say, yes, they would have to be.
Q.	What school did he go to?
A.	Well, I believe he went to a school in
Emporia,. Kansas. So I would guess the Emporia,, whatever you call it, the Emporia,, Kansas, School District.
Q.	Whatever you call it, you don't know the
name of the particular school he attended, do you?
A .	No .
Q.	And you don't know, in fact, whether or
not theit particular school used any of the particular texts that you've identified as texts used in Kansas, do you?
A.	They were required to, yes.
Q.	You're assuming they used them, but do you
actually know that? Are you speculating?
A.	Am I speculating?
Q.	Yes,
A.	Well, I can't say that they used them.
No, I can't say that. I have no way of knowing that .
Q.	Okay. And I take it you don't know
whether or not David Burton ever read any of these texts, do you?
A.	Well, he did say that he was aware of the
issue of cancer,, and presumably, he got that information from somewhere. And one could possibly guess that may have been from a textbook used in his school.
MR. LEYH: Move to strike as nonresponsive.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Listen to the question
carefully. Would you do that for me, professor? Do you know whether or not David Burton --
Q.	Let me finish. Do you know whether or not
David Barton actually read any of the texts that you've identified as texts used in Kansas?
A.	No.
Q.	Do you know what David Burton's reading
habits were?
A.	He said in his deposition that he
occasionally read the Emporia Gazette. I believe he s^id in another section that he occasionally read Time, and if I'm not mistaken. Sports Illustrated.
Q.	Do you know when David Burton occasionally
read the Emporia Gazette?
A.	He didn't say.
Q.	Do you know?
A.	No.
q.	Do you know when he occasionally read
Time?
A.	I don't recall what the context of that
was, no .
q.	Do you know when he occasionally read
Sports Illustrated?
newspapers or books that David Burton read?
A .	NO .
Q.	Are you aware of David Burton's television
viewing habits?
A.	What he said in his report, he didn't
watch much TV.
Q.	So to your understanding in the 1950s,
David Burton didn't watch much TV?
A.	That's what he sai^.
Q .	Is that; true in the Sixties?
A.	I think that's what he said, too, for the
Sixties.
Q.	Okay. I'm over now on Page 3. Have you
taught in a public high school or junior high school?
A.	Have I?
Q.	Yes.
A .	NO .
Q.	Have you known anyone who has?
A.	My wife.
Q.	Is that right? You say here at the bottom
of the paragraph that comes over from Page 2, "Besides textbooks, teachers in
the 1940s and 1950s also began to use visual materials about smoking, including educational films, in classroom presentations. "
Do you know, professor, whether or not educational films were ever used in any school David Burton attended?
A.	No.
Q.	The next section at the bottom of the
page, you make a statement here that says, "invariably, these groups stressed that smoking, once started, could be difficult to quit."
Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did they indicate -- these groups, did
they indicate why smoking might be difficult to quit?
A.	Well, different groups would talk about
different items, but it would usually be associated in some way with tobacco and nicotine.
Q.	Generally, it's your testimony these
groups would suggest - -
A.	They would tell --
£).	Let me finish. Would suggest that
nicotine makes it difficult to quit smoking; is that your testimony?
A.	Or they would talk about tobacco as a
narcotic, and they would say in turn that the narcotizing qualities would make it difficult to quit.
Q.	Do you know if tobacco is a narcotic?
A.	I'm not a scientist.
Q.	You don't know one way or the other?
A.	No, I don't.
Q.	Are you familiar with any scientific
literature that addresses --	.
A.	No.
Q.	-- whether or not nicotine is a narcotic?
A.	Am I familiar? No, I'm not a scientist,
Q.	All right. Page 4, the first sentence
in "C.)" you say, "During the early 1890s the WCTU mounted a national petition drive calling for a constitutional amendment that would prohibit the manufacture or sale of cigarettes in the United States."
Were the reasons for that petition drive all of the reasons you gave me this morning when we were talking about the
themes in the anti-tobacco movement in the early twentieth century?
A.	Yes, they would be emphasized in different
ways, but this came primarily cut of the WCTU. So it would have to do not only with health, but moral questions in a matter of preserving the good health of the family.
Q.	Was that the emphasis of the WCTU
moralizing about tobacco?
A.	Well, the WCTU had a department in which
Lucy Ps.ge Gaston played a prominent part .
The WCTU divided itself into a variety of departments. She felt that they weren't pushing hard enough on the issue, so she went out on her own during the 1890s. But I would say, yes, the purpose of this petition drive was co protect health, hearth, and home.
Q.	Was the moral dimension the most important
dimension to Gaston?
A.	Oh, I think health was very important to
her, too.	i
Q.	Okay. Well, was nealth important because
of its effect on character, or was it
important for some reason having to do with diseases that one might get from cigarette smoking?
A.	I'm sure all of those factors came into
play.
Q.	None more important •’han the other?
A.	That's very difficult to say.
Q.	Okay. Then, let's talk about the court
cases you address on Pages 4 and 5. Did any of these court cases find that the tobacco companies were liable for harms caused by their product?
A.	No, not so far as I know.
q.	Do you know whether or not the findings of
the court in these cases were made available to the public?
A.	The findings in the case of Kansas was
certainly a major point, a focal point of attention in Kansas in 1920. It received tremendous newspaper coverage as to whether the prohibitory law in Kansas would continue or whether it would be struck down by the State supreme court.
q.	i take it you're talking about the
Nossaman case?
A.	Yes, the Nossaman case.
q.	What about the others? Are those findings
made available to the respective public?
A.	Those particular findings, such as Austin
v. Tennessee, I have really no way of knowing.
Q,	is the same true for the Ross case; you
don't know whether the findings were made available to the public?
A.	The Ross case received extensive newspaper
coverage in the Kansas City area. There were several articles in the Kansas City newspapers about the Ross case.
Q.	Were those articles about the findings at
the outcome of the Ross case, what the Court held, or what the jury -A.	what the Court held?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I believe at least one article did deal
with that that I read.
q.	What did the Court hold in Ross?
A.	Well, we would have to go find the
article. I can't remember specifically what the Court held. It certainly did not sustain Ross' claim.
Q.	So the defendant was not found liable for
injury caused by cigarettes; right?
A.	X would have to guess, yes.
0-	And that information was communicated to
the public?
A.	Yes.
THE WITNESS: Can we take about a five-minute break or maybe a ten-minute break?
MR. LEYH: Sure.
[A short recess was taken.)
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) Ford's Little White Slaver,
you refer to it on Page 6.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did Ford's view of tobacco include this
moral dimension that we've talked about that it was bad for your character?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Who is Michael O'Shea? What's he a
professor of; do you know?
A.	He was a professor of education at the
University of Wisconsin specializing in health-related issues. He was also a textbook writer. His textbooks were used widely throughout the United States. He
worked closely with Johr. Harvey Kellogg, and they co-authored together. These texts, some of them were used in the Kansas schools.
Q.	These texts that O'Shea and Kellogg wrote
together included criticism of tobacco on moral grounds?
A,	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Looking at the medical stuff, "G.}"
Page 7, did you see any references in your search of the literature, references before 1960 to a risk of losing your legs from cigarette smoking?
A,	Any references before I960?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. What did you see in that regard?
A.	Good Health Magazine had a number of
references to circulatory problems related to smoking; the article that we spoke about earlier summarizing cases relating to whatever that term is, thromboangiitis obliterans or Buerger's disease, from the mid-1930s. I can t give you a specific number but the answer is yes. We would
Q.	All right. And in tha Good Health
Magazine article -A.	Yes.
Q.	did they discuss amputation cr limb
loss in some direct way?
A.	Yes .
Q.	And approximately what year was that, if
you know?
A.	Well, if I recall correctly, that article
came out in the mid-1930s, so that Good Health followed the medical literature and tried to get the word out to the public more generally. So that article would also be in the mid-1930s.
Q,	You said it followed the medical
literature; is that what you said?
A.	Good Health Magazine, that was one of its
purposes was to summarize medical literature that would be appearing in more specialized academic journals.
Q.	Okay. Do you know the disease that Good
Health Magazine said was a disease that caused amputations?
A.	In that particular article, that was
Buerger's disease or the thromboangiitis obliterans .
Q.	Do you know prior to 1960 whether or not
there was information in the public domain -- strike that -- there was information in this medical research and writings category that attributed amputations to some disease other than Buerger's disease?
A.	No, I'm not really aware of it. I don't
recall anytning.
Q.	Okay. How about after I960?
A.	With respect to Buerger's disease or with
respect to --
Q.	Let me rephrase the question. Are you
aware of -- other than what you've already told me, are you aware of any other sources that suggest that you can lose your legs, have your legs amputated, because of a disease attributable to smoking?
A.	Yes, there was a report in - - there was a
statement in Consumer Reports in 1953 that I recall to that effect.
Q,	And what disease was identified there as
A.	Peripheral vascular disease.
Q.	Okay. Any other sources of information
about amputation and disease at any point in time?
A.	Amputation and disease, there were
articles in Reader *s Digest. Let me give you two that come to mind, "Nicotine Knockout" by Gene Tunney, specifically mentioned Buerger's disease and amputat ions.
Q.	Is this in Reader's Digest.?
A.	Yes, the year I believe is 1940. It may
be 41, but I'm almost sure it's '40.
Q.	That's Buerger's disease and amputations?
A.	Yes.
Q.	All right.
A.	January of 1950, an article by Riis which
I believe is mentioned somewhere; in the repcrt also in Reader's Digest. The title of the article is "How Harmful Are Cigarettes?" As I recall, that article also addresses circulatory problems and mentions Buerger's disease specifically.
Q.	In the context of amputations?
Q.	All right. Do you know whether or not --
strike that .
Who is the readership for Good
Health?
A.	Readership for Good Health, it's very
difficult to say. There are no figures on its circulation, but it was probably in the 25,000. That's what I read in one book, 25,000-area per issue, something like that.
Q.	What book did you read that in?
A.	I really can't say. I don't remember.
Q.	Was it a lay readership?
A.	Yes, primarily it was. I don't know how
else to state it. It was sort of like the Prevention magazine of its day. Let's get the word out. Here are problems. And it had, between 1900 and 1953, Good Health Magazine had over 125 articles on smoking, heart disease, circulatory problems, vascular problems, so on ^.nd so forth.
q.	Do you know whether it was available in
Emporia, Kansas, when David Burton was 1iving there ?
A.	The information that would be contained in
Good Health Magazine would have been available in the textbooks that would have possibly been used in the Emporia schools.
Q.	And those are the textbooks that you've
already identified O’* we've already talked about ?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Those are the same textbooks that you
can't with any certainty say that were ever used in any school David Burton went to?
A.	That's correct.
q.	Do you know whether or not David Burton
ever read the Reader's Digest?
A.	No.
Q.	This subject of public awareness that
you're addressing - in your report, does that vary according to socioeconomic status?
A,	I don't, have any evidence to that effect.
q.	Have you looked into that at all, ever?
A.	Not into that particular question, so I'd
say, no.
q.	Do you know whether or not public
A.	I haven't looked into that question.
Q.	Do you know whether or not there's even
literature on that subject?
A.	No .
Q.	The bottom of Page 8, and it could almost
be anywhere, there's a reference to cardiovascular disease. Do you think that the public understood what cardiovascular disease was in the Fifties?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What do you think their understanding of
cardiovascular disease was?
A.	That you would have problem with your
heart or arteries or some type of circulatory problems relating to your heart, cardiovascular system.
q.	Do you think the ability to understand the
meaning of the term cardiovascular disease would depend upon one's racial background or cultural background?
A .	No .
Q.	Or socioeconomic status?
A.	No.
Q.	How about gender?
A .	NO .
Page 9, I'll introduce that subject.
You're talking about Murrow, and you say that television quickly emerged as another major source for the dissemination of information about the possible health consequences. Weren't there also a lot of ads on television that touted smoking in the Fifties?
A.	I suppose there were.
Q.	You didn't look at those I think you said;
correct ?
A.	No, I didn't.
Q.	Did you ever watch the old Perrv Como
Show? I don't know if you're old enough.
A.	I'm old enough, but I don't remember. I
may have missed it because it may have been on too late for me and Mom made me go to bed, like, at 8:00 o'clock at night, that sort of thing.
Q.	So you wouldn't know about any smoking
going on on that show?
A.	Do I remember seeing that? No, I don't
remember that I watched chat show.
or not on that show there was smoking going on?
A.	On the Perry Como Show?
Q.	Yes.
A.	No, I really don't.
Q.	Did you ever listen to the old Arthur
■ Godfrey radio shows?
A.	I don't remember. I remember not
listening to Godfrey. I remember he had a show, what ij it called, the Amateur Hour or something, on TV. I don't know if that's what it was called. I sort of vaguely remember that show.
q.	Do you remember what Arthur Godfrey said
in his radio show in the Fifties about cigarette smoking?
A.	I know Arthur Godfrey had lung cancer, but
I don't remember what he said.
Q.	At any point in time, right, about
cigarette smoking, I mean?
A.	No .
q.	Do you know from your investigations of
David Burton whetner or not he read the Kansas City Star?
Press?
A .	No .
Q.	I'm looking at Page 12, and there's a
reference to the context of the Gallup Poll question at the top of the page.
A.	Yes.
Q,	"The American Cancer Society" --
A.	Yes.
Q.	-- "reporting the results of a study." Do
you know what that study said?
A.	Yes, that is the final report of E. Cuyler
Hammond, C-u-y-1-e-r, and Daniel Horn's study sponsored by the American Cancer Society that got tremendous press coverage during the Fifties. The first reports came out in 1954, a study of 180,000 males between the ages of 50 and 70, and the conclusions were initially announced in 1954. And l believe they are described in here with extensive press coverage, and then the final summaries appeared in the press in 1957 and I presume on television as well.
American Heart Association and the National Heart Institute issue a statement in the late 1950s that said research was not conclusive on cigarettes and disease?
A.	Did they -- could you --
Q.	Did those organizations, the American
Cancer Society -A.	Oh, the American Cancer Society?1
Q.	No. I think it's the American Cancer
Association, together with the National Heart Institute and the American Heart Association, and are you aware of any statement the three of them issued?
A.	No, I'm not.
Q.	Okay. Moving to Page 13, you are
referring to a Burney statement at the top of the page. I think you mentioned this earlier.
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you know what the American Medical
Association's position on that was, on the Burney statement?
A.	Well, with the Burney statement here --
"Our position is that we have informed
the public through the excellent: coverage of the press, radio, and TV." That's a statement of information.
In the Burney statement to that effect appears somewhere in the report that we have increasing amounts of evidence that smoking cigarettes may be a cause or a causative agent, I don't remember the exact wording, of cancer.
Q.	And the question is: What was the AMA's
position on that?
A.	What, on whether it was disseminated to
the general public or not?
Q.	No, on whether or not it was a cause of
it .
A.	The AMA didn't have a position at that
point in time.
Q.	Did they consider that issue?
A.	Well, I'm sure they probably did at
various points along the way.
Q.	Do you know when they developed the
position?
A.	Well, I know the vice president of the AMA
in 1964, a man by the name of Blasingame said with respect to this question that
the American public has been repeatedly warned about possible health problems and that it's a matter or public and common knowledge. I do know that.
Q.	And he was a smoker, wasn't he?
A.	I don't have any idea.
Q.	You don't know?
A.	I don't know.
Q,	Okay. Did Burney say in the late Fifties
that the tobacco companies had adequately warned about the health risks?
a.	Burney said in 1957 that, and I don't
remember his exact words, that we have adequately warned the public. We've put the information out there to the public.
Q.	The question is: Did he say that the
tobacco companies had adequately warned?
A.	I don't remember that he commented on the
tobacco companies.
Q.	All right. Do you know if the '64 Surgeon
General's report commented on whether the tobacco companies had adequately warned?
A.	I don't recall that it did, that it
commented on that. .
q.	In Paragraph 4, Page 13, you make a
statement, "Such articles took for granted that persons wanted to learn about methods to help break their habit."
A.	I'm sorry, which page?
Q.	Paragraph 4, Page 13.
A.	Oh.
Q.	It's, like, the third sentence there.
"Such articles took for granted that persons wanted to learn" -A.	I see.
Q.	Do you see that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	In those articles, did it indicate why
people wanted to break their habit?
A.	Well, the general theme that would run
through these kinds of articles is that I understand I can develop significant health problems. And my life will be shortened by smoking, so I would like to find out about quitting.
Q.	So it's your testimony that these
articles, in any case, didn't suggest people wanted to quit for reasons having to do with costs or the dirtiness of the habit or maybe immorality?
A.	Sometimes those issues would come up, too.
Q.	Did they come up as often as the health
issue?
A.	I didn't take an exact account, so I can't
really answer that question.
Q.	Do you know when the first scientific
studies addressing whether or not nicotine is a pharmacologically active agent were undertaken?
A.	No, I'm not a scientist. I can't really
answer thac question.
Q.	Okay. Do you know whether or not -- do
you know when the first studies, scientific studies, addressing whether or not nicotine is a psychoactive drug were undertaken?
A.	I would have to give you the same	1
i
re sponse.	*
Q.	Paragraph 5, Page 14, you note a "rapid
shift of filter-tipped cigarettes during the 19 50s . "
A.	Yes.
Q.	Why was there such a shift?
A.	There was a cancer and/or health scare in
the 1950s. And one characteristic of that
scare in terms of information let out to the public related to these experimental studies, in which cigarette tar would be painted on the backs of mice, and tar was being defined at that time as the probable source of lung cancer. As a net result, that information circulating through the public, I would say that people responded to that medical information and that was a primary reason for the shift to filter-tip cigarettes.
Q,	People thought it was safer to smoke
filter-tips?
A.	People thought it would be safer to smoke
filter-tip cigarettes.
Q.	What did the tobacco company say, if
anything, if you know, about tar on the	-
backs of mice causing cancer in humans?
A.	Well, I really don't know. I don't recall
any specific quotations.
Q.	Okay. And were there any cigarette
companies that were advertising in the Fifties the relative safety of filter-tip cigarettes ?
A.	I really can't tell you.
investigation?
A.	I've said before I didn't look at
advertisements, per se.
Q.	Let me refer you to Page 15, a couple of
lines down from the top of the page. You state, "Thus, the public was not only aware but also had a common understanding of the possible habit-forming qualities and health consequences of smoking."
How e^rly on did the public have a common understanding of the possible habit-forming qualities and health consequences of smoking?
A.	How early on?
Q .	Ye s .
A.	I would say certainly by the 1870s and
1880s, if not before.
Q.	And that's true in Kansas?
A.	Would that be true in Kansas?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Well, the Kansas material?, I would say
certainly by 1900, if not before, in the case of: Kansas bated on the materials I've looked at.
Q.	Okay. On Page 16, you identify among the
things you read Mr. Burton's deposition?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you see anything in Mr. Burton's
deposition to suggest he read any of the particular sources of information that you identified in your report as sources for the public awareness about the health risks of smoking?
A.	He stated he read the Emporia Gazette
occas ionally.
0.	Okay. Anything else?
A.	Time magazine.
Q.	Anything else?
A.	Well, among those that I looked at, I
didn't look at Sports Illustrated.
Q.	Okay.
A.	I don't remember any other publications
that he said he read.
Q.	Time. and the Emporia Gazette
occasionally?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you've testified, I think, about those
already, haven't you?
this matter, professor?
A.	To date?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Well, I would say 100 to 110,
approximately.
Q.	Have you got written statements that you
prepare from time to time?
A .	Yes.
Q.	Are they in your file?
A.	NO.
Q.	Why not?
MS. McDOLE: Because I told him not to. When you're prepared to give us all of the statements from your experts, we'll do the same for you.
MR. LEYH: Well, I called for the production of Professor Martin's statements with respect to his time. I don't know, counsel, of any statement by an expert of ours that is in existence that we haven't provided.
MR. McDOLE: Well, you
promised me, for example, Peter Tutor that you would get them for me from your files, and Dr. McClain who keeps no record of his -MR. LEYH; I will get you whatever we have, whatever they have with -MS. McDOLE: That's fine.
MR. LEYH: Let me finish.
With respect to Dr. Tutor and Dr. McClain.
I just simply called for the production of Professor Martin's statements.
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Now, is there anything else
that you were asked not to bring today?
A.	No. I'm not quite sure what the -- I
don't think I understand the question.
Q.	Counsel just indicated that she told you
not to bring your statements.
A.	That's correct.
q.	Did counsel, either one of these or any
other lawyer, tell you not. to bring anything else?
Q.	All right. How "mch morey have you been
paid for your work on this case?
A.	My rate is $195 an hour. That's stated in
t here.
Q.	How much money have you been paid for your
work in this case?
A.	Well, somebody have a calculator?
$20,000, $25,000, if I calculated that correctly■
Q.	And - -
A.	Did I calculate it correctly? I don't
know. I'm sorry. I'm not a mathematician.
Q.	You're multiplying 195 by what?
A.	Let's say 110 to date. 200 times 110,
just a second.
MS. McDOLE: When you say "to date," are you including today's deposit ion?
THE WITNESS: No.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Thanks for that
distinction.
A.	This is a guess. I didn't go through my
bills last night. This is a tough one for me. Let's say between $22,000 and
Q.	Are there any bills you've submitted
regarding what you have not been paid to date?
A.	This is all an estimate on my part. I
didn't look up this information. I submitted a bill approximately a week ago, something like that. I would hope that would be a rough number for you.
Q.	It is. You've told me that you haven't
had any publications on tobacco; correct?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Who would you identify as the leading
historian, or among the leading historians of tobacco in the United States?
A.	Virtually no one.
Q.	Really?
A.	That's right.	'
Q.	Okay. Obviously there are historians of
tobacco in America; correct? Maybe it's not obvious.
A.	No, it's not obvious because quite
seriously this is not a subject which you have a number of specialists running around to do a study of the history of
tobacco in the United States. I think that's reflected in the source material, the secondary sources that I listed,
Q.	All right. Are you aware of anyone, any
historian who you would regard as a specialist on the subject of tobacco in the United States?
A.	A specialist on the subject of tobacco?
Well, there are some historians of early American history who have written about the tobacco trade in the Atlantic world.
Q.	What are their names?
A.	One is named -- what is his name? He
recently retired from the University of Michigan. I'm not going to come up with it for you. He did write a lot of stuff on the tobacco trade as an economic system. I'm sorry. The first name is Jacob if that means anything, but I know that I'm mixing up last names, Jacob Price.
Q.	Can you think of any other historians you
would consider specialists in tobacco in the United States?
A.	Well, I would list Robert Sobel. I don't
know whether he's still living or not. He wasn't a young person when he wrote the book They Satisfy, which I would think would be considered a standard history of the cigarette in the United States. q.	is a standard history different than a
social history?
A.	Well, he looks into -- he goes back and
looks into the rise of the industry. He goes back and talks about various kinds of tobacco products that were available in the marketplace. Then he carries the story forward through time, but he concentrates on primarily the h:.story of the cigarette. . q.	is that different than a social history?
A.	It can be a form of social history.
q.	Okay. Are there people in your profession
known as social historians who study tobacco?
A.	Well, I'm having a difficult time coming
up with anyone. q.	i didn't ask if they were a specialist or
did you regard them as that, but just persons in your profession who are social
historians who studied tobacco?
A.	It's obviously not a booming field. I
can't really think of anyone. I mean, what i S3 the name of the fellow at Northwestern? He's written a book on tobacco culture, but that doesn't have to do with tobacco; it has to do with the lifestyles of the great, planters.
Q.	The what?
A.	The great planters in Virginia, the great
tobacco planters in Virginia in the eighteenth century.
Q.	What about John Burnham who is on your
list of source materials? Isn't he a social historian who studies tobacco?
A.	Among other things, yes. He's a historian
of health and medicine.
Q.	So he's one, right, in answer to my
question?
A.	Well, you had asked me about people who
studied, as I remember, exclusively tobacco, and that certainly isn't the case with Burnham.
Q.	I'm sorry. I didn't mean to ask that. I
don't think I used the word "exclusively."
Let me re-ask the question with that clarification. I don't mean exclusively, but are you aware of any social historians who studied tobacco?
A.	Burnham has written on the subject, yes.
Q.	Anybody else? Is he the leading one?
A.	Well, if there's only one, I guess you're
leading.
Q.	I guess so. Is there only one?
A.	I'm not coming up with other nanes for
you. I'm sorry.
Q.	Allen Brandt?
A.	I'm not even sure he's a historian.
Q.	So Burnham is the only one you can think
of right now, and he's the leading one?
A.	He's it.
0.	Now, you're general editor of the book
series on the American Social Experience it says in your CV?
A.	That's correct.
Q4	What's your role as general editor?
A.	It primarily would be to help New York
University Press locate manuscripts for publication in that series.
Q.	Did yon help them locate Burnham's book in
A.	No, actually Burnham sent that manuscript
in.
Q.	Did you read it prior to the time it was
published?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you comment on it to him?
A.	Did I comment on it to him?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I commented on it to the publisher. I
said two things about it, I find the argument verging on the unbelievable, if not ridiculous. I thought it was one of the worst written manuscripts that I ever saw.
Q.	And when you say "the argument," are you
referring to the argument on smoking?
A.	No, the general argument in the book about
the inversion of culture and so on and so forth.
Q.	So that's the argument you regard as --
A.	Well, you go into each one of the
categories, and I could pretty much say the same thing. But I don't know when that was, five or six years ago, something
published in the series?
A.	We had a very vigorous and strong debate
about that, and I was outvoted. And that leaves me in the position where I have to decide whether or not I want to leave the series editorship, something that I spent years developing or go along with what the publisher wanted.
They wanted it because of Burnham's name, frankly, because his name would help . sell books. So many of the books are first-time authors, and they have to go out on their own merit. You don't get any market play because the authors are totally unknown. There are only two I believe in the whole series done by individuals. Peter Sterns at Cornell University is considered as one of the major players in modern European social history and Burnham.
Q.	Do you know if Burnham was ever made aware
of your feelings about his book?
Q,	You've never calked to him about it?
A.	I have met him on two occasions to say,
"Hello. How are you?"
Normally, whatever I write about a manuscript anyway, this is part of the procedure, will be passed on to the author as an anonymous reviewer, so he or she would not know that I necessarily had prepared the comments. q.	Well, if you can recall in your -- you do
believe you prepared some anonymous comments for Burnham; is that right?
A.	I believe so, yes.
Q.	in those anonymous comments, do you recall
if you said this book should not be published as part of our series?
A.	I mean, I don't recall at this point what
I said. I didn't think it was a good manuscript. The press wanted it, and I conceded the point. q.	i want to ask you if you agree with this
statement, professor: "Physicians, therefore, were living in a culture in which opinion leacers and mass media not only accepted tobacco use but beginning in
the 1920s increasingly looked with disfavor on any attempts to condemn smoking and drinking on health or on moral grounds."
A.	Read it a second time. I'm sorry.
Q.	"Physicians, therefore, were living in a
culture in which opinion leaders and mass media not only accepted tobacco use but beginning in the 1920s increasingly looked with disfavor on any attempts to condemn smoking and drinking on health or on moral grounds."
A.	No, I don't think I agree with that.
Q.	Is that: because you think opinion leaders
and mass media were more sympathetic to tobacco?
A.	I would certainly think that individuals
like Henry Ford, Thomas Edison, a whole variety of individuals who were major employers in the United States who were saying we wen't hire you if you smoke cigarettes, I would certainly include those individuals among opinion leaders.
Irving Fisher was a major opinion leader in the early twentieth century, an
economist at Yale. He is speaking out regularly against tobacco use.
David Jordan was a major educator in the early twentieth century, the president of Stanford University, well known as the individual who may have brought Stanford up as a major institution, repeatedly speaking out	.
against smoking.
I would say all of these are major opinion, leaders, and whoever that source, somehow neglected to go into their research.
Q.	And you would say that the major opinion
leaders you just identified are, in fact, representative of the opinion leaders of the day?
A.	Well, I namad two industrial giants, a
college president, and a major economist.
Q.	Is that a "yes"?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Let me ask if you agree with this
statement: "By the mid-1930s, in medical science, as much as in the mass media, cigarette smoking was accepted as the norm
exactly in the way that Troyer and Markle have shown was true for the culture as a whole, the bulk of M.D.s as cultural exemplars in smoking. If doctors did not stop smoking, how could anyone take seriously statements that smoking was harmful?"
A.	I would have to see the source on that to
see whether the author has any evidence thac doctors smoked as much, if not more than, the population, and I don't know whether that evidence is there.
Q.	Have you ever looked into the question as
to whether or not doctors smoke more than anybody else?
A.	No, I haven't looked into that question.
Q.	And you're aware of no evidence on that
question today?
A.	That quote was from the 1930s. I think
that was framed in the context - -
Q.	I mean, as you sit here today, are you
aware of any evidence about whether doctors smoked more than anybody else?
A.	No, I'm not aware of any evidence.
Q.	Professor Martin, have you got an opinion
as to whether or not the medical community was slow to come to realize that, cigarette smoking causes cancer because they were persuaded that cancer might be hereditary?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
form.
A.	There were a lot of different theories
floating around in the Thirties and the Forties and the Fifties with respect to the sources of cancer; and one of them, one of the theories would be the hereditary theory, but I would read that as an overstatement.
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) Okay, Do you know if
physicians tended to be skeptical about claims that smoking was unhealthy in the Thirties, Forties, and Fifties because they associated with such claims, moralizing, that some in the ant.i - tobacco movement were doing?
A.	No, I really can't answer that question.
Q.	Why not?
A.	I haven't looked at the question.
Q.	You just don't have any evidence to give
you - -
to deal with issues concerning the public awareness, not to deal with the history of the medical community. And that's -- I didn't look into that particular area with respect to what physicians, per se, were doing.
Q.	Can you call on your general knowledge as
a historian to answer that quest ion?
A.	Well, repeat the question.
Q.	Were physicians in the Thirties and
Forties and Fifties reluctant to believe, skeptical about the allegations that cigarette smoking causes cancer because they associated moral judgment with those allegations; namely, the people making them were moralizing? Do you know?
A.	No, I honestly don't know, but I would say
if I had to guess that would come apart upon any reasonable research invest igat ion *
q.	But you're guessing when you say that?
A.	Yes.
q,	okay. Do you agree with this: "Before
the 1950s, most physicians simply did not
take seriously the idea that smoking represented a threat to the cardiovascular system except in very exceptional cases."
A.	I would completely disagree with that.
Q.	For reasons which you've already testified
today?
A,	Yes.
Q,	Do you agree that only in the 1950s did
medical advisers of the American Heart Association begin to take tobacco seriously as a public health problem?
A.	I don't; even know -- I'm not sure when the
American Heart Association was founded.
Q.	Have you ever studied the American Heart
Association?
A.	Not per se, not in particular.
Q.	Do you agree that "In the case of smoking
before the 1950s, American doctors tended to reinforce, not question, the idea that every adult smoked"?
A.	No, I don't agree with that.
Q.	You've never looked into the habits of
physicians, have you, in terms of smoking?
A.	No, I've stated that repeatedly.
Q.	Why do you disagree?
assertion.
Q.	Do you have any facts to suggest it's
wrong?
A.	Does the author have any evidence to
suggest it's right?
Q.	Well, we can interrogate the author at a
later time, but we're here talking to you. And my question is, do you have any faccs to suggest the statement is wrong?
A.	Read the statement again.
Q.	I would be happy to. "In the case of
smoking before the 1950s, American doctors
tended to reinforce, not question, the	(
i
idea that every adult smoked."	\
<
A.	I'm not; even sure what it means, which	J
would make sense given the presumed	1
source.
Q.	What is your presumed -- what's your
suspicion about the source?
A.	Some of this sounds very familiar to me.
Q.	You've read it before, have you?
A.	I guess. It's been years.
q.	So you can't make sense of that statement;
is that your testimony?
are doing what?
Q.	Reinforcing the idea that every adult
smoked?
A,	By virtue of what?
Q.	By virtue of it doesn't say.
A.	It must be Burnham.
Q.	You think it's Burnham?
A.	I don't know who it is.
Q.	Then you've read this article?
MS. McDOLE: Well, a3k him for the article because he said that you could have any document you needed to help refresh your	<
memory.	J
a.	Okay. Which article is this?	£
v
0
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) Have you read the Burnham
article?
A.	The Burnham 1929/1964 comparison?
Q.	That's right.
A.	Yes.
q.	Do you recall anything in there about
whether or not physicians reinforced the idea that every aault smoked?
A.	I recall reading the article, but I don't
A.	Well, it must have been in there if you're
reading from the article.
Q.	I am reading from the article, but it may
not be Burnham.
A.	What is the article? Let me ask you that.
MS. McDOLE: Despite what he promised at the beginning, he's not going to tell you.
MR. LEYH: Let's be very clear about this since counsel is making an allegation of bad faith which I think is most unfair and unwarranted. As I recall what I said to Professor Martin, if you need to consult a document, do so.
I didn't say that I would provide him with any documents that he asked for. I am under no obligation, as you know, to provide him with documents from which I might be reading.
MS. McDOLE: Okay. It's my mistake.
MR. LEYH: I think Professor Martin is well prepared to answer these questions.
Q■	(BY MR, LEYH) Let me ask if you will
agree with this, Professor Martin: When in 1928 the American Tobacco Company cited the authority of 20,697 doctors in an advertisement for Lucky Strike cigarettes, the number was plausible?	.
A.	I guess, yes,
Q.	You have no reason to disagree that
American Tobacco said there were 20,000 - something doctors in an advertisement for Lucky Strike cigarettes?
A.	If there was such an advertisement, yes.
Q.	Do you think that might reinforce the idea <
that smoking was okay?	<
t
A.	Well, given that individuals start	*■
learning at a very young age in this	1
society that smoking isn't good for them,
I don't know why they would believe that.
Q.	The quest ion, sir, is whether or not you
have an opinion that whether in advertisements projecting doctors as smokers would reinforce to the public that
opposite effect and reinforce the idea smoking may not be healthy.
Q.	Really? Have you ever seen tobacco ads
with doctors in them?
A.	Really, I mean --
Q.	Ever, not just in the context --
A.	I may have when I was a little kid, but I
don 1t recall.
Q.	And it's your testimony that using a
doctor in an ad might very well have the effect of suggesting to the consumer that smoking is unhealthy?
A.	Could have that effect, yes.
Q.	And you believe it well might, don't you?
A.	I said it could have.
Q.	Okay.
THE WITNESS: Could we take	I
«
about a five-minute break?	t
MS. McDOLE: Sure.	«
MR. LEYH: Yes, sure.
(A brief recess was taken.)