IN THE CIRCUIT C 17TH JUDICIAL CIRC BROWARD COUNT COMPLEX ClVI NO. 08-8000 IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES Pertains To: Gross
Deposition of LOUIS KYP Shell Square, 701 Poydras S New Orleans, Louisiana 7013 offices of Adams & Reese on commencing at 10:03 a.m. an 2:31 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
SCHLESINGER LAW OF Attorneys at Law BY: STEVEN J. HAW (Via telephone) 1212 Southeast Thi Fort Lauderdale, F
SHOOK, HARDY & BAC Attorneys at Law BY: TERRENCE J. S -AND- ROGER C. 2555 Grand Bouleva Kansas City, Misso ATTORNEYS FOR and LORILLARD
JONES DAY Attorneys at Law By: EDWARD M. CAP 325 John H. McConn Suite 600
Columbus, Ohio 43 ATTORNEYS FOP REYNOLDS/DEFE
REPORTED BY:
LISA JETER Certified Court Re
P FOR THE IN AND FOR rLORIDA [VISION
SACCO LITIGATION 08-025828(19)
)UDES, PH.D., One st, Suite 4500,
:aken in the Ly 9th, 2009, including at
SS, P.A.
ESQUIRE
Avenue Ida 33316
LLP
)N, ESQUIRE IY, ESQUIRE
64108 CLIP MORRIS USA rENDANTS
(Ed), ESQUIRE Boulevard
IT
:er
) 1 Pannrfar
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION
Deposition of LOUIS KYRIAKOUDES, PH.D. Taken on July 9th, 2009
EXHIBIT INDEX
1.	Supplemental Reliance List
2.	Sketch
3.	10-18-79 Superman 11 Movie Placement Document
4.	Re-Not ice of Taking Deposition Duces Tecum
5.	12-5-80 Letter to A. Sacks from B. Roper
6.	3-10-82 Letter to H. Waxman from B. Roper
INDEX
Page Line
EXHIBIT# 1	11	19
EXHIBIT# 2	44	10
EXHIBIT# 3	66	1
EXHIBIT# 4	91	5
EXHIBIT# 5	117	19
EXHIBIT# 6	124 5
EXAMINATI ON BY MR. SEXTON 5 5 EXAMI NATI ON BY MR. GEARY 132 2 EXAMI NATI ON BY MR. CARTER 142 1:
ST I PU LATI ON
It is stipulated and agreed by and among counsel for the parties hereto that the deposition of the aforementioned witness is hereby being taken under the Louisiana Code o Civil Procedure, Article 1421, et seq., for all purposes, in accordance with law;
That the formalities of reading and signing are specifically reserved;
That the formalities of sealing, certification, and filing are specifically waived;
That all objections, save those as to the form of the question and the responsiveness of the answer, are hereby reserved until such time as this deposition, or any part thereof, may be used or sought to be used in evidence.
* * * *
LISA JETER, Registered Professional Reporter and Certified Court Reporter, in and for the Parish of St. Tammany, State of Louisiana, officiated in administering the oath to the witness.
LOUIS KYRIAKOUDES, PH.D., after having been first duly sworn by the above-mentioned court reporter, did testify as follows:
EXAMINATION BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Good morning, Professor Kyriakoudes.
A Good morning.
Q We've met before, but I will just
reintroduce myself. I'm Terry Sexton. I represent Philip Morris in the Grossman case.
With us today are Roger Geary, representing Lorillard; Ed Carter on the phone, representing R.J. Reynolds; and you counsel is on the phone as well. Okay?
A Yes.
Q I know that you have been deposed many times, and I don't mean for this to be an endurance contest or for us to replow many questions that you've been asked and that you've answered many times before, as Ion; as your answers and opinions haven't changed.
So I would like to start by seeing if I
can streamline things and maybe narrow th( scope of the work that we have in front of us today. Okay?
A Yes, that's a good idea.
Q I know that your opinions tend to be very much the same from case to case. I believe you were deposed on June 25th in the Barbanell case. Does that sound about right?
A That's correct.
Q And I believe you testified in the
Barbanell case a week or a week and a half ago that your opinions in that case were going to be generally the same as your testimony in the Hess trial, the Sherman trial, and the Engle generic trial preservation deposition. Do you recall that testimony?
A Yes, I do. That's a correct recollection of that.
Q Is that true for the Grossman case as well? Is it true that your opinions in Grossman will be the same as the opinions that you offered at the Hess trial, the Sherman trial, and in your Engle generic trial
preservation testimony?
A Yes, with a bit of an explanation.
Q Okay.
A Because of the location of Laura Grossman in historical time, being born in 1957, which makes her more recent chronologically, there will be more testimony on my part about the 1970s and the 1980s. And I've supplied additional reliance documents related to that in preparation of this deposition, or for you to prepare for this deposition.
Q I would like to just follow up on that a little bit and find out what you mean when you say that you will offer more testimony regarding the 1970s and the 1980s. Does that mean that you -MR. HAMMER: Is there any way to mak( the volume a little bit louder? I've got my phone turned up all the way and I'm having difficulty hearing you guys.
MR. SEXTON: We're sort of constrained on how far the speaker phone will go.
MR. HAMMER: That sounds a lot better right now than it did.
THE WITNESS: I'm going to focus towards the phone and put more diaphragm behind it.
MR. HAMMER: That would be great. I appreciate that.
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Let me start again.
I understand what you just said to mean that your opinions in the Grossman case are going to be the same as the testimony you offered at the Hess trial, the Sherman trial, and the Engle generic trial preservation deposition, with a caveat that you're going to talk more about the 1970s and 1980s; is that correct?
A That's correct.
Q And that's because of Laura Grossman's age
A That's correct.
Q All right. Is it the case that your
opinions are the same and you're just going to offer perhaps more examples from the 1970s and '80s to support those opinions, or do you have some new substantive opinions that you plan to offer in the Grossman case that you didn't offer in
those prior cases?
A I guess the difference would be specifically - and you can get this from the reliance documents I submitted. I will talk about the marketing activities, and particularly the youth marketing activities of the defendants in the 1970s.
MR. HAMMER: Hello? I've lost you guys.
MR. SEXTON: I was pausing.
MR. HAMMER: Oh, okay.
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Professor Kyriakoudes, let's try this again.
Apart from your plans to discuss the marketing and youth marketing activities of the defendants in the 1970s and the 1980s, are your opinions in the Grossman case otherwise the same as the opinions that yoi offered in the Hess trial, the Sherman trial, and Engle generic trial preservation deposition?
A Yes.
Q Is it fair to say that you've not reached any new opinions since the Hess trial, the
Sherman trial, or the Engle generic trial preservation deposition specifically regarding the conduct of Philip Morris USA?
A No. I mean, my opinions are the same in regards to the conduct of Philip Morris as in the prior trials. Again, the difference being that I may be asked questions about these marketing activities that I referred to earlier. But, you know, my general position is the same.
Q You answered no, but I think the answer t( my question may be yes. So I want to ask it again, just so you understand.
A I might have misheard you.
Q You bet.
Is it true that you have not reached any new opinions regarding the conduct of Philip Morris USA since your testimony in the Hess trial, the Sherman trial, and the Engle generic trial preservation deposition; is that true?
A Yes, that would be true, again, with the mentioning of the youth marketing issue that I raised earlier.
Q Okay.
A I'm glad we got that straight.
Q Would the same be true for the other defendants, R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard Tobacco Company, and Liggett, that your opinions regarding those companies and their conduct are the same as your testimony in those prior trials and trial preservation depositions I mentioned, with the exception of your intention to talk about marketing, youth marketing, in the 1970s and 1980s?
A Yes, that would be correct.
Q Okay. Now, some supplemental reliance materials, as you mentioned, were suppliec to us last week, and let me find some here I want to show you what I will mark as Exhibit 1 and ask you if this is a list of those materials?
A Yes, this is a list of those materials.
(Exhibit 1 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q All right. You can just keep that in front of you. We may refer back to it over the course of the morning.
Professor, referring you to Exhibit 1, the supplemental reliance list. Is that a list you prepared yourself?
A Yes, I sent - I did not type up this list.
I forwarded documents to Mr. John Gdansk in consultation with him, and he - his office somehow put the list together from documents that I supplied to him.
Q So Mr. Gdanski's office physically assembled the list that's before you?
A Yes, upon - based on the documents I supplied to them.
Q You sent Mr. Gdanski's office some supplemental reliance materials. Mr. Gdanski's office created a list of those materials, which is before you as Exhibit 1?
A Yes, that's correct.
Q Why did you send Mr. Gdanski those supplemental reliance materials?
A Well, when I discussed this particular case with him, and he explained to me the general situation, and when I reviewed a couple of - two depositions from the case, fact depositions, I indicated to him that I
had given her birth year of 1957, her location in historical time, that these documents might be relevant for his preparation for the case. They were certainly relevant for my opinions and my discussion. So I took some time and I assembled these documents.
Q Okay. And if you could, please explain to us why you felt like the documents listed on Exhibit 1 were relevant in particular to the Grossman case and to Laura Grossman a opposed to the other cases you testified in.
A Oh, yes. She really would be among the youngest plaintiffs, I call her a plaintiff, even though she's been deceased. Or what would the technical --
Q Decedent?
A Decedent. Thank you. She would be the youngest decedent really of any case that I've been involved with. The only person approaching her age would be the Arnitz case, and he was older than her.
In the past, just as a procedural matter, it's been my understanding - I_
don't follow all the legal stuff. But in the past, many attorneys have represented to me that the judges have ruled against this youth marketing issue because of relevancy in the sense that someone born in 1928, youth marketing in the 1970s wouldn' be relevant. But in this case, someone born in 1957, it struck me as being relevant. So I thought this was something important for Mr. Gdanski to consider, and it was important for, my opinions.
Q You've been consistent in the past in describing yourself as a historian of the tobacco industry and the social aspects of tobacco use. Have I butchered that too badly?
A That's good. That's pretty good. Would you like me to --
Q Yes, please elaborate.
A Let me line it up for you. Really, three things, or you could divide it into three areas. One is like you said, the history of the social practice of cigarette use in American life over a broad historical time, what the public knew about the risks of
smoking at certain points in historical time, and then the role of the tobacco industry in helping build a cigarette culture in the United States and acting as an agent during this period.
Q Your focus as a historian in this case, as in the other cases that you have testified in, is on the tobacco industry and on the public as a whole, true?
A Yes. And again, just to clarify, as I've said, I've never had the kind of documentary evidence on any particular decedent or plaintiff where I could, using the methods that historians use, make an affirmative statement about what one persor may have known and didn't know at certain points in time.
I can talk about larger populations, as you suggested, what's relevant to me in terms of plaintiff-specific information.
As I've said in the past, where they're located in chronological time, kind of the broad kind of demographic and geographic facts of their lives, you know, where they were from, where they are located in
historical time, somebody born in 1920 as opposed to 1957, for example, those broad issues.
Q You have a sufficient record before you in this case to place Laura Grossman in historically temporally/spatially right?
A Yes, that's true.
Q But otherwise, you don't focus much on th specifics of Laura Grossman as distinct from the population at large, right?
A Yes, that would be fair, just to - yes, I agree with you.
Q Just to put a finer point on what you just said, you're not a historian of Laura Grossman or any other plaintiff?
A That's correct, and I've said that many times.
Q All right. You're not a biographer of Laura Grossman or any other plaintiff?
A Right. And just so that you're clear, so you can understand my approach to this, aj I've done in the past, and you all know about me, you know - I mean, she's from New York. She's born in the late '50s. When she begins smoking is a little
difficult, so we don't know exactly when.
It looks like sometime in the teenage years. But that just places her in time and space.
Q And you're not here in the Grossman case t( testify specifically regarding what Laura Grossman read, heard, or saw regarding cigarette smoking, right?
A Her as an individual?
Q Yes.
A No. The best I can say would be New York.
Q Okay. And similarly, you're not here to testify in the Grossman case regarding what reaction Laura Grossman might have had to anything she ever read, heard, or saw about cigarette smoking; is that true?
A Yes. From the documentary record especially, given all the caveats we mentioned earlier first, and also the documented records, to know what her individual reaction was.
Q And you don't intend to offer any opinions on what Laura Grossman actually thought, believed, or knew about tobacco or cigarette smoking, true?_
A Right. As an individual, no, I won't make any opinions about that.
Q And just to put a little finer point on it, you're not going to offer any opinions regarding what information or statements Laura Grossman relied on in making her decisions about cigarette smoking?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. Or hypothetically what information might have led Laura Grossman to make different choices than the ones she made?
A Her as an individual?
Q Yes, sir.
A I can't say about her as an individual. I can talk about groups of people.
Q I understand. That's because it would be nearly impossible, given the documentary record you have in front of you that we have in front of us, to make those kinds of judgments about her as an individual; is that right?
A Right. I can talk about groups, but not her as an individual.
Q You mentioned that you've looked at a couple of depositions in this case?
A Two depositions, that's correct.
Q And which depositions were those?
A Jan Grossman, the husband; and the sister, the younger sister, and I'm drawing a blank on her name at this moment.
Q Was it Margaret?
A What was the last name? It wasn't - she had a married name, not the O'Keefe name.
Q Sure. I'll tell you what, we will come back to it. But it's the youngest sister?
A Yes, the younger sister.
Q And Mr. Gdanski chose those depositions that you reviewed?
A Well, no. I asked him to send me the depositions that would allow me to arrive at the information we've been talking about.
Q And he chose which depositions would be responsive to your request?
A I asked him which ones would be, yeah, an( he described to me what depositions were available. My understanding is like the mother doesn't have a deposition. Maybe I'm - but those were the two that he said had relevance to the case.
Q So is it your testimony that Mr. Gdanski described to you the deposition testimony of perhaps several witnesses, and then you chose the depositions you wanted to read?
A Yes. I was interested in the family. I didn't want to know medical or any of those issues.
Q Do you know whether any of Laura Grossman other siblings were deposed in this case?
A I don't. I can't recall.
Q If they were, would you be interested in comparing their testimony with the testimony of the younger sister whose deposition you read for purposes of understanding and placing Laura Grossman -A It would be interesting, you know, if there's other - as I sit here now, my understanding is that those were the only two that were taken, you know, that were family members. But if there are other family members, maybe they've been taken since I had that discussion. I will make a point in reviewing those.
Q I will move back just for a second.
You're not here in the Grossman case to
testify that Laura Grossman was a victim of youth marketing, true?
A Well -
Q To phrase it differently, you can't make that judgment about her specifically as distinct from the rest of the society given the records you've got before you?
A That's a better question.
Q Okay.
A And my answer to that would be that's correct. Following the line of analysis that I have taken in this case, you know, put her in the category of youths. But in a way, your second question, which is more pointed, really similar to the one about, are you going to identify a specific piece of information that she relied on as an individual? No, my answer is I'm not going to give that opinion. I will talk about Ms. Grossman as part of a youth - her generation.
Q Without knowing what Laura Grossman saw read, heard, believed, understood, thought, we don't have a sufficient record to form a decision about whether she specifically was
a victim of any company's youth marketing efforts, right?
A Right. I mean, certainly many youths were victims of these youth marketing efforts, and I will explain how that operated. It's really up to the jury to decide where Ms. Grossman fits in.
Q We don't have a record that would enable u to make the decision, to make the judgment that Laura Grossman specifically, as an individual, was a victim of youth marketing?
A That's correct. As I said earlier, many people were, but the jury, as I've done in the past, it's their job, I think, to -well, I will defer to them and say that it's up to them to see where Ms. Grossman fits in this.
Q Apart from the two depositions you've mentioned, have you reviewed any other Grossman-specific case materials in forming your opinions in this case?
A No. I've just looked at these two depositions.
Q You haven't looked at anything like
discovery responses, a complaint, anything like that?
A No, I haven't looked at the complaint. Sometimes these are sent to me. I never read them. Sometimes I get what are callec interrogatories. The language seems to change. And those are helpful sometimes because they're like a shorthand. But in this case, I just read the depositions.
When I said shorthand, I meant to say shortcut.
Q Mr. Gdanski is the lawyer with whom you'v( principally been working with on the Grossman case?
A Yes, he's been the person I've talked with.
Q Have you ever met Mr. Gdanski in person?
A Yes, once.
Q When did you meet him in person?
A Last week.
Q Where was that meeting?
A At the offices of the Schlesinger Law Firm in Fort Lauderdale.
Q And did you travel to Fort Lauderdale to meet with Mr. Gdanski specifically or were you there on other business?
A I was in Rorida on other business. And since I was flying in and out of that particular airport, I shoehorned a brief meeting with him.
Q Was that other business that took you to Rorida last week litigation related or otherwise related to your academic work?
A It was litigation related to prepare for another case.
Q And about how long did you meet with Mr. Gdanski last week?
A I got there in the morning at 9:00. I flew out, I think I had a 2:00 flight. Maybe a couple hours, maybe two and a half hours.
Q During your two to two-and-a-half-hour meeting Mr. Gdanski last week in Rorida, did you meet with any other lawyers regarding the Grossman case?
A Yes. I met with the gentleman on the phone here today, Mr. Hammer.
Q Was Mr. Hammer present for the entire meeting or just part of it?
A Most. He walked in and out.
Q Apart from Mr. Gdanski and Mr. Hammer, hav you met with any other lawyers from the
Schlesinger Law Firm in connection with the Grossman case?
A No. I bumped into Mr. Schlesinger in the hallway and had light pleasantries.
Q That wasn't a Grossman-specific conversation?
A No.
Q So you had one in-person meeting with lawyers from the Schlesinger Law Rrm?
A That's correct.
Q That was last week, and it lasted two to two and a half hours?
A Yes, about two and a half hours.
Q Apart from that meeting that you had last week, have you had other meetings or conversations with lawyers in the Schlesinger firm?
A Well, I've talked on the phone with Mr. Gdanski.
Q Is Mr. Gdanski the only lawyer at the Schlesinger Law Firm that you've met with over the phone regarding the Grossman case
A Yes, with one exception. Mr. Hammer callec me this morning as I was driving in to say that he wasn't sure if he had the right_
log-in credentials, and that if he wasn't able to dial into the phone, to call him.
Q That was the sum and total of your
conversation with Mr. Hammer this morning?
A Yes.
Q And about how many telephonic meetings hav you had with Mr. Gdanski regarding the Grossman case?
A Not many. I can't exactly recall, but -oh, just on the Grossman case, now, that's probably one or two and that's it. No, I would say one or two because I was thinking my phone calls with him, but most of them were related to the earlier case which has been -
Q The Barbanell case?
A - the Barbanell case, yes.
Q When would have been the first or the earliest contact that you had with Mr.
Gdanski about the Grossman case?
A He called me in my office on the phone sometime in May. I couldn't tell you exactly, but I do think it was May, and said they had these two cases, and would I agree to work on them with him.
Q And there was maybe one other telephonic conversation with Mr. Gdanski apart from that May 2009 meeting regarding the Grossman case?
A Regarding Grossman, yes. Most of the conversations were leading up to the Barbanell case because that one is coming up.
Q When would that second conversation with Mr. Gdanski have taken place?
A Well, originally there was going to be like a double deposition, in essence combining the Barbanell and Grossman depositions.
And prior to that I told him that Grossman had some issues that we discussec about youth marketing related to the 1970s, and that I wanted to pull together some reliance documents for that.
So we talked about that before the Barbanell deposition. And in essence, it was a very busy time for me. I wasn't able to pull all of that material together in a timely fashion for Mr. Gdanski. So then we rescheduled it to this day, and so I had a talk with him, and it would have been in
early June.
Q So your second meeting with Mr. Gdanski would have been before your June 25th deposition in the Barbanell case?
A Yes. And the point of that call was to explain that I just wasn't able to pull the Grossman materials that he needed to give you in time so that you could prepare properly to make that June 25th deadline.
Q But those materials were pulled together -those supplemental reliance materials were pulled together and sent to Mr. Gdanski so that he could compile this list, Exhibit 1, right?
A Yes. I was sending him materials all along through that period, but I hadn't - it was just getting too close to the time for me to be adequately prepared and for you to b adequately prepared for the second case.
Q Sure. But is it your testimony that Mr. Gdanski's office had all the materials listed on Exhibit 1 prior to the creation of this list?
A Yeah, they should have. I sent documents to him. I talked to him about documents.
I told him the kinds of materials I needed to pull together. It's a real challenge for me to - I don't have a staff.
Q I understand.
A So I rely on the administrative qualities of like his paralegals and secretaries to help me put these things in a list.
Q So if that list was provided to the
defendants on or about June 11th, 2009, Mr Gdanski would have had all the materials on that list prior to its creation?
A Yeah, he should have had all the materials.
Q Let's go back to your meeting last week with Mr. Gdanski and his colleague.
What did you discuss during that two to two-and-a-half-hour meeting?
A The Barbanell trial.
Q So that was not a Grossman meeting last week?
A No. We didn't really talk about that.
It's more related to preparing for the Barbanell trial, which is coming up very shortly. I'm sorry if I mislead you on that.
Q No, I had last week's meeting down as a
Grossman meeting. But your testimony, as I understand it now is, you've only spoken with Mr. Gdanski - well, you've never spoken with Mr. Hammer about the Grossmai case apart from this morning, right?
A That's right.
Q And you spoke with Mr. Gdanski about the Grossman case two times on the telephone prior to today?
A Right. You know, you're -- I understand you need to kind of document all of this.
In the meeting last week, the primary purpose of the meeting was to pull together - you know, to discuss the testimony for the Barbanell case. I'm certain we talked a little bit about the Grossman case, although I can't remember what. But it certainly was not anything -the focus was getting ready for this other trial. And the purpose of me taking the time to visit them on this other trip was specifically to be efficient with my use of time to get ready for this other trial.
Q Your opinions in the Barbanell case do not include this 1970s and 1980s youth
marketing component that you've described today; is that right, sir?
A That would be accurate. I don't plan on talking about that in the Barbanell case for the reasons I described earlier, that in that case the decedent is located much earlier in historical time, not a youth at the time.
Q Did you discuss the 1970s and 1980s youth marketing opinions that you have during last week's meeting in Fort Lauderdale?
A I think only in passing, only to the extent that - to confirm that I had gotten to them back in June everything that they needed to get to you guys, further documents.
Q Did you review any of the documents listec on Exhibit 1 with Mr. Gdanski and Mr. Hammer last week in Fort Lauderdale?
A No, I didn't go through the documents with them.
Q Did you discuss those documents with ther during last week's meeting?
A I didn't discuss any of the individual documents, no.
Q Did you provide Mr. Gdanski and Mr. Hamme during last week's meeting an overview or an outline of your opinions regarding youth marketing?
A I didn't. I basically was making sure more of the kind of procedural -- not procedural. I misspoke. Making sure that you had what you needed and that I had gotten to him what he needed, delivery of information, delivery of documents and sort of the nuts and bolts. That was just kind of confirming that he had everything on the list. Some of these documents have long been in my reliance materials. Some are new. Basically, this was kind of pulling from what I had in a more focused -there's a lot of overlap here from my other reliance documents.
Q I s there a subset of the documents listed on Exhibit 1, your supplemental reliance list, that are new that you have not used as reliance materials before in prior cases?
A Some of these are new in the sense of -most of these, if the documents weren't on
the disk that I gave you, they were listed on the - they had a long 60-page subsequent bibliography. So if, for example, just going at the top of the list, items number one, which is the '59 Roper, the '59 Tl School Attitudes, that certainly should be in my reliance list. These are documents that are familiar to me.
The Smoker Psychology Research, which i the presentation. That's a document that I've had in my files, either - having the document there on my disk. I can't remember if it was on my disk or if it was in my bibliography.
Q Let me interrupt you for a second.
A We can go down each document.
Q I don't want to force you through the whole list. I'm just wondering whether you can identify for me the documents on Exhibit 1 that are new or that relate to these new opinions that you're offering regarding marketing as opposed to something that yoi have previously testified about.
A Well, what's new? The NBER price models, that's a new document._
Q Does NBER stand for the National Bureau o Economic Research?
A Yes. Some of the Califano documents, I've known about those, the literature, I've pulled those out. Many of these documents I've used before, if not as an exhibit, because exhibits are a smaller subset. But certainly it's part of -- that's about the new stuff. Everything else is kind of old hat.
Q You referred a moment ago to the NBER documents, right?
A Yes. Those are a couple of studies about basically its price elasticity, cigarettes among young people.
Q For whom did the National Bureau of Economic Research prepare these two 1982 reports, which are listed on the third page of Exhibit 1 ?
A As I recall, those are just scholarly
reports. NBER is a - I mean, they publish scholarship -- I guess you'd say they publish it. I mean, they do publish. But typically, National Bureau of Economic Research comes out as working papers and
are later published in journals, but they're publicly available, scholarship.
Q You're a historian?
A Yes, I am.
Q Not an economist?
A I'm an economic historian. I mean, I understand -- yeah, I - there's a point at which I have to stop. I didn't take all of the semesters of calculus, but I do understand a lot of that material.
Q Sure. Apart from - did you do some undergraduate coursework in economics?
A I did undergraduate coursework. You're right. I'm not an economist. I'm an economic historian.
Q And I'm not trying to belittle your economic aptitudes. I just want to try to understand your background on this stuff.
You took some undergraduate courses ir economics, like we all did?
A That's correct.
Q No graduate work in economics?
A No. Economic history, but not economics.
Q Any scholarly articles that you've authorec on economics?
A Economic history and economic development
Q What articles have you authored on economi development?
A I had a piece come out a couple years ago called "Selling Which South." The subtitle was something along the lines of "Economic Development in Rural and Small Town North Carolina," where we looked at a variety of measures of economic health in essentially the Mayberrys of the southeast, using North Carolina as a test case. When I say Mayberry, I mean the small towns that are the backbone of southern economies.
Q And what was the thesis or the central thrust or argument of your article?
A That these places were in bad shape for a variety of reasons.
Q Historically or currently or both?
A Both. We integrated a mix of historical analysis. I had a coauthor. That's why I'm saying "we." Then at that point, our most current data was 2004/2005.
Q Was your coauthor an economist or a historian?
A Economic historian.
Q So this article on rural North Carolina was an economic history piece?
A Yes, with a policy --
Q And what policy outcomes or outreaches or programs did you recommend?
A Well, we basically made two major points: One that these small towns need more investment in human capital, and that economic policy -- economic development issues need to be tailored to the specifics of each of these subregions.
We paid some attention to the variations. You know, all small towns aren't the same. In fact, we used that line from Anna Karenina, that all happy families are happy in the same way, but all -- and I'm paraphrasing, all dysfunctional families or unhappy families are unhappy in their own unique ways. That was kind of our model.
You know, as a wag -- you've asked me.
So kind of as a wag, we acknowledged one economist's recommendation for the economi development in these small towns, which is -- although we didn't agree with it,_
there's something to it, which is stick in a sack lunch. You know, are you developini an idea or people? And to a certain degree, some of these places might not be viable the way they had been previously. You've asked me, so...
Q Sure. I was interested.
In what journal did you publish that article?
A Southern Cultures, which is an
interdisciplinary journal that reaches a wide audience beyond historians, and that's why we chose that journal.
Q Is Southern Cultures a peer-reviewed journal?
A Yes.
Q And this piece was peer-reviewed?
A (Nodding head.)
Q Have you ever published any articles in a scholarly economic journal?
A No.
Q Are you a peer reviewer for any scholarly economics journals?
A The Journal of Economic History, I've done that in the past.
Q Apart from the Journal of Economic History, have you published or served as a peer reviewer in any economics journals?
A No, that would be the only one.
Q Apart from economic history, have you ever done any economics research?
A No, just economic history.
Q Have you been hired by anyone as an economics consultant?
A No.
Q Let's go back to these NBER papers for a minute.
How do the two NBER studies at the top of page three of Exhibit 1, your supplemental reliance list, relate to your opinions in the Grossman case?
A Smply for a documentation of a well-known phenomena, which is the elasticity of demand for cigarettes is much higher among younger people, that is more elastic.
Q And for those who might read this who don' have the economics expertise that you and I do, when we say that the price elasticity for cigarettes is high for young people, what we mean is that they are more
responsive to changes in price than others might be?
A That's correct, yes. They're sensitive to price. That would be an everyday way to put it. That they're more likely not to purchase this particular product when the price is high.
Q To say it yet another way, perhaps even simpler, young people are more sensitive to changes in cigarette prices than are older adults?
A That's correct, yes. That's very succinct.
Q How does that relate to your opinions in this case as a historian?
A Well, it's just that I may be asked on the stand about that issue. You know, it's like a marketing issue. I have in the past been asked, you know, how and where are cigarettes sold. You know, and when I mear marketing now, I mean simply the distribution literally bringing to market, and that's relevant to it. I always err on the side of more than less on these things.
Q Are you able to quantify the price elasticity of, say, youths under 18 for
cigarettes?
A I could, if presented with some survey behavioral purchasing data, do that, because it's a simple ratio. It's a fraction measurement. I don't anticipate doing that. And just so you're clear, I don't intend to come up with new measures of price elasticity or to go over older data and provide new measures. I just simply offer that as kind of a reliance document.
Q If you were to graph or chart the price elasticity of youths under 18 for cigarettes, are you able to describe what that curve would look like?
A Yes. I mean, yeah. So you could - I'm not exactly remembering exactly how the visual representations of those studies are. But you could put together say, for example, a graph of age cohorts. And then if you had purchase data and survey data for those age cohorts, you could graph it. And it would basically show, you know -like we said earlier, we could use the elastic terms, but that is the more easy to
understand ways. Younger people would be more sensitive to price. They would substitute other goods, to use that term, as opposed to older people.
Q I'm just trying to probe the depth of your understanding and knowledge of these two studies. But if I asked you to draw me the price elasticity curve for youths under 18 for cigarettes, as we sat here today, could you do it? I just want to see what it looks like.
A Yeah, I will go from memory.
Q SoA Let me see. Xand Y. Let me remember th< conventions. Price, demand. As price goes up, demand should fall. So higher price -you know, sometimes there's diversities, but simply it's just that. The higher price, you're going to have a lower demand. At a lower price, you're going to have a higher demand. So a curve like this would be maybe with a younger group. Then an older group would be less resistant to price changes, so that -Q Less resistant or less receptive? Well,
less responsive, I guess.
A Responsive is what I really meant to say. So I'm just trying to sit here and remembe how to do these other - you would shift the slope of the graph. So price, demand would stay relatively constant. So a lighter change in price, you know, would look something like this. So at this price level, demand is going to be fairly constant.
Q Okay.
A I may be getting the representation of this a little bit off, but I'm using language to express it.
Q I understand.
A That's basically what those curves are.
Q Is it okay for me just to write "adults" next to the adult curve and "youth" next tc the youth curve?
A Uh-huh.
Q Is that an accurate representation of whal you have just drawn?
A Sure. I'm forgetting whether the convention is to put price on the X or demand on the X. Price or demand. I'm
just doing it the other way. They're totally wrong. As the price goes up -that's backwards. I'm just trying to remember the convention.
Q Sure. Thank you.
MR. SEXTON: I will just mark for the record Exhibit 2, which is Professor Kyriakoudes's depiction of the price elasticity curve for cigarettes for both youths and adults.
(Exhibit 2 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q It's fair to say that the curve, as you've described it, reflects that as the price of cigarettes goes up, youths' demand for those cigarettes drops more precipitously than demand would drop among adults?
A That's correct. Yes, that's my intention with my scribblings there.
Q As the price of cigarettes goes up, you either seek less expensive alternatives or get out of the market altogether?
A That's right.
Q When I say, "Get out of the market
altogether," I mean they quit.
A Yes, substitute other goods.
Q Right. Why is it significant for you and your opinions, specifically in the Grossman case, that youths are more responsive to price increases, they're more likely to cut back their smoking or quit than are adults?
A Well, it's - you know, if I'm asked about youth smoking, you know, the issues of, say, for example, cigarette taxes come into play, but that's one of the quickest ways that one can manipulate the - from a policy perspective, that's how you manipulate the price of cigarettes, is you increase the tax. That tends to increase the price of the pack at the store.
Q Do you intend to advocate or discuss excise tax increases or other tax increases on cigarettes in the Grossman trial?
A I haven't, as I sit here. I mean, if they ask me about that, that's fine, but it's not part of what I plan to talk about. I'm not prepared to talk about right now the specifics. You have federal tax, but you also have state taxes. I don't have those
figures in hand right now.
Q And this research that you've included on your supplemental reliance list, Exhibit 1, regarding price elasticity of youths for cigarettes, is that only of prospective value and is it advocating policy outcomes, or is it useful to you historically looking back at the cigarette market in the United States?
A It's useful historically because price is a major determinant of smoker behavior in th( ways we've just discussed, and it's a selective impact in that it affects certain age groups more than others. So it's something to know. I mean, there's no secret there. I mean, this is a widely accepted principle.
Q So give me the take-aways. Give me your opinions as they relate to the historical price elasticity of youths for cigarettes.
A Okay. Well, it explains - it's just good to know as part of kind of historicizing the initiation process. I mean, as a historian and when I talk about the rise of the cigarette in American life, which I've
talked about many times - and if I'm asked, you know, about what is the typical age people smoke, well, you know, the historical - I mean, the historical record shows that survey research is pretty consistent. Median age is around 16. It's particularly, you know, once a cigarette culture really gets going in the mid 20th Century, it becomes strongly associated with youth in a lot of ways. So you know, this is just an insight into that.
Q Do you have an opinion as a historian how the prices for cigarettes have changed, indexed for inflation over the last 50 years?
A I'd have to refresh my memory on that. Bu basically, over the last 50 years, taxes on cigarettes stayed relatively low, the price of cigarettes stayed relatively low. They might even - when you take into account inflation, although I would have to double-check this, become relatively more affordable over the '50s and early - the '50s, '60s, early '70s.
But then the '70s and '80s, taxes begin
to pick up depending upon what state you'n looking at. There are federal excise increases, but I don't have those dates right at my hand, at my fingertips.
Q But both federal and state excise taxation of cigarettes increased in the 1970s and the 1980s, true?
A I'd have to double-check on the '70s. It did in the 1980s.
Q If you don't know the answer, it's okay to just say you don't know.
A I would have to double-check, you know, the - I have American Cancer Society reports, and reports that summarize the taxation figures for cigarettes over time, and then you go back and you just check those. I don't have those numbers memorized.
Q You understand that excise taxation on cigarettes has historically varied from state to state?
A Yes. The federal tax, of course, is national, but then states have their individual taxes, yes.
Q So there's been a greater tax burden in
some states historically placed on cigarette smokers than in other states, right?
A That's correct.
Q Everyone is subject to the federal excise taxes on cigarettes historically, but the state-specific burden is going to vary, true?
A Right. Yes. I'm just not prepared to talk about the specific amounts right now. I hadn't anticipated talking about that at the trial. So this might be kind of a diversion for you. I don't intend to divert you, but...
Q Sure. I'm just trying to plumb the depths of what you know a little bit.
Do you know how historically the excise tax rates on cigarettes in New York have compared to the excise tax rates on cigarettes imposed by other states?
A As a rule, New York has had a higher tax.
Q And do you know whether that was true ir the 1970s and the 1980s?
A Well, compared to states like North
Carolina, yes, it was much higher. I mean,
the whole issue of loading up a semi-truck and running them north. I had a college classmate whose brother was spending an extended vacation in Atlanta after having been caught driving one of those trucks.
Q Smuggling cigarettes?
A Yes, breaking the law.
Q What about Florida? Do you know historically how the excise tax rates on cigarettes in Florida have compared to the excise tax rates in other states?
A I'd have to double-check on Florida. But as I sit here, my recollection for most of this time was Florida tended to be a lower excise tax, particularly to the Northeast.
Q Lower than New York?
A Yes, lower than New York.
MR. SEXTON: We've been going about ai hour. Why don't we take a quick break, if that's okay with you.
THE WITNESS: Sure.
(A recess was taken.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Professor Kyriakoudes, we will go back on the record. You indicated at the break you
wanted to do some additional drawing on Exhibit 2 or modify - annotate the price elasticity curve for cigarettes that you have prepared earlier?
A That's correct. So I'm just adding perfectly inelastic. That is, the price goes up, but the demand stays the same. And then perfectly elastic, a minor change in price obliterates demand. And youth tend - this is the youth tendency.
Q Actually, F*rofessor, if youth are more responsive to price changes, wouldn't thev be - they would be more -
A Elastic.
Q - elastic?
A So in this case - I might be getting it totally wrong. I think I'm getting it totally wrong. Let me rely on my rhetorical explanation, because I think -you know, again, I don't put myself out as an economist, and I was clear about that, an economic historian. So I'm not doing such a great job on this.
Q That's all right.
A The point is that one group is more
responsive in terms of their demand to price changes than the other group. That's the only point to that.
Q And the group that's most responsive to price changes for cigarettes is young people?
A That's correct.
Q All right. I told you earlier that I want to streamline our work today and narrow th' scope.
What I would like to do now is focus your attention on the new opinions that you're going to offer in the Grossman case as distinct from the Hess trial, Sherman trial, Engle generic trial preservation.
Okay?
A Yes.
Q Could you please give us an overview of your new opinions that you want to offer in Grossman on youth marketing in the 1970s and 1980s?
A Yes. What I will say is - if asked, of course, is that the story that really begins in the late '60s is one in which the tobacco industry having learned a great
deal about smoker behavior, about smoker over a period of time - and I've said this before. One of the things that happens is the smoking health crisis, the health scare, whatever you want to call it, that emerges in the '50s really forces the tobacco industry to understand their consumer base in ways that they had not seen the need to do so before. And a lot of people focus on - a lot of the scholars focus on, you know, the medical knowledgi and the kind of scientific knowledge of the industry as related to health. That's not my area. That's an interesting question, of course.
But what I have been doing is looking at how the industry learns about the smokers themselves using sociological, social psychology, individual psychology methods marketing survey methods. It's a diverse and wide array of disciplines and techniques that bear upon this survey focu: group review of preexisting studies, a whole gamut.
_If you recall in my Barbanell_
deposition, I said I was working on a paper on this. When I get it written, I will send you a copy. I will be happy to do so.
Q Great.
A So the industry begins to - particularly Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds. But the industry generally begins to understand the process of youth initiation and youth brand selection. And they begin to see how important the first usual brand, young adult smokers, that process is.
You've got certain key individuals like Diane Burrows at R.J. Reynolds who begin t< pull together this information and present it to the company, company leadership and the like, saying here's where, for example, we are losing market share because, once again, people are choosing to smoke Marlboro, for example.
So that drives this desire to understand the process of youth initiation of smoking, and consequently pushes the companies towards those marketing efforts.
Q What was the name you mentioned from RJ. Reynolds?
A Diane Burrows, B-U-R-R-O-W-S, just as an example.
Q So to your knowledge, did anyone at Philip Morris USA ever suggest that the company actively target and market its cigarettes to underage smokers?
A My opinion is more along the lines of the industry begins to look at underage smokers as part of their market and include that in their market plan.
Q Let's focus just on Philip Morris, for example. Can you point to a document or other piece of evidence that suggests that someone at Philip Morris USA suggested tha the company should actively seek out and target underage smokers to purchase Philip Morris products?
A Using that language, no, I'm not familiar with the document, but that is as unambiguous as that.
Q Is it your opinion that Philip Morris was aware that smokers under the legal smoking age were consuming their products?
A Yes. They were aware of that, and they understood it to be an important component
of the success of their brands, based on what they understood to be a kind of principle of many young - many beginning smokers tended to stick with their early brand for a significant amount of time.
Q But it's not your opinion that - and please correct me if at any point I misstate it. But it's not your opinion that Philip Morris set up or created a marketing program or advertising scheme specifically intended to target underage smokers and to get them to purchase Philip Morris products?
A Right. It's not that clear-cut, and it's not that simple. They certainly - they hope to attract underage smoking through their marketing with marketing campaigns that stress kind of the excitement, the delight, even sometimes kind of the rebellious quality of smoking, individualism, all of those things. They appeal to a broad array. They weren't specifically just underage directed, but they did - within that would be that age
__________arpuP;_____________________________________________________________________________________
Q I would like to draw a distinction, if we could, if you agree that this distinction is appropriate. I would like to draw a distinction between young adults at or above legal smoking age and what I will call underage youth. Is that fair?
A Yes. In most states at this time, 18 is the legal age to purchase cigarettes.
Q At this time right now, or in the '70s and the '80s?
A '70s is my understanding.
Q Are you aware of any states that as late as 1990 had legal smoking ages that were 16 or lower?
A There may have been then, but I'm not awar of them.
Q Are you aware of any states prior to 1990 that had no legal smoking age?
A Again, I'm not aware of that. They may be out there, but...
Q I understand that you're someone who is very interested in public health and would probably prefer that cigarettes not be marketed at all. But can we agree, for purposes of the Grossman case, that there
is nothing inappropriate about a cigarette company marketing its product to young adults who are legally competent to purchase those cigarettes?
A Well, they have -- I mean, commercial speech is protected. The problem comes in, you know, where the marketing materials, they're not single bullets, they're scattered shot shotguns, with small shots that spreads widely. So you're going to hit a broader age group.
At least in my analysis where you see the research where they're looking into underage smoking behavior and they talk about what underage smokers are choosing a brands, that informs their marketing efforts. That's really my opinion.
Q But there's nothing wrong with a company's efforts or attempts to monitor the consumer preferences of young adults who are legally allowed to purchase cigarettes, is there?
A No. If it's a legal market, no. I mean, they certainly have -- I mean, wrong is an ethical issue. That doesn't really come into my analysis. But they certainly did
it and it was not illegal, and it was part of the marketing and survey and research practices of the company.
My opinion is that, again, these things are -- they're incorporating the knowledge of underage smoking, as they do surveys of underage smokers, into their broader marketing plans.
Q Can you from your research identify anyone at Philip Morris who specifically advocated efforts to reach out and persuade underage youths, who could not legally smoke, to consume Philip Morris products?
A Well, again, it's not so clear-cut.
M.E. Johnson, who is, I guess, a social psychologist and marketing researcher with the Philip Morris Company had a number of studies where they're going around to places where young people congregate trying to survey them in absence of their parents, for example, going to the park, the beach, to ascertain their smoking preferences.
He's doing that for a reason. It's not a public health reason.
Q You have some documents from Mr. Johnson
your reliance materials?
A I do, yes.
Q Are those the documents that you intend to point to in support of your opinions regarding youth marketing in the 1970s and 1980s as it pertains to Philip Morris?
A If asked, yes. Yes.
Q And do you believe that it was Myron Johnson's intention to persuade the company or to assist the company in persuading underage smokers who couldn't legally purchase cigarettes to consume Philip Morris products?
A I wouldn't put it that way. Intention is a loaded word that I tend to shy away from.
All I can say is that the purpose of the research was to understand younger smokin< behavior, and that the point of the research was to understand how the cigarette market works. A lot of it is putting the pieces of the puzzle together.
You know, one study says most median age cigarette smoking is 16. So half began smoking before then. So clearly it's a younger phenomenon.
And then in other studies, looked at what people liked first. These are the early brands, and people tend to get locked in a tendency to favor a brand over time.
So this is how you either protect market share in the case of Marlboro, or try to win back market share in the case of Winston cigarettes.
Q As a historian who has spent some time studying economic history, are you aware of whether other companies and other industries have tried to forecast far off into the future the consumer preferences of future customers?
A Yes. I think to get - this will answer
your question. The methods employed by th tobacco industry are the standard methods of marketing research. You know, it's not the method that's the problem; it's the product. The methods are the standard methods of marketing science as it developed over the course of this period. There's always innovations and changes, surveys, focus groups, review of census data, review of sales data, you know,_
varying levels that they try to come up with this. And those are the methods employed by soap, cereal.
Q Cars?
A Automobiles, yes. I'd stick to lower -cars are maybe not the best example becaus cars are a durable purchase made infrequently. The metaphor might not work. The methods, I think, are going to be more similar to frequent purchases with disposable and consumable items in terms of the methods, so kind of a minor decision.
Q As we sit here, can you identify any Philip Morris marketing technique or advertising campaign that was specifically targeted at reaching underage smokers and getting therr to purchase Philip Morris products before they were of legal smoking age?
A Yeah. The question as it is pointed and is qualified the way you put it, I'm not.
Q Can you identify anyone else, apart from Myron Johnson, Myron E. Johnson, at Philip Morris who you believe was engaged in activities that you would consider youth marketing in the '70s and 1980s?
A Yeah. In the'70s, and I'm not recalling the names, but there are a number of Philip Morris studies that are looking at underage smoking behavior. I am forgetting the authors. Many of these are coauthored, Johnson and somebody else. Sometimes not Johnson. Some of them are reporting other studies and summary documents and the like I'm not recalling other names.
Q Are there other specific documents that you intend to point to at trial in the Grossman case in support of your opinions regarding youth marketing in the '70s and the '80s as it pertains to Philip Morris?
A Yes. Some of the documents in my reliance that I made show the actual document or I described them.
Q If I handed you Exhibit 1, which was the supplemental reliance list, could you identify them for me?
A Yeah. Again, sticking just to the Philip Morris -- okay. Going back in time, the Roper Attitude Studies, the very first one on the list, which is a Philip Morris commissioned study.
Q Snce we don't have Bates number or any other kind of number, I wonder if you could perhaps put a "P' in the margin next to those documents?
A Sure.
Q It's for what you think relate to Philip Morris and youth marketing, and then you can describe it for the record.
A This list doesn't have -- when I sent the stuff, I sent it with the Legacy database links and stuff like that. So I'm at a little bit of a disadvantage linking these to the actual original documents as I understand them.
Q These aren't your descriptions, right?
A No, I didn't put these descriptions together. I just sent the documents.
Q Did you send an E-mail with the documents perhaps a link to the documents and where they could be found online?
A Yes, in some cases. And then we talked about it also on the phone in a variety of ways. This is my recollection of the ones that are Philip Morris-related, based on those descriptions.
Q Just so the record will be clear, for purposes of interpreting your annotations later, would you mind just putting a legend at the bottom, "P'? Just so no one will misinterpret, "P' means plaintiff or Philip Morris, and whether an "L" means Lorillard or Liggett?
A That's a good point. I didn't mark the RJR's, but I can do that if you'd like. I was marking a couple. That might be a subsequent question.
Q But you have now marked with a "P' on Exhibit 1 the documents that you would point to at the trial of the Grossman case in support of your opinions regarding youth marketing in the 1970s and 1980s as it pertains to Philip Morris?
A Right. With just the caveat that those descriptions are not my descriptions of the documents. So they're a little bit - I may have missed a couple. They're not the actual citations as they existed in the Legacy database, which is what I use.
Q I want to show you one of these document right now since you marked it. I had a
question about it.
(Exhibit 3 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q I'm handing you what has been marked as Exhibit 3. I would like to ask you if you could identify that for the record.
A Yes. This is the Superman -- one of the Superman documents. I don't know if this is exactly the one that's referenced in there because there's another document that indicates the contract to use the Marlboro image in the film. So this is Superman 11.
Q Do you know whether the document that I'v handed you that's marked as Exhibit 3 matches up with the description of the 16th document at page one on Exhibit 1, your supplemental reliance list, 1979 Superman
II,	the movie placement deal?
A It should be. It looks familiar. I think it is. This is the one where they talk about putting the images of the brand in the film. I could sit here and read the whole thing, but I want to expedite this.
This should be the right document. 1979 is
the date of Superman 11.
Q Now, Exhibit 3 is on the letterhead of what company?
A Dovemead Limited, a division of presumabl a film company.
Q Do you know anything about Dovemead Limited?
A No, I'm not -- I don't.
Q And to whom is this letter which we marke as Exhibit 3 addressed?
A Philip Morris Europe.
Q And specifically Exhibit 3 is addressed from Dovemead Limited to Philip Morris Europe, S.A., right?
A Yes.
Q And there's an address on page one of Exhibit 3 for Philip Morris Europe, S.A., right?
A That's right.
Q Where is that address?
A Switzerland.
Q And I know, Professor Kyriakoudes, that you're not a lawyer. But you don't have any opinions regarding the legal relationship between Philip Morris Europe,
S.A., and Philip Morris USA, do you?
A I don't. I'm not prepared to discuss the ins and outs of those relationships.
Q You don't know how Philip Morris USA is related to Philip Morris Europe, S.A.?
A In a legal sense, no, I do not.
Q And you're not aware of whether Philip Morris USA and Philip Morris Europe, S.A. are legally and factually distinct corporate entities?
A That's right. I'm not prepared to talk about that.
Q If we can take a look at the third page of Exhibit 3. There are two signature lines, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And the lower signature line, again, seek' the agreement and signature of Philip Morris Europe, S.A., correct?
A That's correct.
Q And there's no reference in Exhibit 3 to Philip Morris USA, is there?
A No, but it does say "Philip Morris."
Q But apart from the fact that the words "Philip Morris" are in the names of both
Philip Morris USA and Philip Morris Europe,
S.A., you don't know how those two companies relate to one another, right?
A No, but they do discuss the Marlboro brand, which is a global brand.
Q Are you aware that more than one company around the world markets the Marlboro brand?
A Well, there's two things going on here:
One, you know, from a very specific legal perspective, the nature of the arrangements between the various branches of Philip Morris, how those are construed, that can be quite complex. I don't know that.
Q That's not your area?
A Rght. But, you know, from an impact on public awareness and public knowledge and youth awareness on these issues, the Marlboro brand is one of the most widely recognized brands globally. And from the public's perspective, it's the same artwork and image and the like.
So while there may be a technical legal distinction being made -- and I grant you that may be important in a legal sense
before the judge, and I grant you that.
But from a historical standpoint and for the questions I'm asking about this, that's not really that important.
Q Are you aware of any documents -- are then any documents in your reliance materials in which Philip Morris USA entered into an agreement like this one, Exhibit 3, to place its products in movies?
A I guess they relied on their company in Switzerland to do it for them. That's what I'm aware -- I mean, I have that document.
Q So the answer to my question is, no, you're not aware of any document where Philip Morris USA entered into agreements to place its products in movies, right?
A That's right. I'm not. This is the one I have.
Q Fair enough. Let me look at my notes real quick before we move on.
Let me ask you about an exhibit that you have marked with a "P' on the fifth page of Exhibit 1, your supplemental reliance list, a document that's described as Raising Kids Who Don't Smoke, 2003. Are you familiar
with that document?
A Yes.
Q Okay. And tell me what your opinions are regarding this particular document.
A Well, that's part of an ongoing Philip Morris - I would call it a smoker education project, or I'd call it an antismoking education project that they've engaged in, and that has some interesting items in it. I've talked about that in other trials. It's got a father and a son on the cover.
Q Do you believe that this document we're referring to, Raising Kids Who Don't Smoke 2003, represents or reflects a sincere effort by Philip Morris USA to deter underage people from beginning to smoke'
A That's an intent thing. I couldn't say either way. On one sense at my perceptior of the material in that as someone who knows a lot about this but is not an expert in that particular area of public health, I find it pretty good material.
On the other hand, you know, the public health community has done these studies
where they create - post tested young people's attitudes towards the company, an< they're more favorably disposed towards the company after seeing the company's antismoking materials. They were facing a pretty difficult lawsuit at the time. You can look at a lot of things.
Q Right.
A I don't really have an opinion on that.
I'm just kind of telling you that around it one could look at a lot of aspects about that document. It's a difficult document; the intent is difficult to interpret. So I don't interpret the intent. But I do accept it as a statement by Philip Morris about smoking in youth and the credible statement of what their view was at the time.
Q Anytime a company does the right thing, there's the possibility that somebody is going to view them more favorably as a result of that, right?
A That's true. And whether that leads to more smoking, I have no opinion on that.
Q But the fact that consumers, the general
public, might perceive Philip Morris favorably as a result of its engaging in an effort to deter you from smoking, that doesn't render the entire campaign a cynical ploy to boost market share, does it?
A I think what I want to say is no, because I agree with you.
Q I understand.
A I have no opinion on it. I mean, I will say about that document what I've said previously, which is I think Philip Morris and I agree, you know, that if people had known then what they know now, they maj have made a different choice.
So in that regard, I think it's a credible document. You asked my intent, and that's - maybe I'm taking that too literally to think what were the people thinking about. But together, I don't know.
Q I do not want to force you into taking stances or forming opinions if you're not comfortable forming them. If you're not comfortable trying to divine the intent of
the company from a document, then that's okay too.
A Right. I mean, I have - and the intent is not important to me either. The document says what it says, and I think it's a credible document, and I accept it as a statement of Philip Morris's position at that time on that issue.
Q Can we both agree that, as a general rule, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to consistently and scientifically divine a subjective intent of a company or a person merely by looking at a document?
A Any particular document. You have to -this is what makes historical research both challenging and difficult, but also interesting. And sometimes makes it difficult to explain to people in a courtroom setting what we do, because it's the broad measure of documents. You look at many documents and then you look for patterns.
My preference is for patterns of behavior. I tend to be more focused on what the company actually does and what il
talks about in a kind of objective and empirical sense, than trying to worry about intent, because that means you - people can have intent. A company can have behavior, which is the sum behavior of the people in the company. It's an important distinction to me, although it might be esoteric to others.
Q Would it be fair to summarize your opinion about youth marketing as it relates to Philip Morris this way? That you understand that Philip Morris observed the smoking patterns or behavior of young people and on some underage people that historically have consumed Philip Morris cigarettes, but you don't intend to testify at the trial of this case that Philip Morris specifically intended to get underage smokers to use Philip Morris products? Is that a fair encapsulation of your opinion?
A I would say it this way: Again, the word - I just stay away from the word "intent." So I will put it this way.
Philip Morris understood that the underage
market -- and this is true for R.J.
Reynolds -- was the battleground for brand loyalty. And they understood that market share is determined early in this process. Therefore, they understood that it was important that if someone was going to begin smoking at any age, it was important for that beginning smoker to use a Philip Morris product if they wanted to maintain - by the 1970s, maintain the Marlboro market leads.
Q So what did Philip Morris do?
A They took that knowledge into consideratior in their marketing plans as they sponsored sporting events, as they developed their visual media advertising. By the 1970s, of course, that means magazines and billboards and other point of purchase items. That's what they did.
Q Is there something that you think Philip Morris should have done differently in that regard?
A Well, if the intention was -- let me rephrase that. If the goal -- and I don't think this was Philip Morris's goal. But
if you set out the goal of reducing the health consequences of smoking, one way t( do that is to reduce consumption. And it's just an objective social behavioral fact that relatively few people pick up smoking after age 21, 22, 23. Some do, but that accounts for a relatively small amount of the smoking initiation age pattern.
So if you're going to do that, then you don't advertise or you market in a way that avoids any claims about excitement, desirability. Of course, a response to that is, "Well, it's a legal product."
Social speech is affected. This the policy conundrum. I'm a historian. So I just kind of explain what happened.
Q Right. I want to follow up on a couple of points you just made. First, is it your opinion that in the 1970s and the 1980s, Philip Morris was not trying to reduce the health consequences of cigarette smoking?
A Well, I don't have an opinion - that's not what I was saying earlier. I preface everything by "if" in this particular way.
I mean, you could -- again, I don't want to
lead you astray. I don't have an opinion on that because that involves things like maybe safer design, you know, smokeless cigarettes. There were those various products that --
Q And I understand state-of-the-art -
A I've never testified about that, nor do I intend to.
Q I understand you don't intend to testify about the history of state-of-the-art, cigarette design, or anything like that, right?
A Exactly.
Q I understood you to say just a moment ago "I don't think this was Philip Morris's goal, reducing the health consequences of smoking." Maybe I misheard.
Do you intend to offer opinion at trial that Philip Morris was not trying to reduce the health consequences of smoking in the 1970s and 1980s?
A What I was getting at, I was very focused on what I was saying, not reducing the health consequences, smoking by reducing demand. Now, I think they were being
dedicated to increasing demand for their products. And there's other ways to reduce the health consequences of smoking that ar< beyond my expertise to have professional opinions about.
Q Right. So you're not going to offer opinions at trials about the history of how the design of Philip Morris cigarettes or other cigarettes have changed over time?
A Right. I mean, I've talked about filters and public perception of filters, but that's it.
Q But ventilation, porous paper, these types of things, you're not going to get into the specific scientific and design aspects of a cigarette as it changed over time?
A No, that's not an area that I have expertise in.
Q Fair enough.
I think earlier you told me that Philip Morris took into consideration the knowledge that the youth market was the battleground for future market share. Did I get that right?
A Yes. Just based on the objective social
process of smoking initiation.
Q And as a consequence, do you believe that Philip Morris sponsored sporting events and conducted visual media advertising campaigns in a way that was not calculated to decrease youth interest in Philip Morris brands?
A Yes. That's good. Yes, I agree with that.
Q But you're not offering the opinion that Philip Morris came up with some advertising campaign or logo that was specifically intended to target or appeal to youth as distinct from the population at large?
A That's correct.
Q The same would be true for sporting events right?
A That's right. They catch - they use the metaphor of the shotgun. They cast a wide net. They include within that youth, but other people as well.
Q Let's go back and talk about Laura Grossma for a few minutes. You are aware that Laura Grossman died roughly 14 years ago ir 1995?
A Yes.
Q That's the same year I graduated from law school. I don't think you were testifying in tobacco litigation at that time, were you?
A No. I was still in graduate school. I graduated two years after that.
Q And obviously you never met or corresponde in any fashion with Laura Grossman?
A No.
Q And we have no testimony from Laura Grossman in this case; is that right?
A That's correct.
Q And I think you answered this more broadly, but I just want to put a finer point on it. You've never read any diaries or journals or correspondence that Laura Grossman left behind?
A No.
Q Have you ever met or corresponded with Jan Grossman, whose deposition you read?
A No, and that would be true of any of the family members, friends.
Q Never - I'm sorry to interrupt.
A I have not met any of the people that are party to the litigation either directly as_
formal complainants or associated with it.
Q Okay. And no one has supplied you with an; of Laura Grossman's medical records, education records, or employment records, right?
A That's correct.
Q Is it fair to say that the only people you have spoken with regarding Laura Grossman are Mr. Gdanski, Mr. Hammer, and today with me in this deposition, right?
A That is true.
Q You're not going to offer any opinions at trial on the cause of Laura Grossman's illnesses?
A No.
Q Or whether she was addicted to cigarette smoking?
A No.
Q We don't know, as we sit here today, what specific cigarette ads Laura Grossman ever saw, right?
A That's correct.
Q Nor do we know what specific tobacco companies' statements she might have heard or read, true?
A That's true.
Q And you don't know when, if ever, Laura Grossman became addicted to cigarette smoking, true?
A That's correct. I don't know that.
Q You will not offer the opinion at the trial of this case that something one of the tobacco companies said or did specifically affected Laura Grossman as an individual?
A That's correct, I will not offer that opinion.
Q In your conversations with Mr. Gdanski or Mr. Hammer, did they offer you any facts about Laura Grossman and her life, apart from what you might have picked up in reading the two depositions?
A No. I know about her from the depositions.
Q Do you recall from reading the depositions whether Laura Grossman was an intelligent woman?
A Well, her sister said she was intelligent. That's all I have.
Q All right.
A What that means, I don't know.
Q I'm not sure my brother would say the same
thing about me.
A I couldn't say either way.
Q You don't know whether Laura Grossman wa an intelligent, independent, or strong-willed person?
A She seems to have had an independent strea from her behavior. But these are very soft and ambiguous terms. That's not the kind of thing that I've worked with in my analysis.
Q Is it fair to summarize what you said as follows: The facts that you do know about Laura Grossman you gleaned from reading those two depositions that you were given?
A Yes.
Q And you, I think, have described depositions in the past as kind of a form of oral history?
A Well, they're interviews.
Q And one of the first things that a professional historian or historical scholar like yourself learns in the profession is how to weigh evidence, right?
A Yes.
Q And the reason a historical scholar learns
how to weigh evidence is that some historical evidence is going to be more reliable and trustworthy and well-suited for answering a particular question than other forms of evidence might be, true?
A True.
Q And I believe you've testified in the past that oral history is highly susceptible to presentism and influence by current and contemporary values and beliefs; is that true?
A Yes. All history like all sources has to be used with great care. It's suitable for some kinds of things and less reliable for other things.
Q In weighing the credibility of historical sources, whether it's oral history or some other historical evidence, do you consider whether the source of that evidence had a vested interest or a pecuniary interest in the story that he or she was telling?
A Yes, that can be a - that's certainly a factor. Of course, that comes up in these trial testimonies as well. I do take those into account._
Q I n other words, someone who is a plaintiff in a lawsuit or a defendant in a lawsuit might have a vested interest in providing a less than completely objective historical record?
A I tend to stay away from the term "objective," because the position that historians take is -- it's a little bit like if you're Catholic, we're all sinners.
I mean, all evidence is tainted, but it's tainted in different ways. It's all biased in that regard.
But, yes, I mean, people shape their responses to hopeful outcomes. I mean, yoi do take this into account, and I do take into account when I read this evidence and all other evidence.
Q Would it matter to you as a historian if a source of historical evidence had told inconsistent stories about the same event or facts over time?
A It would depend on the inconsistencies.
You know, and to kind of shortcut this -and you're probably anticipating this. The plaintiffs' depositions are most reliable
on providing the kind of basic objective facts that can be established in the case in terms of behavior, if you have people that were there to say, "Well, I know she started smoking at roughly this time." To me it doesn't have to be a precise date, but she was a teenager, more or less, some ambiguity in this case.
You have the situation in the home, kind of the descriptions of the smoking rituals, those kinds of things. When the bias comej in, at least for me as a historian, and I tended to discount the valuative judgments. Well, he or she believed this. That's difficult for me to rely on one way or the other. And hence the value of me coming ii and taking people back in time and looking at the broader cultural and historical phenomenon.
Does that anticipate a number of questions?
Q It does.
A You may have to ask them anyway. Sorry.
Q I want to think about your answer for a minute.
So my take-away - and I'm sort of predisposed to try and condense and simplify what I can, and correct me if I get any of this wrong. But my take-away from the testimony you just provided is that, apart from taking some just basic factual information from these depositions, you are very reluctant to accept any subjective interpretation from these witnesses about the plaintiff and about the decedent and about what she either knew o didn't know?
A That's correct. As a historian, I don't rely on those subjective evaluations.
Q If you had a choice as a historian in
considering a body of many different pieces of evidence, some of which had an interest, pecuniary or vested interest, in telling a particular story and others who were disinterested, do you have a preference historically on which kind of evidence you would rather rely on?
A Well, I mean, that's so abstract. Here is my preference: The closer to the time period - as a rule, evidence generated at
the time a phenomenon happens is not alway more reliable, but it can tell you more than stuff where people were called back and come up with judgments about that, particularly if there's one way or another, you know, an outcome that they are hoping to avoid or would like to have happen, and that's based on their words.
That's true of all oral history. When I go and interview a veteran or somebody involved in the Qvil Rights movement, people are constantly engaged in this kind of creative narrative act of order in their past. One of the things that makes it difficult to use as evidence, but that's all we have. So this is one of the challenges of a historian.
But I think it's fair to say that in my evaluations and in my professional opinions and in my presentations, in all of my direct testimony, I've relied, you know, on evidence generated at the time and have tried to stay as objective as possible in terms of my methodology.
Q Would you be inclined as a historian to
give more weight or attach more credibility to evidence which is disinterested as opposed to evidence which is interested?
A Yeah, just as a basic proposition, yes. Disinterested in what, and interested in what?
Again, my Catholic Church metaphor, yoi know. All evidence is compromised. It has within it certain biases, and the challenge is to ferret out those biases and either correct, adjust, counteract with other evidence. And if there was an easy, simple guide to it, then history would be a lot easier.
And in some regards, it makes historical methods seem less precise because, let's say, you know, a statistician is using a data set and they're agreed-upon principles on multiple regression and what have you. That's true, but that's because he's staying within that data set. But that data set itself can have bias and other issues.
Historians deal with so many different types of evidence, that we have to weigh
them carefully. Like you said, we do take into account disinterested and interested.
MR. SEXTON: Let's go off the record for just a second.
(A lunch recess was taken.)
(Exhibit 4 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Professor Kyriakoudes, I have marked as Exhibit 4 the Notice Duces Tecum for this deposition. And I think I see across the table that you already have a copy of Exhibit A, which is the document request. Am I correct about that?
A That's correct. This is my copy of it.
Q All right. Why don't we just march through this really quickly. Let me ask you first, did you bring anything with you today that is responsive to Exhibit A of Exhibit 4?
A I did. I brought my curriculum vitae.
Q Okay.
A That's all I brought.
Q And I take it that anything else that might constitute your file or your reliance materials, you have already produced to us
in advance of this deposition?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. You do not have any time records fo the time that you've spent working on the Grossman case?
A No.
Q You haven't generated any bills?
A No. As I testified at the Barbanell deposition, I was paid a retainer, which, you know, retained me for this case, the Barbanell case.
Q Is this curriculum vitae which you have handed across the table to me essentially the same one that you handed over at the Barbanell deposition in late June?
A It is the same one.
Q Okay.
A In the sense that it's not been updated to reflect the Barbanell deposition, but otherwise is complete. The curriculum vitae has within it a list that's responsive to the item where you asked for a list of all prior testimony. I just included that in the CV.
Q Okay. Do you have any correspondence,
either letters or E-mails that you have exchanged with either Mr. Gdanski or someone else at the Schlesinger Law Firm?
A No, I don't have anything.
Q So the E-mails that you would have sent in June with the links, the American Legacy Foundation documents that were provided aj supplemental reliance materials, those E-mails are deleted or otherwise gone?
A Right. I don't have those.
MR. HAMMER: I'm having a little bit of a hard time hearing you. If you could speak up, that would be great.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I will be mindful of that. I was a little low-talking there.
MR. HAMMER: I have just one question. Are you referring to the subpoena that you sent asking for him to produce documents?
MR. SEXTON: Yes. We're referring to what we've marked as Exhibit 4, which is the deposition - the Notice Duces Tecum and Exhibit A.
MR. HAMMER: Okay. Did you all get the plaintiff's objections to the Notice_
of Deposition Duces Tecum?
MR. SEXTON: I've not seen them, but perhaps others in my office have.
MR. HAMMER: We filed that. If you don't have a copy of it, I don't know -- I know it was sent to your office. If you don't have it there - I was hoping to make that part of this deposition just to be attached to it, as well as the subpoena that you're referencing.
MR. SEXTON: I don't have that, but I also don't have an objection to your sending that to the court reporter after the fact if you want.
MR. HAMMER: Okay.
MR. SEXTON: Just appending it that way. I won't make an issue of that.
MR. HAMMER: If you would like, if you want to give me a fax number, we could fa: it over to you guys right now.
MR. SEXTON: We're visiting Adams and Reese, and I don't have a fax number for them. But again, I don't object to you sending it separately to the court reporter afterwards.
MR. HAMMER: Sure.
MR. SEXTON: And I don't think anybody else will.
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Let me ask you just a few more questions here. Hopefully we're coming closer to the finish line.
As you know, the first Surgeon General's report on smoking and health was released in 1964, right?
A Yes.
Q I believe you've acknowledged in prior testimony that that initial 1964 Surgeon General's report on smoking was pretty big news?
A Yes.
Q And subsequent Surgeon General's reports oi smoking and health were released through the late 1960s and early '70s?
A And then some. There's been 25, 26, roughly about two dozen.
Q And you've testified in the past, I believe, that during this time period, the late '60s and early '70s, the public health message regarding the dangers of smoking
began to dominate media coverage of tobacci issues?
A Yes.
Q The public health community's message regarding the dangers of smoking began to dominate or was overweight -- overweight is probably not the right word. But the public health community message took on a greater focus in the 1960s and the 1970s as it relates to smoking?
A Yes, that would be accurate.
Q And during that same time period, the tobacco industry viewpoints began to receive less attention and emphasis from the media?
A Yes, less. Although, still they had a variety of ways to get their message out, but that's true, it was less.
Q In 1965, a year after that first Surgeon General's report, Congress passed the Federal Qgarette Labeling and Advertising Act?
A That's correct.
Q And that 1965 labeling act required Surgeon General warning labels to appear on every
package of cigarettes sold in the United States?
A Well, I describe them as caution labels, since that's the word they used. But yes, cigarettes were required to have a label that said, "Caution, smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Q Fair enough.
So the '65 labeling act required a cautionary label from the Surgeon General to appear on every cigarette package sold in the United States, right?
A Yes, a cautionary label. That's right.
Q But then that label was changed in 1969?
A That's correct.
Q And how did that warning change?
A Well, it became a more affirmative warning You know, if you look at the first labeling act in '65, required in '66 the use of markings, it didn't apply to advertising.
And it basically, just on the basis of kind of what it said compared to what the Surgeon General concluded, was not accurate.
Q Right._
A The newer warning going on in '70 was mor( affirmative of the Surgeon General's actual findings.
Q So we refer to that as the 1969 warning because of the legislation that -- in fact, the newer stronger warning went on in 1970, correct?
A Right. The '69 legislation, we're talking about the same thing.
Q And that warning, that second warning whic appeared on every package of cigarettes sold in the United States, from January 1st, 1970 on said what?
A "Warning, the Surgeon General has determined that smoking is hazardous to your health." I believe that's the language.
Q You mentioned advertising a moment ago. What year was it that cigarette ads were pulled off of radio and television?
A Well, the broadcast media on the industry made the offer, and then that was firmed up in legislation. I believe it was coincident with the new warning labels. So in 1970, the first of the year, 1970.
Q So in early 1970, all cigarette ads are essentially banned from television and radio?
A That's correct.
Q I n what year was it that the tobacco
companies were required to put the Surgeon General's warning label on all of their print advertisements?
A That would be the next year, '71. That's when that was incorporated into the regulations.
Q So by 1971, every cigarette print
advertisement in the United States carried a Surgeon General's warning label on it, right?
A That's right.
Q Do you know how old Laura Grossman was whe she started smoking?
A Well, there's not an affirmative date from the evidence I've looked at. But it seems to me, given the testimony of the sister, who of course was not there -- or she was there, but was a little kid, she mentioned that the mother would buy cigarettes when they were 16.
So my reading, I can't date it precisely, but around 16 sounds reasonable from the evidence and given what we know about the general pattern of smoking initiation.
Q So if Laura Grossman was born in 1957, anc she started smoking at age 16 -A '73.
Q So for purposes of our discussion today, is it fair to use 1973 as a starting date for Laura Grossman's smoking?
A Yes, I think that is reasonable. It's
possible that she experimented sooner. We don't know for sure. Accepting the fact that there's no precise indicator of the precise point, I think that's a good reasonable working date.
Q The best historical evidence that we have available to us as to when Laura Grossman first began smoking cigarettes was that she started in 1973?
A Yes.
Q So by the time Laura Grossman starts smoking in 1973, the first Surgeon General's report has been released, right?
A Yes.
Q And subsequent Surgeon General's reports have been released?
A Yes, they have.
Q By the time Laura Grossman began smoking i 1973, every cigarette package sold in the United States had a Surgeon General's warning label on it?
A That's correct.
Q By the time Laura Grossman started smoking in 1973, cigarette advertising had been pulled from radio and television?
A That's right.
Q And by the time Laura Grossman started smoking in 1973, warning labels were appearing on all print ads for cigarettes in the United States?
A Yes, that's correct.
Q You describe in the Barbanell deposition how statements or information that a person doesn't specifically hear or see can still have an effect on them. Do you recall that?
A Yes.
Q Is it your view that information can filter
indirectly through our culture and society to people who don't receive that information from a source directly?
A Yes, people talk about things.
Q And that would be true of all kinds of statements and information as it pertains to cigarette smoking, wouldn't it?
A Yeah, all statements.
Q It would pertain both to cigarette company advertisements and statements, as well as messages from the public health community about the dangers of smoking?
A That's true.
Q I take it you don't currently have in your possession any pictures of Laura Grossman'
A No, I don't. There's reference to them in the depositions, but I don't have them. I haven't seen them.
Q Is it your intention as you sit here today to use pictures of Laura Grossman in your testimony at the Grossman trial?
A Only in this capacity. And having not seen the pictures, I can't make a decision about that. There's a reference to some pictures of her smoking. To the extent those
pictures may or may not illustrate larger points about the social practice and use of cigarettes, perhaps I would show those.
Q Can you tell me what you mean by that?
A Yeah. I haven't seen the pictures. But let's say hypothetically there's a picture of them - of a family sitting around the table after a Thanksgiving meal and people are smoking, doing something which used t be done at my house. The gravy afterward: becomes a bit of an ashtray. That would be an interesting picture, because it would illustrate the social use of the product.
So I have not yet looked at those, but intend to, and I'm sure you've seen them. So there wouldn't be any secret to these pictures, but I may make a decision.
Q I haven't seen any yet.
A Okay. Well, they're referred to in the depo of the husband, I believe, Jan Grossman. I'm not sure how you pronouno it. I would be interested in looking at those.
Q But as we sit here today, you have not yet relied on the contents of any photographs
of Laura Grossman for the purposes of your opinions in this case?
A That's correct. And my maybe long-winde< answer was really just a way of giving you a sense of what the criteria would be to use them.
Q You were just suggesting to me what kind: of pictures might be interesting to if you they became available?
A Yes.
Q You mentioned in the Barbanell deposition that you are working on a paper that examines the tobacco industry's use of structural science methodologies in a direct attempt to understand why smokers begin smoking. Do you recall that testimony?
A Yes. And before you ask me a question, a copy of that just arrived, and I need to read for typos. What I said was social science, not structural. So that may be an error in the transcript of the deposition.
Q Because my question was, what are structural science methodologies?
A I'm not a brick builder.
Q Okay.
A This gets back to what I said before lunch, you know, this use of sociological, social psychology, and these other methodologies to understand the smoker, his or herself.
So that's a mistake. Maybe it's in the transcript or maybe in the notetaking.
Q So where is this paper in terms of -- it's the process of development, social science methodologies used by the tobacco industry to understand smoking behavior?
A What I have done is gone through my research materials, which is the same thing as the reliance materials that I give you guys, put that on a stick. And I have pulled out those studies that deal with trying to understand the smoker, his or herself, and the idea behind the papers.
People have been very interested in what the industry knows, what do they know abou cancer and medical causation. I'm interested in the way that they began to understand the smoker himself. It's very good research, and they really do a good job of understanding the process of smoking
initiation.
Q Are there documents on Exhibit 1, the reliance list, which is provided by plaintiffs to us, the supplemental reliance list, that reflect the social science methodologies that were used by the tobaccc industry to understand smoking behavior?
A Yes.
Q Would you mind pointing those out to me? And if you think they're voluminous, maybe we could just mark them the way you've marked previously perhaps with an "S'?
A I recall research paper studies. I can characterize them to you. Maybe that will be quicker.
Q Okay.
A Basically all of the Roper studies, all of the survey research in here, the M.E Johnson, 1965, I think it's called Health Cigarette Study, has some interesting descriptions.
The Wakeham presentation called Smoker Psychology, which is a kind of PowerPoint presentation to the board of directors in 1969. I anticipate that will be my opening
paragraph to describe that setting as a lead into the paper.
So those are the documents. I'm relying heavily in this study on what were the periodic Roper studies, Philip Morris commissioned a bunch of those. Then in th< '70s, RJ. Reynolds is also relying heavily on those to understand that process.
Q The social science documents that you're referring to that you're using for this paper that you're writing, are they broader than this list on Exhibit 1?
A Yes, they are.
Q It will be a much deeper pool of documents that you will refer to?
A That's right. Although, it is fair to say that at least right now -- I'm always finding new things. But most of the research materials I intend to use for this paper are in my broader set of reliance documents, if that's helpful to you at all.
Q I don't think I nailed this down with precision yet. Let me just make sure I've got it right. If I wanted to assemble in one place the reliance materials that
you're using for the Grossman case, would I take the reliance materials that you used and your Engle generic trial preservation deposition and combine them with the supplemental reliance list that's been marked as Exhibit 1 ?
A Yes. Let me preface this by saying, you know, I don't have the good list that you guys - your experts have. That's a function of myself. I need to get that organized, but I have not yet been able to do that.
In the Ferlanti and the Hess and Sherman trials, I did my standard common knowledge discussion. And I call that standard common knowledge just as a shorthand. I 'rr talking about in terms of describing the course of public understanding and the risk of smoking over time, industry statements and interactions between those two. That was not reflected in the course of questioning in the preservation deposition.
It was much more focused on industry behavior and industry statements and those things. So I want to add that to it.
Q So you want to add Hess, Ferlanti, and Sherman?
A Yes. And specifically from those sets -again, not knowing what questions you're going to ask me, but the kinds of things to help you may be things like the public statements, the fallouts from the Surgeon General's report, perhaps, some New York Times stories from the '50s and '60s, even though that is before her birth. My argument would be that we need to understand the context of the world that she was born into and raised in. And then industry media statements, you know, the exhibits which I've used, you know, in nearly every trial. Joseph Coleman on Face of the Nation, perhaps, some of the newspaper coverage of the '88 Surgeon General's report, the '94 hearings, perhaps, if the questioning will take me that far in time, but it might. It's those kinds of things. The tobacco - need to know, film series, those kinds of documents, or exhibits I should say.
Q If I'm sort of trying to clearly define the
universe of reliance materials that you might refer to at trial, is it fair to say that that universe consists of your reliance materials from Engle generic trial preservation, Hess, Ferlanti, Sherman, and your Grossman supplemental reliance materials?
A Yes.
Q Let me ask you this question that I think I asked you earlier. I apologize if I did.
You're not going to offer any opinions in this case specifically regarding the details of Laura Grossman's smoking behavior?
A No, not anything beyond than the general thing we talked about, 17 years old, '73.
Q The key dates of her smoking?
A Right.
Q But you don't intend to offer any opinions regarding how intensely she smoked or the -- opine on what you think her brand history was or anything like that?
A No. I mean, in terms of the brand history I mean, they discuss a number of brands, Vantage, Pall Mall from her parents, and
Marlboro. I accept the fact that she was just smoking. And they say in the deposition that often she would smoke whatever was at hand. So that's not important to me.
Q Would you agree we don't have a clear historical record in this case of what Laura Grossman's smoking history was?
A I n terms of brands?
Q Yes.
A Yes, except the fact that she seemed to be fairly broad in her - Vantage seems to be something that the depositions identify her, at least in the '70s and '80s, being a preferred brand. There was some mention o Marlboro, some mention of Salems. The take-away point is that she smoked a lot of different types of cigarettes.
Q Have you already told me everything that you've done to prepare for today's deposition, that is two to three conversations with Mr. Gdanski, one with Mr. Hammer, reading a couple of the depositions from the Grossman case? Is that everything you've done to prepare for
today?
A Yes, that's right. That's exactly what I've done.
Q Independent of all of your research and the work you've done. But focusing specifically on the work you've done for this case, that would be the universe of the work you've done for this case?
A That's correct, yes.
Q You've not read the testimony or opinions of any defense expert in the Grossman case?
A I have not.
Q Do you know who any of the defense expert in the Grossman case are?
A I don't.
Q Do you intend to do any additional work or research before testifying in the Grossman case?
A I don't have mapped out any specific Grossman related research, no.
Q So no current plans to do additional work?
A No.
Q We talked a minute ago about pictures of Laura Grossman. Do you have any pictures of the places where Laura Grossman lived,
either the town or house or anything like that?
A No, I don't. I know those places well just through my own personal biography.
Q Did you live at some point in your life in close proximity to where Laura Grossman lived?
A My grandparents did. I'm a Greek guy from New York. Astoria is a pretty important neighborhood. All of my extended family for many years, although people have aged out, lived in Jackson Heights, a couple neighborhoods over. I know the neighborhood very well.
Q Do you intend to offer any opinions regarding that area of New York in the Grossman trial?
A I don't know. I mean, she - one thing about Ms. Grossman that struck me as I reac the deposition is that she seems to have been from a very, at least to me, familiar kind of working class Queens family. You know, a bunch of kids in a small apartment, four kids to a room. I mean, I know that world personally just through my own
upbringing observation. To that extent, it's a familiar world to me personally.
Q Does that about cover what you would say about Astoria as it might relate to Laura Grossman in this case?
A Yes. I mean, Astoria is a very mixed neighborhood. It's got a tradition of being Greek. It was originally a Czech neighborhood, people who built the Steinwa; pianos. There's still a Bohemian beer garden there, which is a wonderful place to go in the summer. It's your standard multi-ethnic, middle and working-class New York neighborhood.
Q But I take it, despite your family
background and family connections in that area, you don't know anyone that knows the Grossmans personally or have any sort of personal contact with the Grossmans in that way?
A No, I don't have any personal contacts with the Grossmans, the O'Keefe family, her birth family, if you will, that she was raised with. I don't know any of those people.
Q If you come to trial and tell me that your best friend was her next-door neighbor, that would be kind of a surprise?
A That would be bad, and I can tell you right now, no, there's nothing -
Q Nothing like that?
A No sucker punches like that. And I'd have to explain that, a needle bath on the stand. I don't want that to happen.
Q I want to finish up at least my portion for right now by showing you a couple more documents, getting your comments on them You're familiar with the Roper Organization?
A Yes.
Q And you rely in part on some polling that's been done by the Roper Organization historically regarding attitudes towards cigarette smoking?
A That's right.
Q Do you consider the Roper Organization to be a reputable and reliable polling organization?
A I do.
Q Are you familiar with Burns Roper?
A Yes.
Q And who was Burns Roper?
A Well, he's - I can't remember if he's the son or the brother. He's got some relation to the founder, but he was running the operation in the '60s and '70s.
Q Burns Roper was at one point the chairman of the Roper Organization?
A Yes. I said running the operation, but yeah, the boss man.
Q Are you aware of whether the Roper Organization in the '60s, '70s, '80s, perhaps beyond, was doing polling for the Federal Trade Commission on smoking relatec issues?
A Were they hired by the FTC to actually do polling? They may have been. Certainly the FTC '81 report relies heavily on Roper work. Whether that was commissioned by th FTC or not, that may have been the case.
I'm not recalling from memory either way.
But my position is that the Roper Organization supplied methodologically rigorous materials to their clients, be they tobacco industry, federal government,
or any other marketing. That's how these groups make their living, providing good research.
Q Was the Roper Organization in that time period known for doing sophisticated and credible survey research?
A Oh, yeah. They're one of the - back in the '30s, they're one with Gallup, the founders of modern polling.
Q And do you believe that the Roper Organization historically has had the resources and the capability to do any really sophisticated analysis of survey and polling data?
A Sure. Yeah, they're a legitimate organization. That's a good word.
MR. SEXTON: Let me show you a document and ask you if you have ever seer it. I will mark it as Exhibit 5.
(Exhibit 5 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q Professor Kyriakoudes, I'm handing you wh£ I have marked as Exhibit 5. It's a two-page document printed front and back.
It's a letter dated December 5th, 1980, on the letterhead of the Roper Organization,
Inc., from Burns W. Roper, chairman, to Andrew Sacks, Esquire, of the Federal Trade Commission.
Have you ever seen this letter before?
A Yeah, I have.
Q Okay. And this letter dated December 5th, 1980, seems to indicate that the Roper organization is working with the Federal Trade Commission on some polling and surve work related to cigarette smoking, correct?
A Just give me a minute.
Q Sure.
A I've seen this letter, but I just need to remind myself because it's been a long time.
Okay. Go ahead.
Q Would you agree with me that Exhibit 5, this December 5th, 1980 letter from Burns W. Roper to Andrew Sacks of the Federal Trade Commission reflects that the Roper Organization was doing some cigarette smoking related polling and survey work for the FTC?
A Well, I don't know about that. I mean, what they seemed to be discussing, and the; refer to a telephone call, is about the meaning and significance of previously conducted opinion research.
I mean, I take your question to mean that the FTC is commissioning Roper to do an independent study. But from this letter, it may be the case and is probably likely the case that what they're doing is discussing some of the materials that Roper has supplied to the FTC, probably at the behest of the industry. There's a redacted portion of the '81 report. And they're discussing the significance of it.
Q Let me just ask you about the first paragraph. Mr. Roper says to Mr. Sacks, "Each of my three partners and I, incidentally two smokers, two nonsmokers, have made a quick review of the results to your tack-on questions. It has been a quick review because of the need to get the printouts to you before the deadline we promised.
Doesn't that suggest to you that the FTC
has provided some tack-on questions to the polling that the Roper Organization is actively engaged in?
A Possibly.
Q And I understand that maybe you're only guessing at this that there's - that it's not a -
A Right. Are they adding - I mean, does tack-on mean that they're adding questions to a poll that they're about to do, or is it the case that they have supplied a list of questions and clarifications about previously conducted research, and they're basically rerunning the numbers in ways that are suitable to the FTC? This is a distinction that's not important to me.
Q Okay.
A It's unclear. The tack-on could be, right, it could be, again, tacking on to a questionnaire, they're going to go out in the field and do it, or they can tack on some questions to a bunch of other questions they said they had, things like break this down by smoker and nonsmoker o what have you. And in this era when people
are still using cards and big tape, they simply would call Roper and say, well, this first set of results are fine, but now we want to know more about this response.
Q Just to back up for the purposes of context. The FTC has commissioned Rope over the decades to conduct and interpret surveys and polling data on cigarette smoking, right?
A I'm not sure if they've commissioned polls I wouldn't be surprised. If I was at the FTC wanting to conduct a poll, I would certainly think about hiring Roper.
They're credible. We're not disagreeing here -
Q Great.
A - in terms of the qualifications of the organization.
Q And the FTC has certainly cited in reports and documents that you are familiar with Roper polls and Roper polling analysis, hasn't it?
A Yes.
Q Mr. Roper goes on in paragraph two of Exhibit 5 to note that, "Nevertheless,
quick or not, it is our joint opinion that the results show a high general awareness of the dangers of smoking on health that the government, the Cancer Society, and others have been promoting." Do you see that?
A Yes.
Q It goes on to say in the third paragraph of Exhibit 5, "There are some differences between smokers and nonsmokers, with smokers being somewhat less inclined to acknowledge smoke as causal, but we are more impressed by the similarity of the answers given by smokers than nonsmokers than by the differences."
Did I read that accurately?
A Yes.
Q Do you disagree with any of what Mr. Rope is saying in this letter?
A Well, I've testified before, you know, by 1980, you know, the tide is turning, there is a high general awareness, that's true.
I think the differences between smokers anc nonsmokers are significant. I mean, they are literally statistically significant in
the precise term. He's more impressed by the similarity. I'm more impressed by the differences. And that's, I think, because what I see going on in the '70s especially, which is a transitional time, as I've testified many times, at a turning point in the late '70s especially, is that industry begins to work the margins. The central failings, they lose that, but they begin to work the margins, the margins of belief and opinion.
Q Would it be fair to say, though, that in December of 1980, you would have had to look long and hard to find someone in America more qualified than Burns W. Rope to interpret survey and polling data?
A Oh, yeah. They're a legitimate organization. But he's not saying very much in this letter. You know, I mean, this is not -
Q This is his opinion regarding what the polling data shows about the level of general awareness of the dangers of smoking?
A Yes. And he underlines "general
awareness," he puts it in quotes, which are always the kind of pointing to the fact that he means general. Yes, this is fine.
Q All right. I want to show you one other letter from Mr. Roper.
(Exhibit 6 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q I'm going to show you now what I've marked as Deposition Exhibit 6. This is a March 10th, 1982 letter on the letterhead of the Roper Organization, Inc., from Burns W. Roper to the Honorable Henry Waxman, chairman, Health Subcommittee, Committee o Energy and Commerce. You're familiar with Chairman Waxman, obviously?
A Yes, I am.
Q And are you familiar with this letter,
Exhibit 6?
A I am. Just let me remind myself. Okay.
As I remind myself, he does mention here, a survey will be conducted specifically for the FTC. Sorry. I was unaware or wasn't able to recall, but that's fine.
Q Just so the record is clear, you were
pointing out a moment ago that this letter, Exhibit 6, from Burns Roper to Chairman Waxman reflects that the FTC had commissioned Roper to do some survey research on attitudes towards smoking and health, correct?
A Yes.
Q And I don't want to interrupt you if you need more time.
A Let me just remind myself because it's bee a while.
Q Sure.
A Okay.
Q Mr. Roper is writing this letter to
Chairman Waxman regarding a report whicl had been issued by the Federal Trade Commission regarding a cigarette advertising investigation in May 1981, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And in that FTC staff report on the cigarette advertising investigation, the FTC had reported on polling data that had been generated by the Roper Organization regarding attitudes on smoking and health?
A That's correct.
Q And Mr. Roper in this letter expresses no objection to the way the FTC staff reported the results of the Roper Organization's survey results, right?
A That's what he says, yes.
Q He is, in fact, in this letter objecting, strongly disagreeing with the interpretation that the FTC staff has made of the Roper Organization's polling data, right?
A That's correct.
Q Referring you to page two, the top paragraph. Mr. Roper writes to Chairman Waxman, "The FTC staff concludes, based or our and other survey data, that the public is inadequately informed about the dangers of smoking, using exactly the same data on which they base their conclusion. I would conclude almost exactly the opposite, that the public is highly aware of the reported dangers of smoking."
First, did I read that portion accurately?
A You read it accurately.
Q So Mr. Roper believes that the FTC has misinterpreted Roper data on attitudes towards smoking and health?
A Yes, he's disagreeing. Although it's -- if you read it carefully, it's a -- you can have high levels of awareness. You can be highly aware, as he says, but that can also be inadequate. So it's a - this letter has always struck me as a strange letter, but he does make that point, yes.
Q Mr. Roper says in the second paragraph, regarding a 1978 survey that the Roper Organization had performed for the Tobacco Institute, that the Roper Organization had drawn up a balance sheet and their summary of that survey's findings. And he identifies two, quote, liabilities, closed quote, for the tobacco industry, and he says specifically those are one, more than nine out of every ten Americans believe that smoking is hazardous to a smoker's health, and two, a majority of Americans believe that it is probably hazardous to be around people who smoke even if they are not smoking themselves, doesn't he?
A That's correct.
Q Referring you to page three.
A You read that correctly, and I've seen the original document he refers to. Also corrected - he's reporting that correctly.
Q Actually, let's go back to the bottom of page two for a second.
A Sure.
Q Mr. Roper goes on to point out that, "My fundamental quarrel with the FTCs contention is that they are expecting the public to possess a high level of detailed, rather technical information that it is wholly unrealistic to expect and that can probably never be achieved by any educational campaign, no matter how extensive it is or of what duration it is."
Did I read that accurately?
A You did.
Q And as you're familiar with the 1981 FTC staff reports, do you disagree with Mr. Roper's contention?
A Well, I do in this regard. I mean, he's kind of talking around the FTC report. I mean, his statements are reasonable in thi;
letter, but they're not really the questions that the FTC report asks. That's why it's a strange letter.
Yeah, there's high levels of general awareness. That's true. But the FTC is making another point in that report, which is to say that, while there is high levels of general awareness, there are gaps, and we still don't see the kind of reductions in smoking prevalence that we want to see from a public health standpoint. And their conclusion ultimately is that we need a different warning regime or labeling regime or labeling system that will more effectively convey in a personal level and in individual level these hazards.
So they're kind of talking past each other in this letter. And that's how I always understood this letter to be. It's an interesting letter.
Q The first full paragraph which reads -again, this is Mr. Roper to Chairman Waxman. "I would not argue that more severe and varied warnings would lessen public understanding of the dangers, but I
would argue that they are unlikely to increase the awareness much, for it is already at a very high level."
First, did I read that accurately?
A You read it accurately.
Q Okay. So the central thrust of Mr. Roper's letter to Chairman Waxman seems to be tha we've gotten public awareness of the dangers of smoking about as high as we car possibly get it, and there's not much more that can be done to increase that awareness? Isn't that his central point here?
A That's his point. But again, when you look at the data from this time period, both in the FTC report and also stuff done right after that, some of it done by Roper himself, some of it done by Harris and other organizations. When you ask questions where people are asked to assess the relative dangers of various health behavioral hazards and you ask experts, the public shows that they -- compared to what the experts know to be the case, the public is underestimating the risks of smoking.
There's issues on addiction. They're kind of talking past each other in this document.
There is high general awareness, as he says in the other letter, that smoking is a hazard and one of the causes of lung cance by the 1980s. But that doesn't mean that the warning regimen is effective. I mean, they're two different things.
Q You can't think of any reason to suspect that Mr. Roper is not doing his very best in this letter to give a candid and fair-minded assessment of this state of public knowledge regarding the dangers of the cigarette smoking, can you?
A No, I'm not going to - I take the letter at what it says. And when you read it carefully, my position on the letter is what I just said, that he's really kind of talking past the FTC. No, he's not - he's calling it as he sees it, and I accept that.
MR. SEXTON: At this time, I'm going to pass the baton to Mr. Geary and see where that takes us.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. GEARY:
Q Good to see you again.
A How are you?
Q Fine. Thank you for traveling to New Orleans today. How were your travels?
A Fine. Not much traffic. I got here pretty quick, about an hour and 20 minutes.
Q Professor, I'm going to start off by asking you just a few questions specific to Lorillard, Lorillard Tobacco Company. Wha I want to do is ask you if you have opinions in certain areas; and if so, what the basis for those opinions is.
First let me ask you this regarding Lorillard specifically: Can you identify any conduct on Lorillard's part that you contend constitute marketing to underage smokers by Lorillard?
A Well, Lorillard, like RJ. Reynolds and Philip Morris, collected survey information on smoking behavior, including underage smoking behavior, and much the way I described the Philip Morris situation,
incorporated that into their strategic planning. Well, that's a technical term, I guess. Incorporated that into their company knowledge about the market that they serve. That's a better way to describe it.
Q Anything else?
A That would really be it.
Q Okay. Let me ask you about the first part of that opinion. You say that Lorillard and others collected survey information; is that right?
A That's right.
Q With respect to Lorillard, are you contending that Lorillard itself did surveys; and if so, I want to know what th( basis for that is. Or are you saying we relied on information compiled by others?
A That's a good point. I think much of the Lorillard information is collected in other venues, Tobacco Institute surveys and the like.
Q Are you aware of any instance where Lorillard itself conducted surveys or did polling on its own; and if so, what_
document do you have to support that?
A I can't think of one right now.
Q Do you have any criticisms of companies looking at polling or survey information conducted by other organizations in an effort to learn more about what is thought about the company's products, any criticism of that by itself?
A No. And my answer is the same as the one gave at the beginning of the deposition related to Philip Morris, which is, you know, they come to understand, particularly in the '60s, you know, the role of smoking initiation in their market, particularly as the market begins to stop growing at the same rate of growth. And so they begin looking for ways to understand this more carefully so that they can maintain their market position.
Q I think part of your opinion was that the companies, including Lorillard, incorporated this information into the company's knowledge; is that right?
A Yes.
Q But with respect to Lorillard, you're not
saying that Lorillard developed strategic marketing plans geared towards marketing tc underage smokers, are you?
A I'm not aware of ones that are strictly geared towards underage smokers.
Q Other than what you've just said, do you have any other opinions specifically about Lorillard and its marketing practices?
A No, I don't. Lorillard is a smaller player in this story.
Q Are you familiar with - you're familiar with the Cigarette Advertising Code, I take it?
A Yes.
Q And that was a code agreed to by the companies back in the '60s -A That's correct.
Q -- doing advertising?
I take it you're not aware of any evidence that Lorillard ever violated that code; that's true, isn't it?
A I'm not aware of any evidence of that.
Q I want to ask you a little bit about your opinions of about Ms. Grossman. If you would, and I don't want to be redundant,
but can you tell me again what your opinions are about Ms. Grossman?
A Well, we did talk a lot about what my opinions were. Again, I'm not going to make an affirmative statement as to what she may have known or didn't know as an individual.
So the extent that she figures into it,
I'll talk about people of her generation and the role of smoking and social history of her age, cohort, and how that developec over time, talk about industry conduct during that period.
For example, if you look at my reliance materials, I have some newspaper stories about the issue of setting up student smoking lounges in schools, particularly junior and high school, junior high school and senior high school. That becomes actually a big issue in the 1960s, especially in the 1970s. I don't know her specific high school, so I don't - I won't talk about her high school. This was something that was in the air in the New York area, certainly, and nationally.
So I'm going to be talking about youth and her age generation, and not so much about her. Except to the extent that she might be representative of broader social trends, which would be a woman, you know coming of age in the early '70s, you know, working class, as we say in New York, outer borough, average everyday person.
Q Okay. You just said in one of your opinions the role of smoking by people of her age, cohort. Is that what you just explained to me?
A Yes.
Q Anything beyond what you just explained t< me?
A No. That's the kind of thing I like to talk about.
Q You also said that one of your opinions regarding Ms. Grossman would be industry conduct during the time that she smoked. Did I understand that correctly?
A Or her lifetime. Actually, my position, as I said earlier this morning, is that we do need to understand the context of the worlc that she was born into. So I will talk_
about things before she was born to set the stage, if you will, for America in the '60s and '70s on these issues.
Q Would your opinions regarding industry conduct during her lifetime be any different than the opinions you've expressed previously in your generic testimony in Sherman and in Hess?
A No.
Q There's evidence that she began smoking i about the year 1973; is that right?
A That's what -- yes, that seems to be roughly the time period.
Q And did you see evidence that she quit smoking on diagnosis in very early March 1994? Is that what you saw?
A There's a discussion of that, yes, and contradictory information from the two depositions. But yes, there is evidence of that.
Q During that time frame, the time that she smoked, can you point to any published newspaper articles which contained the industry point of view that cigarette smoking had not been scientifically proven
to be a cause of lung cancer during that time frame?
A Well, the industry made plenty of statements to that effect.
Q My question is a little bit different. My question is: During the time frame that she smoked from '73 to '94, can you identify any newspaper articles published during that time frame which contained the assertion that the industry claimed or the industry's position was that it had not been scientifically proven that cigarettes cause lung cancer? Can you identify such an article?
A I think what you're asking me, if I can clarify, is an article that says only that and doesn't have a statement from a publii health group or is not in rebuttal to some other information.
Q Not so much that says only that, but that says that whether by itself or in context of other information.
A Published articles in that period? I can't think of one right now. I've testified that at this time the industry's position
or ability to get heard in the media does decline compared to an earlier period, and they shift to other means to get the message out and persuade smokers to keep oi smoking. So nothing comes to mind. Lots of industry rebuttals were appended to stories, but not only industry perspective.
Q I take it that you would agree that any statements by the companies after the time she stopped smoking could not have had any effect on her smoking -- on her decision to smoke? You would agree with that, wouldn't you?
A You mean like after 1994?
Q After the time that she quit smoking.
A Yeah, that makes sense.
Q You see the point?
A Yes. You've got to ask those questions.
That's on the lawyer list. Yes, once you stop smoking, once she passes away, the industry statements don't have any real effect on her.
Q You're a historian by trade?
A Yes.
Q And you're a professor of history?
A That's right.
Q And you teach in the department of history at your university?
A That's correct.
Q And the focus of your education has not been on marketing; is that true?
A Right. I don't hold myself out as someone who can design and implement a marketing strategy for a company, nor would I hold myself out as someone who would evaluate ; contemporary marketing campaign for its effectiveness.
Q And you don't hold yourself out as an expert in the field of marketing; that's true, isn't it?
A Yes, contemporary marketing. As a historian, I do look at marketing, and I teach a course on the history of American business and the American economy, and we talk a lot about that. I've published on industry marketing using country music, for example. But in the sense that, using the methods that contemporary marketing specialists use to evaluate and design marketing campaigns, I don't do that._
Q We're just about done here, Professor. In going back to Lorillard, other than what you just told me as part of this exchange, your opinions about Lorillard are the same as those opinions you've expressed in the generic trial deposition, Hess, and Sherman; that's true?
A Yes, that's true.
MR. GEARY: Professor, I'm going to turn things over to counsel for Reynolds.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. CARTER:
Q Good afternoon, Professor. For the record; my name is Ed Carter, and I represent R.J. Reynolds. Thanks for taking the time to participate today.
A You're welcome.
Q So earlier today there's been some questions and testimony regarding when Ms. Grossman may have started smoking. We've talked about 1973 as a date there. There's also been some testimony about the fact that she was not necessarily brand loyal.
So in this case, from the depositions that you've read, are you aware that Vantage, Salem, and Pall Mall were the onh brands of cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds that there's any evidence Ms. Grossman smoked?
A Did you mention Pall Mall?
Q Yes, I meant to.
A Yes.
Q Vantage, Salem, and Pall Mall?
A Yes. That's the RJ. Reynolds brands that I read in the depositions.
Q So just to put a fine point on that, there's no evidence in this case that Ms. Grossman smoked Camels?
A No, I saw no reference to Camels.
Q As you've testified earlier, you don't have any opinions or any knowledge as to what tobacco ads, if any, Ms. Grossman actually saw, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. In your reliance materials, do you have any - have you identified any Vantage, Salem, or Pall Mall ads that you allege specifically targeted youths?
A Well, again, my answer would be similar to what I said earlier, is that they targeted a broad range of the population, which could include youth, but not to the exclusion of other population cycles. It's very difficult to draw that age line on an advertisement.
Q I n the course of your work, have you ever come across any literature suggesting that Vantage, Salem, or Pall Mall has targeted youths specifically?
A No, I haven't.
Q I n the course of your work, have you ever come across any literature suggesting that Vantage, Salem, or Pall Mall ran ads that were improper in any way?
A Improper by what standard?
Q By any standard, whether they violated the Cigarette Advertising Codes, for example?
A I mean, they were what they were. I don'-think of them as proper or improper. They're just what they are. They're historical documents transmitting to the public at that point in time, in this case the 1970s, images of smoking and delight
and the pleasure of smoking, the freshness in the case of Salem. I don't have an opinion as to whether they were proper or improper.
Q Okay. And you're not aware of any evidenci indicating that the FTC or any state attorney general ever pursued an action against RJRor any Vantage, Salem, or Pall Mall ads?
A That may exist, but I'm not aware of it.
Q And earlier - again, correct me if I'm misstating this in any way. You do not hold yourself out as an addiction specialist, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And in this case, you don't anticipate offering any opinion as to whether Ms. Grossman was addicted?
A No, that's not an area that I will offer an opinion.
Q On your reliance list -MR. CARTER: Actually, can we go off the record for a second?
(Off-the-record _discussion.)_
BY MR. CARTER:
Q Dr. Kyriakoudes, are you familiar with Dr. Robert Proctor?
A Yes.
Q How often do you communicate with Dr. Proctor?
A Over the years on average, about once a month, maybe, sometimes more, sometimes less, depending upon the circumstances.
Q How frequently would you say that you communicate with Dr. Proctor regarding Horida tobacco litigation?
A Not much. Robert and I have overlapping or coincident academic interests. I don't really like to talk about litigation with him at all.
Q Do you remember when the last time that yo communicated with Dr. Proctor was?
A It would have been - I think I sent him an E-mail in May.
Q Was that the E-mail that you were asked about in the Barbanell deposition that transmitted a deposition transcript from Dr. Michel in the Campbell case?
A That's correct, we talked about that. I
sent him this transcript. I think we all know what that is.
Q You haven't spoken to him since your Barbanell deposition?
A No, I haven't spoken to him or E-mailed hirr or anything like that.
Q Did you retain a copy of the E-mail that you sent him in May transmitting that transcript from Campbell?
A Yes. After the deposition, I went and searched for it, and I was able to find it.
And I would be happy to give that to y'all if you want it.
Q Yeah, I would appreciate that. If you could do that, that would be great. Just circulate it to the three of us. I will make sure that the court reporter, when we're off the record - give you all of that contact information.
A Sure.
Q Getting back to that a little bit. In your Barbanell deposition, you were asked a number of questions regarding Dr. Proctor's conduct concerning research assistants at the University of Rorida. And you
testified prior to those questions coming up in the Barbanell deposition, you were not aware of Dr. Proctor's conduct; is that correct?
A That's correct. And to be precise, I was given a set of questions that were essentially hypotheticals. You know,
"suppose if," that was actually the line of questioning.
Q But those hypotheticals, that was the first you heard of any of the contact that he may have had with the University of Rorida regarding research assistants?
A That's right. And I made my position clear on that.
Q I believe you said that, in your opinion, you didn't think that anyone should be -here. I've got a quote here. You think that people should leave graduate students alone; is that correct?
A Yeah, I think I said to the - if they want to have meat once a week, having remembere what it was like to be so poor as a graduate student.
Yes, I'm not - I'm not interested in
that in any way. My position on the methods, the conclusions, the materials employed by historians who have been retained by law firms representing tobacco manufacturers, that's clear, I published in that.
I have a disagreement with them on that. But I'm not carrying that over to the graduate students who are doing the very tedious job of reading newspapers or whatever, you know, they're doing to assist their research efforts.
Q I n the Barbanell deposition, you were aske< if knowing what you were asked to assume about those - about Dr. Proctor's actions, that if knowing that now, did you regret sending the transcript of Dr. Michel's deposition to Dr. Proctor, and you said that you didn't know, and that you would have to think about it.
Now that you've had some time to think about it, do you have an answer to that question?
A Is that what I said? Okay. Transcripts-testimony transcripts, they're public_
information. There's nothing secret about a deposition or a trial testimony, particularly when there's somebody writing down everything you say.
So you know, I'm not Robert Proctor.
I'm Louis Kyriakoudes. There's no problem with me sending a deposition transcript or trial testimony transcript, any kind of formal transcript, to anybody.
Q So why did you decide to send the transcript to Dr. Proctor?
A Well, when I send you an E-mail, you will see that what I said was simply - I believe the phrasing was, "Here is the latest in the R.J. Reynolds lineup." You know, I've written on and published on the role of professional historians testifying as experts in this venue; so has Dr. Proctor. And simply, this was somebody who was new whom I had never heard of.
You know, when they asked me if I read the transcript, and I said, "Yeah, I read the first two pages." And the reason why, let me make this clear, that's where he said his name and where he talked. I was
just interested in identifying him because I had never heard of him, which simply means that he's just not someone I knew, and I forwarded that on. That's all I did.
Q Are there - given your view of transcripts that you've just expressed a few moments ago, have you sent any transcripts - any other transcripts to other experts that you know are working with plaintiffs in Florida tobacco litigation?
A No. Robert is the only historian, the only other historian to which I have communicated, you know, and have a commo research interest. So I'm not in regular communication with people that are outside of my field.
Q Dr. Proctor - any other transcripts from other tobacco litigation or just Michel's?
A I mean, over the years?
Q Yes.
A Yeah. No. In fact, you know, back when I asked Dr. Proctor to participate in the data research project, I believe part of my responsibility was to assemble a preliminary list of transcripts that were
in the data holdings. And I believe I mailed those on a disk to him. So yeah, this was normal kind of scholarly communication.
Q So I appreciate the fact that you say you have not read the transcript of Dr. Michel's deposition. Obviously, you didn't know anything about Dr. Proctor's actions. If you knew that he had - that he was going to take the transcript and follow up by calling the university to talk about research assistants, would you still have sent the transcript to Dr. Proctor knowing what he would do with it?
A I'm not sure what he did. But if we take hypothetically what you represent to be the case, I don't - I don't operate that way.
I mean, I can't tell the future. I did not send him the transcript with the slightest realization or knowledge, awareness, inkling that it contained within it information that could be used to harass graduate students who were working as research assistants. There's just not enough time in the day for me to read that
stuff. I read enough of it when I wrote the article, and that's enough.
I mean, I don't know. I don't operate that way. That's not my thing. I can't speak for Dr. Proctor. You will have to ask him.
Q Sure. And I don't mean to be heard to be asking you to speak for Dr. Proctor. I was curious for your personal opinion on that.
I suppose a related personal opinion. If someone had done what I'm representing t you Dr. Proctor did with regard to the research assistants to one of your research assistants, how would you have reacted?
MR. HAMMER: I'm going to voice an objection. I know this is a discovery deposition. We're here on the Grossman case. This is far out of line as far as relevance goes.
MR. CARTER: This is actually my last question on it. So if you could indulge me for one more, I will be wrapped up.
MR. HAMMER: Okay.
THE WITNESS: Well, I was asked and gave the names of the two guys that are
helping me in a limited capacity, and I would hope that my view that - you know, I'm the one responsible for the interpretation and assembly of the material and speaking for the material under oath. And if anyone has a beef or criticism, I'm a big boy, I can take it, and to leave them out of it. That's my position.
So to answer your question, I would want in this case the Golden Rule to be followed. I would like my research assistants to be treated the way I've always comported myself on this.
And just to be clear, you know, it's not like I haven't testified a lot. I've testified many, many times, both at deposition and at trial. It's very important to me that my actions are alway: above reproach in this venue. Everything I say gets written down. God knows it's hard enough to do it like I've been doing it.
For me personally and I think professionally, everything else is a
distraction and a waste of time. I'm not interested in making any trouble for any graduate student research assistant, undergraduate, contract researcher, paralegal, whomever may be assisting the experts.
MR. SEXTON: You left out lawyer.
THE WITNESS: And lawyer. I will ever drive to New Orleans so that people can fly home on nonstop flights.
MR. CARTER: Thank you, Doctor. I appreciate that. We will handle contact information off the record if you can get us a copy of that E-mail, it will be greatly appreciated.
THE WITNESS: Sure.
MR. CARTER: That's all I have for today. I will hand the floor back to Mr. Sexton.
MR. SEXTON: I don't have anything further. Unless someone else does, we're done.
MR. GEARY: We appreciate you cominc here.
REPORTER'S CERTI FI CATE
I, LISA JETER, Certified Court Reporter, do hereby certify that the above-mentioned witness, after having been first duly sworn by me to testify to the truth, did testify as hereinabove set forth;
That the testimony was reported by me in shorthand and transcribed under my personal direction and supervision, and is a true and correct transcript, to the best of my ability and understanding;
That I am not of counsel, not related to counsel or the parties hereto, and not in any way interested in the outcome of this matter.
LISA JETER
CERTI FI ED COURT REPORTER
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL REPORTEF
A	addiction 131:1
ty 140:1 156:11 145:13
26:2 27:21 28:6	adding 51:5 120:8,9
24 41:14	additional 7:9 51:1 5:11 124:24 112:16,21
l-H	address 67:16,20
e-mentioned	addressed 67:10,12
, 156:4	adequately 28:18,19
nee 59:20	adjust 90:11
ract 88:23	administering 4:23
emic 24 7	administrative 29:5
5;14 ’	ads 82:20 98:19
pt 72:15 74:6 99:1 101:16 8 111:1 131:21 143:19,24 144:15 pted46:17	145:9
ipting 100:14	adult 43:18 54:11
unt 47:20 85:25	adults 40:11 43:17
15,16	91:2 44:10,18 45:7 57:4 unts77:7 58:3,20
rate 31:3 43:21	advance 92:1
11 97:24	advertise 77:10
rately 122:16	advertisement
, ~	„	QQ- 122 1/1 A.H
;ved 128:15	102:10
owledge	advertising 56:10 >;12 62:14 76:16 80:4 owledged 80:10 96:21 97:20
22	95:12 98:18 101:11 9:13 96:22,24 125:18,22 135:12 gig 135:18 144:19
ig 15;4	advocate 45:17
n 145:7	advocated 59:10
ns 149:15	advocating 46:6
’*9 154*19	affirmative 15:15 ely 55:5,15 97:17 98:2 99:19 ):3 136:5
ities 9:5,6,16	affordable 47:23
8 62:24	aforementioned 4:5
il	63:16 64:13	afternoon 142:14
22	98'2	age 8:17 13:22 ns 1:7 94:21 41:20,22 46:14
108:25 109:1 47:3>6 55:23 56:24 cted 82:16 83:3 57:5,8,18 58:11 j;1g	60:22 62:18 76:7
:6,8 100:7	annotate 51:2
6:11 137:2,6,11	annotations 65:2
4:6	answer 4:16 10:11 1113:11 21:10,1848:10 it 15:5 61:15 70:13 87:24 157:13 104:4 134:9 144:1 6:13 34:11 36:4 149:22 154:10
:14 80:23 98:18	answered5:22 2:23 125:1 10:11 81:13
1:7	answering 85:4
ie 16:12 26:25	answers 5:23 122:14
:25 57:2,24 73:8	anticipate 41:5 :13 74:9 80:8 87:20 106:25 1:6 118:19 145:16
0:8,12	anticipated 49:11
;ed 4:3 135:15	anticipating 86:24
;ed-upon 90:18	antismoking 71:8 !ement68:18 72:5
:8	anybody 95:2 150:9
!ements70:15	Anytime 72:19
id 118:18	anyway 87:23
36:24	apart 9:15 22:19
nrtlA-'l	1A-1A "K-1/L 11-1
w 19:15	62:21 68:24 83:14
wed 58:21	88:6
rnatives 44:22	apartment 113:23
wether 44:23	apologize 110:10
:1	appeal 56:22 80:12
>iguity87:8	appear 96:25 97:11
iguous 84:8	APPEARANCES irica 123:15 1:9
8:2	appeared 98:11
irican 14:24	appearing 101:16
:25 48:13 93:6	appended 140:6
1:18,19	appending 94:16
iricans 127:20	apply 97:20
7:22	appreciate 8:5 unt 56:5 77:7 147:14 152:5 -unts 49:10 155:12,23
ysis 21:11 36:20	appreciated 155:15
: 12,25 84:10	approach 16:21
7:13 121:21	approaching 13:22
rew 118:4,21	appropriate 57:3
a 37:15	aptitudes 35:17
53:14 69:15	assist 60:10 149:11
22	79:17	assistant 155:3
3:16 114:17	assistants 147:24 5:25 145:19 148:13 152:12,24 s 14:22 132:14 153:13,14 154:13
e 129:23 130:1	assisting 155:5
ment 36:15	associated 47:9 82:1
2:11	assume 149:14
tz 13:22	Astoria 113:9 114:4 ngements 69:11 114:6
y 53:21 56:22	astray 78:1
re 19:15	Atlanta 50:4
fed 104:19	attach90:l
le 4:7 36:15	attached 94:9
1	38:9 139:14	attempt 104:15
): 16 153:2	attempts 58:19
les 35:24 36:2	attention 37:12
19	138:23 52:12 96:14
2:8,23	Attitude 63:23
ork 69:21	attitudes 33:6 72:2 rtain 59:22 115:18 125:5,25 ray 103:11 127:2
6	40:15,18 42:7 1:14,16,19,21 14:2 8 47:2 52:22	attract 56:16
7	73:17 92:22	audience 38:12
):10 130:20	authored 35:24 36:2 >:21 147:22	authors 63:5
): 13,14 150:21	Automobiles 62:5
1:22 153:24	available 19:22 35:2 lg 70:3 93:19 100:19 104:9
1:10 139:15	Avenue 1:11
$:8	average 137:8 146:7
129:2	avoid 89:7
cts 14:14 72:11	avoids 77:11
15	aware 55:22,24 nble 107:24 57:12,15,17,19 1:24 61:10 68:7 69:6 nbled 12:10 70:5,12,14 80:22
7	116:11126:21 nbly 154:4 127:7 133:23 •tion 139:10 135:4,19,22 143:2 is 130:20 145:5,10 148:3
isment 131:13	awareness 69:17,18
2:2,22 123:23	basis 97:21 132:15 4:1 127:6 129:5 133:17
9:8 130:2,8,12	Bates 64:1
1:4 152:20	bath 115:8
1:7	baton 131:24
--battleground 76:2
-B- 79:23
14,16	beach 59:21
111:24 19:10	bear53:22
:24 29:13 31:14	beef 154:6
:1145:7 46:8	beer 114:10
:16 50:24 61:7	began 60:23 96:1,5 :22 80:21 87:17 96:13 100:20 :3 105:2 117:7 101:5 105:22 7:25 121:5 138:10
8:6 135:16	beginning 56:3 2:2 147:21 71:17 76:8 134:10
1:21155:18	begins 16:25 52:24 ibone36:13 54:5,7 55:8 123:8 cground 35:18 134:15
4:16	behavior 46:11 53:1 awards 44:3 58:14 60:18 63:4 X)N1:13 7ZL-9ZL S 1^
ly 14:10	106:7 108:24
nee 127:15	no:14 132:23,24
led 99:2	behavioral 41:3 trnnell 6:8,12 77:4 130:22
: 16,17 27:7,13	behest 119:13
:20 28:4 29:17	belief 123:10
:22 30:15,24	beliefs 85:10
:4 53:25 92:8,11	believe 6:6,11 60:8 : 15,19 101:19 62:23 71:13 80:2 4:11 146:22 85:7 95:12 23 7:4,22 148:2 98:16,23 103:20 9:13 H7:io 127:20,23 ‘ 53:8 126:19 148:16 150:14 id 12:11 56:1 151:23 152:1
:24 79:25 89:8	believed 17:24 6:15 21:23 87:14
c 87:1 88:6 90:4	believes 127:1
cally 32:5,15	belittle 35:16
:14 37:6 41:23	best 17:11 62:6 :16 47:17 97:21 100:18 115:2 6:17 120:14 i3i:n 156:11
0:15	brands 56:1 58:16 t7:24 21:8 61:3 69:20 80:7 3:5 110:24 111:9 nd 38:12 79:4 143:4,11
3:15 116:13	break 50:19,25 7:14 120:24
87:11 90:22	breaking 50:7
id 86:11	brick 104:25
is 90:9,10	brief 24:3
ography33:3	bring 91:18
14	bringing 40:21
5:14 121:1	broad 14:24 15:23 5:20 154:7 16:2 56:22 74:20 oards 76:17 111:12 144:3
92:7	broadcast 98:21
rapher 16:18	broader 58:11 59:7 raphy 113:4 87:18 107:11,20 [13:1 109:10 137:4
1:23	broadly 81:13
:2,14,19 30:16	brother50:3 83:25 13 49:16 64:12 116:4
20	86:8 93:11	brought 91:20,22
M1 1^-0^	BDHWADn 10
k 19:4	builder 104:25
d 106:24	built 114:9
88:16	bullets 58:8
:mian 114:10	bumped 25:3
32:11	bunch 107:6 113:23
173:5	120:22
7:5 14:5,8 16:1	burden 48:25 49:7
24	100:6	Bureau 34:1,16,24
):13 137:25	Burns 115:25 116:2
5:1	116:7 118:3,20
ugh 137:8	123:15 124:12
116:10	125:2
>m 65:4 128:6	Burrows 54:13 55:1
evard 1:15,20	business 23:25 24:1
54:7	24:5 141:19
ches69:12	busy 27:21
d54:8,10 56:5	butchered 14:15
4	66:22 69:4,5	buy 99:24
8,19	76:2	B-U-R-R-O-W-S
):21,23 111:15	55:1 1:24
C	6:13,21 8:9,19,25
15	9:18 12:21,24 13:4
ulated80:5	13:11,20,23 14:7
ulus	15:6 16:5 17:5,13
fano 34:3	18:25 19:25 20:9
13:15 26:2 28:5	20:25 21:12 22:21
:5 57:6 71:6,7	22:22 23:9,14 24:9
R* 1 'S 11	24:18 25:2,22 26:8
1:2	26:10,14,16,17,20
‘d23 5 25-23	27:4,7 28:4,19
:21 36:5 89:3	30:5,8,15,17,24
6-19 22	31:4,6 36:11 39:16
ng 131-21	40:14 45:5 51:16
2-n ’	52:13 57:25 61:6,7
; 26:13	63:12 65:14 75:17
ids 143:15,16	81:11 83:7 87:2’8
paign 62:15	92:5,10,11 104:2
:4 80:11 128:16	108:1 110:12
1:11	111:7,24 112:7,8
paigns56:17	112:11,14,18
:5 141:25	114:5 116:20
lpbell 146:24	119:9,10 120:11
^ ^	1^0-9ZL 1ZH-1 1 A
2:4 131:6 139:1 146:24 152:17 9:13	153:18 154:11
lid 131:12	cases 1:4 2:1 9:1
ibility 117:12 13:12 15:7 26:24
icity 102:22	32:23 64:21
4:l	cast 80:18
tal 37:8	catch 80:17
Is 121:1	category 21:13
, g5;X3	Catholic 86:9 90:7
fully 91:1 127:5	caught50:5
1:18 134:18	causal 122:12
olina 36:8,11	causation 105:21
:1 49:25	cause 82:13 139:1
ied99:13	139:13
yiug 149:8	causes 131.6
62-4 6 7	caution 97:3,6
ter 1:19 3:12	cautionary 97:10,13
[4 142:13 15	caveat 8:13 65:18
5:22 146:1	caveats 17:18
3:20 155:11 17	census 61:24
5:12 6:6,6,8,12	central 36:14 123:8
3:6,12	40:10 45:10 46:8
;ury 47:9	46:25 47:7 49:2
11	62:3	58:1 60:20,23
lin 15:1,16	77:21 78:11 79:16
16	38:3 46:13	82:16,20 83:3
12	90:9 132:14 96:21 97:11 98:19 linly 13:5 22:3	99:1,12 101:6,11
18	33:6 34:8	102:7,9 106:20 15 58:23,25	115:19 118:12,23
22	116:17	121:8 125:17,22 1:13,19 136:25	131:15 135:12 HFICATE	138:24 144:19
5:1	cigarettes 34:14
fication4:12	39:19,24 40:19
ified 1:24 4:21	41:1,14 42:9 44:9
5:3,22	44:16,17,21 45:14
fy 156:4	45:19 46:5,20
rcnan 116:7	47:13,18,19 48:6
3:3 124:14,16	48:15,20 49:6,18
5:2,15 126:14	49:20 50:6,10 51:3
):22 130:7	52:5 55:5 57:8,23
ienge 29:2 90:9	58:4,21 60:12 61:8
lonnoc 80-17	7Q-Q Q
ge 23:7 43:7 100:20 101:16 8 97:16	103:3 111:18
ged 5:24 47:13 139:12 143:4
9,16	97:14	CIRCUIT 1:1,1
ges 40:1,10	circulate 147:16
24	51:12 52:2,5	circumstances
23	146:9
acterize 106:14	citations 65:22
141:12	cited 121:19
k 48:16	City 1:16
;e 73:15 88:15	Civil 1:2 4:7 89:11
:es 18:11	claimed 139:10
sing 54:18	claims 77:11
15	clarifications e 19:12,18 20:4 120:12
13	clarify 15:10 139:16
nological 15:22	class 113:22 137:7
nologically 7:7	classmate 50:3
rch 90:7	clear 16:20 41:6 •ette 14:23 15:3 51:21 65:1 111:6
8,16,25	18:7 124:25 148:14
9:5 150:24	commissioned 4:15 63:25 107:6 rly 60:24 109:25 116:19 121:6,10 r-cut56:14 125:4
:14	commissioning its 116:24 119:7
s 28:17 113:6	Committee 124:14
ed 127:17	common 108:14,16 zr 88:24 95:6 151:13
ithor 36:20,23	communicate 146:5 ithored63:5 146:11
i 4:6 135:12,15	communicated 5:21 146:18 151:13
es 144:19	communication >rt 136:11 151:15 152:4
7:11	community 71:25 >rts 41:20,22 96:8 102:11
cident 98:24	community's 96:4
6:14	companies 11:5 sman 109:16 54:22 61:11 69:3 iague 29:14 82:24 83:8 99:6 icted 132:22 134:3,21 135:16
'VI 1 90	1 ZLO-Q
mibus 1:21	54:15 55:4,15 58:2
bine 108:4	59:3,17 60:9,10
bining 27:12 67:3,5 69:6 70:10 e 19:9 36:4 41:7 72:2,4,19 74:1,12 :10 58:24 62:1 74:25 75:4,6 102:9 :4 115:1 134:12 132:12 133:4 4:9,14	141:9
es 34:25 58:6	company’s 22:1 :23 87:11 140:5 58:18 72:4 134:7 fortable 73:24 134:23
:25	compared 49:19,24 ing 27:7 29:22 50:10 97:22 :16 95:6 137:6 130:23 140:2
8:1 155:23	comparing 20:12
mencing 1:7	competent 58:3
ments 115:12	compile 28:13
imerce 124:15	compiled 133:18
mercial 58:5	complainants 82:1
imission 116:14	complaint 23:1,3
8:5,11,22	complete 92:20
5:17	completely 86:4
plex 1:2 69:14	constantly 89:12
ponent31:l	constitute 91:24
25	132:19
ported 154:14	constrained 7:22
promised 90:8	construed 69:13
erning 147:24	consultant 39:9
lude 126:20	consultation 12:6
luded 97:23	consumable 62:11
ludes 126:15	consume59:13 hiding 1:7 60:12
lusion 126:19	consumed 75:15
2:12	consumer 53:8 lusions 149:2 58:1961:13
iense 88:2	consumers 72:25
iuct 10:3,5,17	consuming 55:23
6	121:7,12	consumption 77:3
2:18 136:12	contact 26:19 7:20 138:5 114:19 147:19 7:24 148:3 148:11 155:12
iucted 80:4	contacts 114:21
2:5 120:13	contained 138:23 1:22 133:24 139:9 152:21
irming 32:12 141:23
regate59:19	contend 132:19
»ress 96:20	contending 133:15
ection 25:1	contention 128:11 ections 114:16 128:22
equence 80:2	contents 103:25
equences77:2	contest 5:20
21 78:16,20,24	context 109:12
3	121:6 137:24 equently 54:22 139:21
ider 14:10	contract 66:12
24	85:18 155:4
>:21	contradictory ideration76:13 138:18
21	conundrum 77:15
idering 88:16	convention 43:24 istent 14:12 44:4
6	conventions 42:15
istently 74:11	conversation 25:6 ists 110:3 26:4 27:2,9
tant43:6,10	conversations 25:16
:6 83:12 111:22	52:23 53:15 61:22
vey 129:15	76:17 77:12 85:23
f 54:3 91:12,15	99:22 108:18,21
:5 104:19 147:7	141:18 144:8,13
5:14	courses 35:19
>orate 68:10	coursework 35:12
■ect 6:10,19 8:15	35:13
16,18	11:12	court 1:1,24 4:21
:18 16:16 18:8	5:3 94:13,24
:1 21:11 22:13	147:17 156:3,22
: 10 35:21 40:3	courtroom 74:19
:12 44:19 49:4	cover71:12 114:3
:5 52:7 56:7	coverage 96:1
: 15,16,19,20	109:18
: 14 81:12 82:6	create 72:1
:22 83:5,10 88:3	created 12:15 56:9
:13 90:11 91:14	creation 28:22
:15 92:2 96:23	29:11
: 15 98:7 99:4	creative 89:13
1:9,18 104:3	credentials 26:1
2:9 118:12	credibility 85:16
5:6,19,20 126:1	90:1
f\-M 198-1	79-1£ 7^-17
3:20,21 145:11	crisis 53:4
5:14,15 146:25	criteria 104:5
8:4,5,20 156:11	criticism 134:7 ected 128:5 154:7
ectly 128:3,5	criticisms 134:3
7:21	cultural 87:18
esponded 81:7	culture 15:4 47:8 :19 102:1
espondence	Cultures 38:10,14
:16 92:25	curious 153:9
isel4:4 5:16	current 36:22 85:9 2:10 156:13,14 112:21
iteract 90:11	currently 36:18 itry 141:21 102:14
JNTY 1:2	curriculum 91:20 )le 12:24 18:25 92:12,20
:14 34:13 36:4	curve41:15 42:8,21 : 10,21 77:17 43:18,19 44:9,14 1:23 113:12 51:3
5:11	curves 43:16
*se 11:25 48:22	customers 61:14
5:6	decline 140:2
>2:24	decrease 80:6
;s 144:5	dedicated 79:1
:al 73:5	deeper 107:14
:h 114:8	defendant 86:2
--defendants 9:7,17
-B--11:3 29:9
;ers 95:25 96:5	defense 112:11,13
2:12 122:3	defer 22'16
5:23 126:17,22	define 109:25
):25 130:9,21	degree 38:4
L:14	deleted93:9
36:22 41:3,9,21	delight56:19 144:25
21	61:25,25	delivery 32:9,10
18,21,22	demand 39:19 42:15
7:14 121:8	42:16,19,21 43:5,9
5:16,22 125:23	43:25,25 44:16,18
3:10,16,18	51:7,9 52:1 78:25
7:2 130:15	79:i
1:23 152:1	demographic 15:23
base64:10	department 141:2
23	depend 86:22
67:187:699-19	i
-;22	depiction 44:8
1118:1,8	depo 103:20
*48:3 110:17	deposed5:18 6:7 1:18 27:24 20:9
-;25	deposition 1:5 2:4 line 28:9 2:13 4:5,17 6:17 >:23 7:11,12 8:13 9:22 53:1 66:19 10:2,21 19:23 20:2
24	105:16 20:14 27:12,20 des 121:7 28:4 54:1 81:20 ased 13:16 82:10 91:11 92:1,9 ient 13:18,19 92:15,19 93:22
20	15:13 31:6 94:1,8 101:19
11	104:11,22 108:4 mber 118:1,8 108:22 111:3,21 5:20 123:13 113:20 124:10 le 22:6 150:10 134:10 142:6 ion 21:25 22:9 146:22,23 147:4
12	102:23	147:10,22 148:2 5:17 140:11 149:13,18 150:2,7 lions 18:7 152:7 153:17
4:18	diaphragm 8:2
)sitions 11:8	diaries 81:15
:24,25 18:25	died 80:23
:1,2,12,15,18,21	difference 9:2 10:6
:4 22:19,24 23:9	differences 122:9,15 :13 83:16,17,18 122:23 123:3
: 14,17 86:25	different 18:11 :7 102:17 73:15 86:11 88:16 1:13,24 138:19 90:24 111:18 3:1,12 129:13 131:9 ;h 42:5 138:6 139:5
;hs 49:15	differently 21:4 ribe41:14 64:8 76:21
:3 101:19 107:1	difficult 17:1 72:6 3:6 72:12,13 74:10,16 ribed 19:21 74:18 87:15 89:15 :2 31:1,5 44:15 144:6
:17 70:24 84:16	difficulty 7:21
2:25	direct 89:21 104:15
ribing 14:13	directed 56:23
8:17	direction 156:10
ription 66:16	directly 81:25 102:3
rlntinnc L’1 ^	rlirpptnre 1 fVv9ZL
:10 106:21	disagree 122:18 gn 78:3,11 79:8 128:21
:15 141:8,24	disagreeing 121:14 rability 77:12 126:8 127:4
re 54:20	disagreement 149:7
rite 114:15	disciplines 53:21
iled 128:12	discount 87:13
ils 110:13	discovery 23:1 r 71:16 73:3 153:16
rminant 46:11	discuss 9:15 29:15 rmined76:4 30:14 31:9,22,24 :15 45:17 68:2 69:4 iloped 61:22 110:24
: 15 135:1	discussed 12:21 6:11 27:15 46:12
sloping 38:2	discussing 119:2,11 ;lopment36:l,3 119:15
:7 37:9,24 105:9	discussion 13:6 nosis 138:15 20:22 100:9 26:2 108:15 138:17 le 54:13 55:1 145:25
iterested 88:20 74:20,21 93:7,19
2,5	91:2	106:2 107:3,9,14
33:1,12,13	107:21 109:24
l\2	115:12 121:20
usable 62:11 144:23
3sed72:3	doing 41:6 44:1 net 16:9 21:6 51:22 53:16 59:23
14	68:9 80:13 103:9 116:13 nction 57:1,2,4 117:5 118:23
24	75:7 120:16 119:10 131:11 action 155:1 135:18 149:9,11 ibution 40:21 154:22
rse 53:20	dominate 96:1,6
rsion49:13	double 27:12
rsities 42:17	double-check 47:22 rt 49:14 48:8,12 50:12
le 14:21	Dovemead 67:4,6 le 73:25 74:11 67:13
ion 1:2 67:4	dozen95:21
or 155:11	Dr 146:2,3,6,11,18 iment 2:11 146:24 147:23 11 33:10,12,16 148:3 149:15,17
''K/11-11 ^-10	1 /IQ* 1 Q	1 Q
14.17.25	70:12 152:13 153:5,8,12 14,24 71:1,4,13	draw 42:7 57:1,3
12,12	73:11,17 144:6 1,4,6,13,14	drawing 19:4 51:1 13 117:18,25	drawn43:22 127:15 1:4 131:3 134:1	drive 155:9 mentary 15:12	drives 54:20
17	18:17	driving 25:24 50:5
mentation	drop 44:18
17	drops 44:17 mented 17:20	Duces 2:13 91:10 ments7:10 9:4 93:22 94:1 5,8,11 13:3,7,9	duly 5:2 156:5
18	28:24,25	durable 62:7
16.17.20.22.25	duration 128:17
10.13.18.19.25	dysfunctional 37:18
8.19	34:3,5,12	-
25	60:3 63:8,10	-E-
15	64:4,13,17	E 62:22
18.19	65:13,20	earlier 10:9,24
24	66:9 70:5,6 17:19 22:13 26:14
:5,7 41:24 51:4 81:25 84:2 88:11 :8 77:23 79:20 90:10 93:1,2 113:1 0:10 137:23	116:21
0:2 142:19	elaborate 14:19
3:17 144:2	elastic 39:20 41:25 5:11 51:8,14,15
iest 26:19	elasticity 34:14 y 28:1 47:23,24 39:18,23 40:25 :4 61:3 76:4 41:8,13 42:8 44:9 : 19,24 99:1 46:4,20 51:3
7:6 138:15	emerges53:6
sr90:14	emphasis 96:14
41:25 90:12	empirical75:2
lomic 34:2,17	employed 61:16 :24 35:6,15,17 62:3 149:3
:23 36:1,1,2,6,9	employment 82:4
:25 37:2,9,9,23	enable 22:8
:20,24 39:1,5,7	encapsulation 75:20
:22 61:10	endurance 5:20
lomics 35:12,20	Energy 124:15
:22,23,25 38:23	engaged 62:23 71:9 :3,6,9,22 89:12 120:3
inmipc	oner‘miner 7 V?
:23 51:21	6:25 8:12 9:21
lomist’s 37:23 10:1,20 52:15 lomy 141:19	108:3 110:4
:19 5:14 142:15	entered 70:7,15
:ation71:7,8	entire 24:21 73:4
:4 141:5	entities 68:10
:ational 128:16	era 120:25
VARD 1:19	err 40:22
:t 101:22 139:4	error 104:22
0:11,22	esoteric 75:8
:tive 131:8	especially 17:18 lively 129:15 123:4,7 136:21
:tiveness 141:12	Esquire 1:10,14,15 ient 30:22 1:19 118:4
rt71:16 73:3	essence 27:12,20
4:6	essentially 36:9 rts 22:2,4 54:23 92:13 99:2 148:7
: 17,19 59:11	established 87:2
9:12	et4:7
a-33:11 44:22	ethical 58:24
:5 71:19 74:4	Europe 67:11,14,17
25	68:5,8,19	28:13,22 31:18
1	32:20 33:19 34:6
late 141:10,24	34:19 39:14 44:7
lations 88:14	44:11 46:3 51:2
19	63:18 65:13 66:2,6 186:20	66:15,17 67:2,10 ts 76:15 80:3,15	67:12,17 68:14,21 yday40:4 137:8	70:8,21,23 91:6,10 Mice 4:18 15:12	91:13,19,19 93:21 13 84:23 85:1,2	93:23 106:2
5.18.19	86:10	107:12 108:6
16.17.19	88:17	117:19,20,24
21.25	89:15,22	118:19 121:25
2.3.8.12.25	122:9 124:6,10,19
20	100:3,18	125:2
5:20,22 138:10	exhibits 34:7 109:15
3:14,19 143:5	109:24
3:14 145:5	exist 145:10
tly 17:1 26:9,23	existed 65:22
17,17	66:10	expect 128:14
13	112:2	expecting 128:11
5:18,20	expedite 66:24
TV/TTlNJATiniVr
>:2 142:12	100:13
lines 104:13	expert 71:21 112:11
lple 16:2 33:4 141:14
20	45:10 54:16	expertise 39:22 79:4 19 55:2,12 79:18
21	62:6 136:14	experts 108:9
1:22 144:19	112:13 130:22,24
lples 8:21	150:18 151:8
ptionll:9	155:6
23	explain 13:8 22:5 ange 142:3 28:6 74:18 77:16 anged93:2 115:8
e 45:17 48:2,5	explained 12:22
19	49:5,17,19 137:12,14
9,11,15	explains 46:21
ement 56:18	explanation 7:2
11	51:19
ision 144:5	express 43:14
)it 2:8 3:3,4,5,6	expressed 138:7 ,8 11:17,20 142:5 151:6
1,17	13:10	expresses 126:2
nded 50:4	113:10,22 114:15
3:10	114:16,22,23
nsive 128:17	far7:23 61:12 nt 31:12 102:25 109:21 153:18,18
4:1 136:8 137:3	fashion 27:23 81:8
ail 64:18 146:20	father 71:11
6:21 147:7	favor 61:4
0:12 155:14	favorably 72:3,21 ailed 147:5 73:2
ails 93:1,5,9	fax 94:19,19,22
--federal 45:24 48:2,5
-E- 48:22 49:5 96:21
i 109:16	116:14,25 118:4
ig72:5	118:10,21 125:16
12:25 37:14	felt 13:9
:24 72:25 77:4	Ferlanti 108:13 :14 98:5 100:14 109:1 110:5
1:1,11 124:2	ferret90:10
6:7 142:24	field 120:21 141:14 1:21 152:5 151:16
jr 85:23	fifth 70:22
*15:24 83:13	figures 46:1 48:15 :12 86:21 87:2 nfi-R
nally os:y	filed 94:4
ngs 123:9	files 33:11
9:24 16:11	filing 4:12
:14 57:6 70:19	film 66:13,23 67:5 :9,20 79:19 82:7 109:23
:11 89:18 97:8	filter 101:25
0:10 107:16	filters 79:10,11
0:2 123:12	find7:14 11:15 y43:9 111:12 71:23 123:14 ■minded 131:13 147:11
12:16	finding 107:18
iuts 109:7	findings 98:3 127:16
iliar 33:8 55:18	fine45:21 121:3 :20 70:25 124:3,24 132:6,8 3:21 114:2 I43:i3
5:13,25 121:20	finer 16:13 18:3 4:15,18 128:20 81:14
5:11,11 146:2	fingertips 48:4
ilies 37:16,18,18	finish95:7 115:10
ily 20:5,20,21	firm23:21 25:1,9,17 :22 103:7 25:21 93:3
ed 98:22	forming 22:21 73:23
s 149:4	73:24
5:2 17:19 26:18	forms 85:5
10 61:2 63:23	Fort 1:12 23:22,23
18	84:2091:17	31:11,19
8	96:19 97:18	forth 156:7
25	100:20,24	forwarded 12:5
2:16 121:3	151:4
5:23 129:21	found 64:20
):4 132:16	Foundation 93:7
3:9 148:10	founder 116:5
3:23 156:5	founders 117:9
2:7,18	four 113:24
24:12	fraction 41:5
t24:13	frame 138:21 139:2
ts 155:10	139:6,9
‘155:18	frequent62:10
ida 1:2,12 24:1	frequently 146:10
6,16	50:8,10,12	freshness 145:1
14	146:12	friend 115:2
7:25 148:12	friends 81:22
L:9	front 6:2 11:23 is-ifi io i
3	8:1 15:6 16:8 118:25 119:7,12
19	52:11 53:10 119:25 120:15
11,22	55:11	121:6,12,19
24	96:9 141:5 124:23 125:3,21 sed32:16 74:24 125:23 126:3,9,15
22	108:23	127:1 128:20,24
ring 112:5	129:2,5 130:16
w7:13 14:1	131:20 145:6
17	152:11	FTC’s 128:10
wed 154:12	full 129:21
>wing21:ll	function 108:10
ws 5:4 84:12	fundamental 128:10
; 33:17 73:22	further 31:15 ;s 53:6 155:21
:ast61:12	future 61:13,14 itting 43:23 79:23 152:18
4	_
4:15 21:24	_G_
17	Gallup 117:8
al 82:1 150:9	gamut 53:24
alities 4:9,11	gaps 129:8
len 114:11	90:1 94:19 105:14
inski 12:5,19	118:13 131:12
:10 19:12 20:1	147:12,18
:12,16,24 24:11	given 13:1 17:18
: 16,24 25:19,20	18:17 21:6 84:14
:7,20 27:2,10,23	99:21 100:3
:2,12 29:10,14	122:14 148:6
:3,7 31:18 32:1	151:5
:9 83:12 93:2	giving 104:4
1:22	glad 11:1
nski’s 12:9,13	gleaned 84:13
: 15 28:21	global 69:5
•ed 135:2,5	globally 69:20
ry 1:15 3:11	go 7:23 29:13 31:20
13	131:24 132:3	33:16 39:11 41:8
2:9 155:23	42:12 48:16 50:24
;ral 10:9 12:23	80:21 89:10 91:3
:25 74:9 96:25	114:12 118:18
:10,23 98:14	120:20 128:6
0:4 110:15	145:22
2:2,22 123:23	goal 76:24,25 77:1
3:25 124:3	78:16
Q-ZL 8 1^1 -ZL	1^ZL-91
irally 6:14 54:7	44:21 51:7 121:24
eral's 95:8,14	122:8 128:9
:17 96:20 98:2	153:19
:7,14 100:25	going6:14 8:1,10,14
1:2,7 109:8,19	8:20 18:4 21:16,18
irated 88:25	27:11 33:4 42:19
:22 92:7 125:24	42:20 43:9 47:8
iration 21:21	49:750:1852:13
6:9 137:2	58:10 59:18,21
;ric 6:16,25 8:12	62:9 63:22 69:9
>1 10:1,20 52:15	72:21 76:6 77:9
8:3 110:4 138:7	79:6,14 82:12 85:2
2:6	98:1 109:5 110:11
leman 24:19	120:20 123:4
;raphic 15:23	124:9 131:16,23
ing28:17 30:19	132:10 136:4
:12 51:16,17	137:1 142:2,9
:16 78:22	152:10 153:15
5:12 147:21	Golden 154:11
21:19 28:7	good5:7,8 6:4 14:17
:18,18 52:18	14:17 46:21 65:8
23 80:8 100:16 101:10,14 102:15 5:24,24 108:8 102:20,21 103:21 7:2,16 132:4	104:1 108:1 110:6
3:19 142:14	111:24 112:11,14
Is 42:3 45:2	112:17,20,24,25
;n31:13 32:9 113:6,17,19 114:5 3:8	135:24 136:2
rnment 116:25 137:19 142:21 1:4	143:6,15,19
uate 35:22 81:5 145:18 153:17
3:19,24 149:9	Grossmans 114:18 1:23 155:3 114:19,22
uated 81:1,6	Grossman's 8:17 id 1:15 20:8 82:3,13 dparents 113:8 100:11110:13 169:24 70:1 111:8
h 41:12,20,22	Grossman-specific
5	22:21 25:5
y 103:10	group 42:22,23 18:4 51:23 51:25 52:2,4 53:23
25	54:4 85:13 56:25 58:11
13	121:16 139:18
7-1 ^	(tfAiinc 1 Q-1 ^ 00
tly 155:15	growing 134:15
:kll3:8 114:8	growthl34:16
sman 1:4 5:11	guess 9:2 34:22 43:1
1,22	7:4 8:9,25	59:15 70:10 133:3
8	13:11,11 16:5	guessing 120:6
9.15.19	17:5,7	guide90:13
13.14.23	18:6	guy 113:8
10	19:3 20:15	guys7:21 9:9 31:15
25	21:1,20,22	94:20 105:15
7.10.17	23:14	108:9 153:25
18 25:2,22 26:8	-
10,20	27:4,5,13 -H-
15	28:7 29:18	H 1:20 2:15
1.4.8.17	39:16	half 6:12 24:14
4.19	52:13,20	25:12,13 60:23
25	63:11 65:14	hallway 25:4
21.23	81:8,11	Hammer 1:10 7:18 16^20 82:8^20	7:24 8:4 9:8,11
3.9.14.19	84:3	24:20,21,24 25:23
13	92:5 99:17	26:4 30:4 31:19 ):6,19,23 101:5	32:1 82:9 83:13
: 11,17,24 94:4	heavily 107:4,7 : 15,18 95:1 116:18
1:23 153:15,23	Heights 113:12
446:1 48:4	Hello 9:8
:24 111:4	help 29:7 109:6
5:18	helpful 23:7 107:21
ied 63:18 66:15	helping 15:3 154:1
: 13,14	Henry 124:13
4ing66:5	hereinabove 156:7
7:23	hereto 4:4 156:14
ile 155:12	Hess 6:15,24 8:11 pen 89:7 115:9 9:20,25 10:19 pened 77:16 52:14 108:13 pens 53:3 89:1 109:1 110:5 138:8 py 37:15,16 54:3 142:6
7:12	high 39:24 40:7 iss 152:22 122:2,22 127:6 193:12 123:14 128:12 129:4,7 4:22 130:3,9 131:4 iDY 1:13 136:18,18,19,22 ris 130:18 136:23
34:10	higher 39:19 42:16
irrl 1^1-6	ZL0-18 01 ZLQ-01 0^
:15 127:21,23 127:7
irds 129:16	hired 39:8 116:16
0:22	hiring 121:13
138:18	historian 14:13 15:6 th 36:9 53:4,4 16:14 35:3,6,15 :13 57:22 59:24 36:24,25 40:14 :22,25 77:2,21 46:24 47:12 51:22 : 16,20,24 79:3 61:9 77:15 84:21 :9,18,24 96:4,8 86:18 87:12 88:13 :7 98:16 102:11 88:15 89:17,25 6:19 122:3 140:23 141:17 4:14 125:6,25 151:11,12
7:3,22 129:11	historians 15:14 0:21 139:18 38:12 86:8 90:24 •101:21 149:3 150:17
*d 17:7,15 21:23	historical 7:5 13:2 :24 140:1 14:24 15:1 16:1 8:11 150:20 31:7 36:19 46:19 1:2 153:7 47:4,4 70:2 74:15 •ing7:21 93:12 84:21,25 85:2,16 •ings 109:19 85:18 86:4,19
18 90:15	identifies 127:17
3:18 111:7	identify 21:16 33:19 1:23 59:9 62:13,21 irically 16:6 63:20 66:7 111:13
18	46:7,10 132:17 139:8,13
2049:1,6,17	identifying 151:1
9	75:15 88:21	112:11 66:13,19 5:18 117:11 67:1 iricizing 46:22	illegal 59:1
•ry 14:22 35:23	illnesses 82:14
1	37:2 38:24	illustrate 103:1,13
1,5,761:10	image 66:13 69:22
10	79:7 84:18	images 66:22 144:25
8,12,17	89:9	impact 46:13 69:16
13	110:22,23	implement 141:8 1:8 136:10	important 14:10,11 ):25 141:2,18 54:10 55:25 69:25 8:11 70:4 74:4 75:6 141:7,9,13 76:6,7 111:5 113:9 5:13 120:16 154:19 ings 152:1	imposed 49:20 e87:9 155:10	impossible 18:17
1 0/1-1 ^	7/1-1 n
ful 86:14	123:1,2
ifully95:6	improper 144:16,17 tig 89:6 94:7 144:21 145:4
50:19 132:9	inadequate 127:8
s 24:14,14	inadequately
12,13	126:17
e 103:10 113:1	inappropriate 58:1
an 37:8	incidentally 119:19
and 19:3	inclined 89:25 *:20 122:11
thetically 18:9	include 30:25 55:9 \:6 152:16 80:19 144:4
theticals 148:7	included 46:2 92:24
^:10	including 132:23
- 134:21
-J--inconsistencies
6:4 38:3 105:18 86:22
:ification 11:21	inconsistent 86:20
12	66:3 91:7	incorporated 99:10 7:21 124:7 133:1,3 134:22
ified 143:23	incorporating 59:5
ease 45:15,15 32:10 54:14 88:7 0:2,11	101:20,25 102:3,6
eased 48:6	128:13 132:22
eases 45:6,18,18 133:11,18,20 :3	134:4,22 138:18
easing 79:1	139:19,22 147:19
pendent 84:4,6 150:1 152:22 2:4 119:8	155:13
EX 2:8 3:1	informed 126:17
xed47:14	informs 58:16
cate 118:9	infrequently 62:8
cated 12:25	initial 95:13
:25	initiation 46:23 54:8 cates 66:12 54:21 77:8 80:1 eating 145:6 100:5 106:1 cator 100:15 134:14
rectly 102:1	inkling 152:21
vidual 17:9,21	innovations 61:23
:1,12,14,20,23	ins68:3
:18 22:11 31:24	insight 47:11
:24 53:19 83:9	instance 133:23
9:16 136:7	Institute 127:14
i/iHiiolicni ^-91 1^^-91
ilge 153:21	intelligent 83:19,21 istries 61:12 84:4
istry 14:14 15:3	intend 17:22 41:7 :8 52:25 53:7,13 45:17 49:13 60:3 :17 54:5,7 55:8 63:11 75:16 78:8,9 :17 96:13 98:21 78:18 103:15 5:10,20 106:7 107:19 110:19 8:19,23,24 112:16 113:15
9:14 116:25	intended 56:11 9:13 123:7 75:18 80:12
7:18 136:12	intensely 110:20
7:19 138:4,24	intent71:18 72:13 9:3,10 140:6,7 72:14 73:17,25 0:21 141:21 74:3,12 75:3,4,24
istry's 104:13	intention 11:9 44:19 9:11,25 60:9,14 76:23 istic 51:6 102:19
ition 47:14,21	interactions 108:20
lence 85:9	interdisciplinary rmation 15:20 38:11 :5,9 19:16 21:17 interest 80:6 85:20
20	86:3 88:17	J 1:10,14
18	151:14	Jackson 113:12
■ested 20:5,11	Jan 19:3 81:20
7	57:22 90:3,5 103:20
2	103:22	January 98:13
5:19,22 148:25	JETER 1:24 4:20 L:1 155:2 156:3,21
5:15	job 22:15 51:23 ■esting 20:16 105:25 149:10
14	71:9 74:17	John 1:20 12:5
3:12 104:8	Johnson 59:15,25 5:20 129:20 62:22,22 63:6,7 ■ests 146:14 106:19
■pret 72:13,14	Johnson’s 60:9
L:7 123:16	joint 122:1
pretation 88:9	JONES 1:18
5:9 154:4	Joseph 109:16
preting 65:2	journal 38:8,11,13 rogatories 23:6 38:15,20,24 39:1
rupt33:15	journals 35:1 38:23
23	125:8 39:3 81:15
■view 89:10	judge 70:1
•ifiovijc S/I • 1 Q	liirlrrac 1 A
5:22	judgments 18:20 •tment 37:8 87:13 89:4
ived 13:21	JUDICIAL 1:1
11	July 1:7 2:5
ives78:2	June6:7 28:1,3,9 Tson 25:8 29:9 31:14 92:15 10:23 14:4 93:6
16,17	50:1	junior 136:18,18
24	74:8 94:17	jury 22:6,14
5:16,20	-
d 125:16	-K-
s 16:3 20:7	Kansas 1:16
15	37:10 45:9	Karenina 37:15
18	90:23 96:2	keep 11:23 140:4
5:15 131:1	key54:12 110:17
5:3	kid 99:23
92:22	kids 70:24 71:14 s 33:5 62:11 113:23,24
10	76:18	kind 15:11,22,23
_ 30:11 32:6,11,15
J_ 34:9 37:20,22
:10 46:22 49:12 133:16 134:12,13 :12 56:2,18,19 136:6,21 137:5,6 :12 64:2 72:10 147:2 148:7 :1 77:16 84:8,17 149:11,19 150:5 :23 87:1,9 88:21 150:16,21 151:9 :12 97:21	151:13,21 152:8
6:23 113:22	153:3,16 154:2,15
5:3 124:2	knowing 21:22 8:24 129:9,17 109:4 149:14,16 1:1,19 137:16 152:14
0:8 152:3	knowledge 42:6 Is 18:19 29:1 53:11,12 55:3 59:5 :14 87:11 102:5 69:17 76:13 79:22 4:7 109:5,22,23 108:14,16 131:14 w 14:25 17:24 133:4 134:23 :11 151:3 152:9 143:18 152:20
w5:18 6:5 10:9	known 15:16 34:4 : 16,24 16:22,23 73:14 117:5 136:6
:1,20 20:6,8,16	knows71:21 105:20 :19 21:12 30:10 114:17 154:21
: 14 37:13,21	Kyriakoudes 1:5 :2 40:16,18,19 2:4 5:1,7 9:13
•9^ ZL9-17 ZH-7	^0-9zL ^7-99 Q1 -Q
:2,3,7,10 48:10 150:6
: 11,12 49:16,17	Kyriakoudes’s44:8
:22 50:8 51:20	-
:11 58:7 60:22	-h-
:18,25 66:9,14	L4:165:6
:6,22 68:4 69:2	label 97:5,10,13,14 :10,14,16 71:24 99:7,14 101:8
:13,14,21 78:3	labeling96:21,24 : 19,23 83:2,5,17 97:9,18 129:13,14
:24 84:3,12	labels 96:25 97:3 :23 87:4 88:12 98:24 101:15
:6,21 90:8,17	language 23:6 43:13 :10 94:5,6 95:8 55:18 98:17
:18 99:17 100:3	large 16:10 80:13
0:14 105:3,20	larger 15:18 103:1
8:8 109:14,15	lasted 25:11
9:23 112:13	late 16:24 52:24 3:3,13,18,23,24 57:12 92:15 95:19 4:17,24 119:1 95:24 123:7
1:4 122:20,21	latest 150:15
3:19 130:24	Lauderdale 1:12
22.23	31:11,19	legislation 98:5,8,23 *a7:4 8:17	legitimate 117:15
11	16:5,9,14,19 123:17
6.14.23	18:6,10	lessen 129:24
8,15	21:1,22	letter 2:14,15 67:9
10	80:21,23 118:1,6,8,15,20
8,10,16	82:3,8 119:9 122:19
13,20	83:2,9,14 123:19 124:5,11
19	84:3,13 124:18 125:1,14
17	100:6,11,19 126:2,7 127:8,9 ):23 101:5,10 129:1,3,18,19,20 1:14 102:15,20 130:7 131:5,12,16 1:1 110:13 131:18
L:8 112:24,25	letterhead 67:2
3:6 114:4	118:2 124:11
1:9,10,14,19 4:8	letters 93:1
21	25:1,9,21	let’s 9:13 29:13
7	81:1 93:3	39:11 55:11 80:21
):4	90:16 91:3 103:6
uit 72:6 86:2,2 128:6
er 23:12 25:20	level 43:9 123:22
23	140:19	128:12 129:15,16
a	1
9,16	129:4,7
78:1 107:2	liabilities 127:17
jrship 54:15	life 14:24 46:25 ng 27:6 83:14 113:5
*72:23 76:11	lifetime 137:22 1134:6 138:5
ied52:25	Liggett 11:4 65:7
is 53:17 84:22	light 25:4
25	lighter 43:7
; 148:19 154:8	liked61:2
8:10	limited 67:4,7,13 1:16 155:7 154:1
cy 64:10 65:23	line3:2 14:2021:11
6	37:15 68:17 95:7 14:1 55:22 144:6 148:8
5,8,13,18	58:22 153:18
18	67:24 68:6	lines 36:6 55:7
10,23,25	77:13 68:14
ly58:3,20	lineup 150:15
12	60:11 68:9	link 64:19
id 65:3	linking 64:12
s 64:11 93:6	long 5:22 24:10 \ 1:24 4:20 32:13 33:2 118:16 6:3,21 123:14
>:9 11:17,19	long-winded 104:3
:2,3,4,7,10,15	look 41:15 43:8 55:8 : 13,23 29:7,8,11 68:13 70:19 72:7 : 13,21 33:4,7,18 72:11 74:20,21 :15 46:3 63:19 97:18 123:14 .-24 64:9 66:18 130:14 136:14 :23 92:21,23 141:17
6:3,5 107:12	looked 18:24 22:23 8:5,8 120:11 22:25 23:3 36:8 0:19 145:21 61:1 99:20 103:14
1:25	looking 46:7 48:2 d 13:9 28:22 53:16 58:13 63:3 :17 32:19 33:1 74:13 87:17 :18 103:22 134:4,17
ally 40:21 73:19	looks 17:2 42:11 2:25 66:20
ature34:4	Lorillard5:14 11:3 4:9,14 65:6 132:12,12,17 ation 1:4 2:2 132:20,21 133:10
R 81 •'X 9^	1^-1ZL 1^ 90 9ZL
1:18	135:9,20 142:2,4
i 7:14,19 16:25	Lorillard's 132:18
:3 30:16 43:13	LORILLARD/D... :16 64:12 65:20 1:17
:8 93:11,15	lose 123:9
:23 135:23	losing 54:17
9:5 147:21	lost 9:8
113:5	lot7:24 32:17 35:10 1112:25 113:7 47:10 53:9,10 3:12 60:20 71:21 72:7 ; 15:24 72:11 90:13 ig 117:2 111:17 136:3 * 1:13 141:20 154:16
ed60:15	Lots 140:5
ing50:l	louder 7:19
ted 15:22,25	Louis 1:5 2:4 5:1 :6 150:6
tion7:4 13:2	Louisiana 1:6 4:6 ed61:3 4:23
80:11	lounges 136:17
in 26:1	low 47:18,19
r 42:19,20	124:6,9
14,16,17	57:14	market 40:21 44:23
5 68:17	44:25 46:8 54:17
talking 93:15	55:5,9,10 58:22
1142:25	60:20 61:5,7 73:5
ity 76:3	76:1,3,11 77:10
h 38:2 91:5	79:22,23 133:4
5:2	134:14,15,19
131:6 139:1,13	marketed 57:24
- marketing 9:5,6,16
-M--9:16 10:8,23 11:10
19	11:10 14:4,6 21:2
azines 76:17	22:1,4,12 27:16
ed 152:2	31:1,10 32:4 33:22
itain 76:10,10	40:17,20 52:20
1:18	53:20 54:23 56:10
>r 37:6 46:11	56:17,17 58:2,7,16
>rity 127:22	59:2,8,16 60:5
ing 18:6 32:5,7	61:18,21 62:14,25
1:6 155:2	63:13 64:7 65:16
110:25 143:3,7	75:10 76:14 117:1
5:10,24 144:10	132:19 135:2,2,8
1:15 145:9	1/11 q 11 1/1
ipulate 45:12	markets 69:7
14	marking 65:10
Lifactured	markings 97:20
^4	Marlboro 54:19
ufacturers	61:6 66:12 69:4,7 69:1976:11 111:1
ped 112:19	111:16
:h 91:16 124:11	married 19:8
^16	matches 66:16
E>aret 19:6	material 27:22
*in 64:3	35:10 71:20,23
*ins 123:8,10	154:5,5
*;10	materials 11:14,18
111:16 44:6	11:19 12:14,16,20
8	106:11	22:21 28:7,10,11
7;19	28:15,21 29:1,10
ced 11:20 44:11	29-12 32-14 22
12,25	66:2,5,15	58:7 60:1 70:6
9	70:22 91:6,9	72:5 91:25 93:8
21	106:12	105:13,14 107:19
1:6 117:20,24	107:25 108:2
0:1,4,7 116:24 24:17
9:11 136:15	meeting 23:20 24:4 3:22 149:2 24:16,22 25:8,14 ter 13:25 86:18 27:3 28:2 29:13,16 8:16 156:15 29:18,25 30:1,12 ^berry 36:12 30:13 31:11,23 ^berrys 36:10 32:2
Connell 1:20	meetings 25:15 26:6
1103:8	members 20:20,21 n5:19 7:14,17 81:22
I	10:4 16:23	memorized 48:18
:3 34:21,23 35:6	memory 42:12 :12 39:25 40:19 47:16 116:21
:20 41:16 45:1	mention 111:15,16 :20 46:15,16,23 124:21 143:7
:4 49:25 58:5,22	mentioned 11:8,14 :23 70:12 73:10 17:19 18:24 22:20 :3 77:25 79:10 54:24 98:18 99:23 :10,13,14 88:23 104:11
3:4 110:23,24	mentioning 10:23
3:18,24 114:6	merely 74:13
9:1,6,6 120:8,9	message 95:25 96:4
9-9ZL19V1Q	Q^-8 17 1 ZLO-ZL
0:14 144:20	met5:9 23:16 24:19 1:19 152:18 24:25 25:21 81:7 3:3,7 81:19,24
ning 119:4	metaphor 62:8 ns 65:5,6 75:3 80:18 90:7
:17 83:24 124:3	method 61:19
0:3 151:3	methodologically nt 23:10 43:2 116:23
3:8	methodologies sure 74:20 104:14,24 105:4 surement41:5 105:10 106:6
sures 36:9 41:7	methodology 89:24
:9	methods 15:14 1148:22 53:19,20 61:16,17 ia 76:16 80:4 61:20,21 62:2,9,12 :1,15 98:21 90:16 141:23 9:14 140:1 149:2
ian 47:6 60:22	Michel 146:24
ical 20:6 53:11	Michel’s 149:17 :3 105:21 151:18 152:7
123:18,24 24:10	mid 47:8
He 114:13	71:6,16 72:15 73:1
165:3 106:9	73:12 75:11,12,15
3:5	75:18,19,25 76:9
Iful 93:14	76:12,21 77:20
>r 51:8 62:12	78:19 79:8,21 80:3
ite 39:12 87:25	80:6,10 107:5
>:23 118:13	132:22,25 134:11
ites 80:22 132:9	Morris's 74:7 76:25
teard 10:14	78:15
17	Morris-related
nterpret65:5	64:24
iterpreted	mother 19:23 99:24
7:2	move 20:24 70:20
^ad 29:23	movement 89:11
ed65:21	movie 2:11 66:19
ouril:16	movies70:9,16
poke 32:7	multiple 90:19
tate 56:8	multi-ethnic 114:13
tating 145:12	music 141:21
ake 105:6	Myron 60:8 62:22
36:19	62:22
d 114:6	M.E59:15 106:18
oi
ern 117:9	N4:l
[fy 51:2	nailed 107:22
lent 19:5 34:11	name 19:5,7,8,8
14	98:18 125:1 54:24 142:15 tents 151:6 150:25
itor 58:19	names 63:2,9 68:25 th 146:8 153:25
ling 5:7,8 11:25	narrative 89:13
12	25:24 26:4	narrow 6:1 52:9
5 137:23	Nation 109:17
ris 1:16 5:11	national 34:1,16,24
3,5,18	54:6 48:23
4,11,14,17,21	nationally 136:25
9.13	59:10,13	nature 69:11
17	60-6 13	NBER 33:24 34:1
14.17.23	63:3 34:11,21 39:11,13
14.22.24	64:7	nearly 18:17 109:16
6,17	67:11,13	necessarily 142:24
17.25	68:1,4,5	need 30:11 37:7,10
8.8.19.22.23.25	53:9 104:19
1.1.13	70:7,15 108:10 109:11,22
8:15 119:22	Northeast 50:15
5:9 129:12	note 121:25
7:24	notes 70:19
led 28:7 29:1	notetaking 105:7
:15 32:8,9	Notice 91:10 93:22 lie 115:8 93:25
hbor 115:2	number 33:5 59:17 hborhood 63:2 64:1,2 87:20 3:10,14 114:7,9 94:19,22 110:24 4:14 147:23
hborhoods	numbers 48:17 3:13 120:14
50:19	nuts 32:11
;r 15:11 23:4	-
:3 78:7 81:7,15	-Q-
:23 128:15	0 4:1
0:20 151:2	oath 4:23 154:6
ertheless 121:25	object 94:23
1:6 8:23 9:25	objecting 126:7
: 17 16:24 17:11	objection 94:12 : 15,21,24 33:20 126:3 153:16
:20,24,25 34:9	objections 4:14 •7 Q ZLQ-1 8 91 93:25
:24 107:18	»o:4,/ 8/:l
9:8 113:9,16	89:23
4:13 132:6	obliterates 51:9
6:24 137:7	observation 114:1
0:20 155:9	observed 75:12
er 98:1,6	obviously 81:7
s 95:15	124:16 152:7
spaper 109:18	offer 7:15 8:21,24
6:15 138:23	8:25 17:22 18:4
9:8	41:1052:13,19
spapers 149:10	78:18 79:6 82:12
-door 115:2	83:6,10,13 98:22
127:20	110:11,19 113:15
ding 38:18	145:19
smoker 120:24	offered 6:24 8:11
smokers 119:19	9:20
2:10,14,24	offering 33:21 80:9
stop 155:10	145:17
nal 152:3	office 12:7,9,13,15
h 36:7,10 37:1	26:21 28:21 94:3,6
:24 50:2	offices 1:7,9 23:21
iated4:23	83:6,11 119:5
the-record	122:1 123:11,21
5:24	133:10 134:20
11	13:14 26:10	145:3,17,20
7:7 123:17	148:16 153:9,10
► 1:21	opinions 5:23 6:5,13
5:16 6:3 7:3	6:22,23 8:9,20,22
1	10:25 11:13	8:24 9:18,19,25
8	17:12 18:9	10:4,17 11:5 13:5
9	43:11,17	14:11 17:22 18:2,4
21	48:10 50:20	22:22 30:24 31:10
16	63:22 71:3	32:3 33:21 39:16
2	82:2 91:21	40:13 45:4 46:19
3,17,25	93:14	52:12,19 60:4
24	94:15	63:12 65:15 67:24
3:19 105:1	71:3 73:23 75:9
5:16 118:8,18	79:5,7 82:12 89:19
):17 124:20	104:2 110:11,19
5:13 130:6	112:10 113:15
3:9 137:9	132:14,15 135:7
1:11 143:22	135:24 136:2,4
5:5 149:24	137:10,18 138:4,6
):16	33:22 42:4 90:3
*13:23 40:10	opposite 126:20
8	42:4,23	oral 84:18 85:8,17 23:17 47:7 89:9
17	140:19,20	order 89:13
y.l 148:22	organization 115:14 18:11 19:20 115:17,21,23
23	135:4 116:8,12,23 117:4 ing71:5 117:11,16 118:2 le 64:20 118:10,23 120:2 ing 106:25 121:18 123:18 ate 152:17 124:12 125:24 *:3 127:13,14
ated22:5	organizations ation 116:6,9 130:19 134:5
s 110:21	Organization's ion21:19 47:12 126:4,10
7,2156:6,8	organized 108:11
17	59:4 72:9,24	original 64:13 128:4
10	75:21 77:19	originally 27:11
22	78:1,18 80:9 114:8
ians 1:6 132:7	paraphrasing 37:17
5:9	parents 59:20 ome89:6 110:25
6:15	Parish 4:22
omes 37:4 46:6	park 59:21
:14	part 4:17 7:8 21:20 r 137:7 24:22 34:8 45:22 ine 32:3 46:22 55:9 59:1 eaches 37:4 71:5 94:8 115:16 68:3 132:18 133:9 ide 151:15 134:20 142:3 •lap 32:17 151:23
•lapping 146:13	participate 142:17 •view 32:2 52:18 151:22
•weight 96:6,6	particular 12:21 eefe 19:8 13:10 15:12 24:3 4:22 40:6 71:4,22 74:14
- 77:24 85:4 88:19
-^--particularly 9:6
L 64:3 65:4,5,12 47:7 50:15 54:5 :22	89:5 134:12,14
‘ 45:16	136:17 150:3
case 97:1.11	nartipc A-A
; 3:2 34:18	party 81:25
:14 66:17 67:16	pass 131:24
: 13 70:22	passed 96:20
6:13 128:2,7	passes 140:20
is 150:23	passing31:12
137:1292:9	pattern 77:8 100:4
110:25 143:3,7	patterns 74:22,23 3:10,24 144:10 75:13
4:15 145:8	pausing 9:10
sr54:l 79:13	pecuniary85:20 4:12 105:8 88:18
6:13 107:2,11	peer 38:22 39:2
7:20	peer-reviewed ^rs 34:25 39:11 38:14,17
5:18	people 18:15 22:14 igraph 107:1 34:15 38:3 39:20 9:17 121:24 39:24 40:9 42:1,4 2:8 126:14 47:3 52:6 53:10 7:11 129:21 54:18 59:19 61:2,3 ilegal 155:5 71:17 73:13,19 ilegals 29:6 74:18 75:3,6,14,14
5 80:20 81:24 59:17 60:6,12
7	86:13 87:3,17 62:13,17,22 63:2
3,12	102:2,4 63:14,21,24 64:6 3:8 105:19	64:24 65:5,17
3:11 114:9,25 67:11,13,17,25 3:25 127:24	68:1,4,5,7,8,18,22
3:20 136:9	68:23,25 69:1,1,12
7:10 148:19	70:7,14 71:5,16
1:15 155:9	72:15 73:1,12 74:7
lie’s 72:2	75:11,12,15,18,19
eive73:l	75:25 76:9,12,20
eption 71:19 76:25 77:20 78:15
11	78:19 79:8,20 80:3
ictly 51:6,8	80:6,10 107:5
)rmed 127:13 132:22,25 134:11
)d 15:5 28:16	phone 5:15,16 7:20
2	61:22 88:25 7:23 8:2 24:19
23	96:12 117:5 25:18,22 26:2,13 3:15 136:13 26:21 64:22
3:13 139:23	photographs 103:25
3:2	phrase 21:4
)dic 107:5	phrasing 150:14
r*r» 1^-91 1^-1^	nlivoi/.Qllv n-Q
5 101:20 137:8	pianos 114:10
mal 113:4	pick 48:1 77:5
k 19,21 129:15	picked 83:15
$:9,10 156:9	picture 103:6,12
mally 113:25	pictures 102:15,20 1:2,18 154:24 102:23,24 103:1,5 pective 45:13 103:17 104:8
11.21	140:7 112:23,24 iade59:ll 60:9	piece21:16 36:4 ):4 37:2 38:17 55:13 lading 60:10	pieces 60:21 88:16 lin 102:9	place 16:5 27:10 lins 1:4 60:6 70:9,15 107:25
14	65:17 102:6 114:11 omena 39:18	placed 49:1 omenon 60:25	placement 2:11
19	89:1	66:19
p 1:16 5:11	places 17:3 36:16
3,5,18	54:6 38:4 59:19 112:25
3.11.14.16.21	113:3
9,12	59:10,13	placing 20:15
itiff 1:12 13:16 116:13,17 117:9 :13 16:15,19	117:14 118:11,24
:5 86:1 88:10 120:2 121:8,21 itiffs 13:15	123:16,22 125:23
:25 106:4 151:9 126:10 133:25 itiff’s 93:25	134:4
itiff-specific	polls 121:10,21
:20	pool 107:14 [8:24 31:3 45:22 poor 148:23
:10	population 16:10 ining 133:2 80:13 144:3,5
is 9:15 59:8	populations 15:18
: 14 112:21	porous 79:13
5:2	portion 115:10 45:11 119:14 126:23
er 135:9	position 10:10 74:7 santries25:4 86:7 116:22 se 13:8 14:19 131:18 134:19 :18 56:7 137:22 139:11,25 sure 145:1 148:14 149:1 ty 139:3 154:9
73:5	possess 128:12
nh ZLQ-1 ^	nnecpednn 1 09-1 ^
:23 28:5 35:7	possible 89:23 :21 51:25 52:3 100:13
:12 56:7 60:4,18	possibly 120:4 :11 65:8,14 130:10
: 18 81:14	post 72:1
0:16 111:17	PowerPoint 106:23
3:5 116:7 123:6	Poydras 1:6
7:10 128:9	practice 14:23 103:2
9:6 130:12,14	practices 59:3 135:8
3:19 138:22,24	precipitously 44:17
0:17 143:13	precise 87:6 90:16 4:24 100:15,16 123:1 ited 21:15 62:19 148:5
iting 106:9	precisely 100:2
4:2 125:1	precision 107:23
its 15:1,17 37:6	predisposed 88:2
: 18 103:2	preexisting 53:23
:y 37:3,4,9	preface 77:23 108:7
: 13 46:6 77:14	prefer 57:23
120:10 121:12	preference 74:23 Ing 115:16,22 88:20,24
fences 58:20	principles 90:18
22	61:13	print 99:8,12 101:16
^rred 111:15	printed 117:25
minary 151:25	printouts 119:23
aration7:ll	prior 9:1 10:6 11:7
4	27:14 28:22 29:11 are 7:12 24:8 30:9 32:22 57:17
8	34:17 111:20 92:23 95:12 148:1
1:25	probably 26:11 ared 12:3 28:18 57:23 86:24 96:7
19	45:23 49:9 119:9,12 127:23
4	68:2,11	128:15
aring 29:21	probe 42:5
ent 24:21 54:14	problem 58:6 61:19 entation 33:10 150:6
5:22,24	procedural 13:24 entations 89:20 32:6,7
ented41:2	Procedure 4:7
entism 85:9	process 46:23 54:8 ervation6:17 54:11,21 76:4 80:1 8:13 9:21 10:2 105:9,25 107:8
20	11:8 52:15	Proctor 146:3,6,11
2-^99 1in-^	1 /!£• 1 Q 1 /IQ* 1 Q
;y 14:17 47:5 151:17,22 152:13
23	72:6 95:14 153:5,8,12
Y.9 132:8	Proctor's 147:23 alence 129:10 148:3 149:15 iously 33:23 152:8
5	73:12 106:12	produce 93:19
):4 120:13	produced 91:25
1:1	product 40:6 58:2 j 33:24 34:14 61:20 76:9 77:13
23	40:1,4,7,24 103:13
8.12	42:2,8,15	products 55:17,23
15,16,19,20,24	56:13 59:13 60:13
5,7,8,24,25	62:17 70:9,16
2,8,15,21	45:6 75:20 78:5 79:2
14,16	46:4,10 134:7
20	47:18 51:2,6	profession 84:23
9.12	52:2,5	professional 1:25 ;s40:10 47:13 4:20 79:4 84:21 ary 30:12 89:19 150:17 :ipally 23:13 156:23 :iple46:17 56:3	professionally
4:25	publish 34:21,23,23 fessor 5:7 9:13 38:8
:1 44:7 50:24	published 35:1 :11 67:22 91:9 38:19 39:2 138:22 7:23 132:10 139:8,23 141:20 0:25 142:1,9,14 149:5 150:16
)GENY 1:4 2:1	pull 27:17,22 28:6 *ram 56:10 29:2 30:13 54:14
*rams 37:5	pulled 28:10,12 34:5 ect 71:7,8 98:20 101:12 1:23 105:16
nised 119:24	pulling 32:15
noting 122:5	punches 115:7
lounce 103:21	purchase 40:6 41:21 )er 144:21 145:3 55:16 56:12 57:8 jerly 28:9 58:4,21 60:12 62:7 )osition90:4 62:17 76:18
ipective 46:5	purchases 62:10
ect 61:5	purchasing 41:3
ected58:6	purpose 30:13,20 fen 138:25 60:16
9:12	purposes 4:8 20:14
ZL1-Q	^7-9^ 6^-9 IHfVQ
:7 106:3 120:1	pursued 145:7
riding 86:3 87:1	pushes 54:22
7:2	put 8:2 12:7 16:13 dmity 113:6 18:3 21:13 29:7 :hologist59:16 40:5 41:19 43:24 :hology 33:9 51:20 60:14 62:20 : 19,19 105:4 64:3,16 75:24 6:23 81:14 99:6 105:15 lie 14:25 15:9 143:13
:22 59:24 69:17	puts 124:1
:17 71:22,24	putting 60:21 65:3 :1 79:11 95:24 66:22
:4,8 102:11	puzzle 60:21
8:18 109:6	P.A 1:9
6:16,21 128:12	p.ml:8
9:11,25 130:8	-
0:23,24 131:14	-Q--
9*17 14424	qualifications 9:25 ’ 121:17
licly 35:2	qualified 62:20 lie’s 69:21 123:15
ities 29:5	range 144:3
ity56:20	rate 134:16
itify 40:24	rates 49:18,19 50:9
•rel 128:10	50:11
sns 113:22	ratio 41:4
tion4:15 10:12	reach 59:11
8,14	53:14	reached 9:24 10:16
16	62:19 65:11	reaches 38:11
1	70:13 85:4	reaching 62:16
17	104:18,23	reacted 153:14 ):9 119:6 139:5	reaction 17:14,21 2:6 149:23	read 17:7,15 20:4,14 3:21 154:10	21:23 23:5,9 39:21 tioning 108:22	66:23 81:15,20 2:20 148:9	82:25 86:16 tionnaire	104:20 112:10 ):20	113:19 122:16 tions5:21 10:7	126:23,25 127:5
3	87:21 95:5	128:3,18 130:4,5
2:4 119:21	131:17 143:2,12
3:1,9,12,22,23	150:21,22 152:6
2:2 130:20	152:25 153:1
>•11 1/10-18	8^-1£
3:1,6	111:23 149:10
k 50:19 70:20	reads 129:21
):20,22 122:1	ready 30:19,23
1:9	real 29:2 70:19 ker 106:15 140:21
kest 45:11	realization 152:20
kly 91:17	really 13:14,20 45:1,7 138:14 14:20 21:15 22:6 ):15 29:20 43:2 47:8 i 69:14 52:23 53:6 58:17 e 127:17,18 58:24 70:4 72:9 5:18 91:17 104:4 es 124:1 105:24 117:13
- 129:1 131:19
-R- 133:8 146:15
>98:20 99:3	reason 59:23,24 L:12 84:25 131:10 d 10:24 109:13 150:23
^24	reasonable 100:2,12 ing 70:24 71:14 100:17 128:25
44:15	reasons 31:5 36:17
!llious 56:20	103:19
ittal 139:18	referring 12:1 71:14 ittals 140:6 93:18,20 107:10
116:17 20:10 126:13 128:2
:9 34:20 53:25	refers 128:4
:18 101:22	reflect92:19 106:5
4:16 106:13	reflected 108:21
4:24	reflects 44:15 71:15 lling 63:1,9 118:22 125:3
6:21	refresh 47:16
ive96:14 102:2	regard73:16 76:22 ptive 42:25 86:12 128:23 ss 50:22 91:5 153:12
gnized 69:20	regarding 7:16 10:3 llection6:19 10:17 11:5 17:6,7 :13 64:23 17:13 18:5 24:18 mmend 37:5 25:22 26:7 27:3,5 mmendation 32:3 33:21 46:4 :23 60:5 63:12 65:15 rd 16:4 17:17 67:24 71:4 82:8 :18 21:24 22:8 95:25 96:5 110:12 :7 47:4 50:25 110:20 113:16
•8 6V1	11^-18 19^-91
4:25 142:14	127:12 131:14
5:23 147:18	132:16 137:19
5:13	138:4 142:20
rds 17:20 21:7 146:11 147:23 :3,4,4 92:3	148:13
icted 119:13	regards 10:5 90:15
ice 77:3,20	regime 129:13,13
:19 79:2	regimen 131:8
icing 77:1 78:16	Registered 1:25 :23,24 4:20 156:23
ictions 129:9	regression 90:19
indant 135:25	regret 149:16
>e 1:7 94:22	regular 151:14
r 11:24 98:4	regulations 99:11
7:15 110:2	reintroduce 5:10
9:3	relate 33:20 39:15 rence 68:21 40:13 46:19 64:6 2:16,24 143:16 69:3 114:4
renced 66:10	related 7:10 24:6,7 rencing94:10 24:8 26:14 27:16 rred 10:8 34:11 29:21 53:13 68:5
2:20 116:14	remindll8:16
3:12,24 134:11	124:20,21 125:10
3:10 156:13	render 73:4
es 75:10 96:10	rephrase 76:24
ion 116:4	replow 5:20
ionship 67:25	report95:9,14
ionships68:3	96:20 100:25
ive 130:21	109:8,19 116:18
ively 43:6	119:14 125:15,21
18,19,22	77:5,7	128:24 129:2,6
ised 95:9,18	130:16
):25 101:3	reported 1:23
ance 19:25	125:23 126:3,21
3:19	156:8
ancy 14:5	reporter 1:24,25
ant 13:3,5,10	4:21,21 5:3 94:13
7,9	15:19 40:22	94:25 147:17
ble 85:3,14	156:3,22,23
25	89:2 115:22	REPORTER S
nee 2:9 7:10 9:4	156:1
13 12:2,14,20	reporting 63:7
18	28:11 32:14	128:5
1 son 'X'X-l	'XA • 1 Q O 1
1	63:15,19	101:2 121:19
18	70:6,23	128:21
24	93:8 105:14	represent5:ll 5:3,4 107:20,25 142:15 152:16
3:2,5 110:1,4,6	representation 5:14 143:22 43:12,21
>:21	representations d 18:6 21:17 41:18
10	89:21	representative *:25 133:18 137:4
5	116:18	represented 14:2
tant 88:8	representing 5:14 29:5 51:18 5:15 149:4 153:11
15	88:14,22	represents 71:15
j:16	reproach 154:20
ng 107:3,7	reputable 115:22
;mber 30:17	request 19:19 91:13
13	42:14 43:3	required 96:24 97:5
4	116:3 146:17 97:9,19 99:6
;mbered 148:22	rerunning 120:14
;mbering 41:17	rescheduled 27:24
arch 33:9 34:2	19:13 22:20
: 17,25 39:6 46:2	reviewer 38:22 39:3
:5 58:13 59:2,9	reviewing 20:23
:17,19 61:18	Reynolds5:15 11:3
:15 105:13,24	54:6,13,25 76:2
6:13,18 107:19	107:7 132:21
2:4,17,20 117:3	142:10,16 143:5
7:6 119:5	143:11 150:15
0:13 125:5	REYNOLDS/DE...
7:24 148:13	1:22
9:12 151:14,23	Re-Notice 2:12
2:12,24 153:13	rhetorical 51:19
3:13 154:12	right6:9 7:25 8:19
5:3	11:23 16:6,10,18
archer 59:16	16:20 17:8 18:1,21
5:4	18:22 22:2,3 25:25
rved 4:10,16	28:14 30:5,6,10
>tant 42:23,25	31:2 34:12 35:14
urces 117:12	44:24 45:3,23 46:1
ect 133:14	48:4 49:3,9,10
4:25	51:24 52:8 56:14
onse 77:12	57:9 64:15 65:18
1 -A	(\1-\A
:14	69:3,16 70:16,17
onsibility	72:8,19,22 74:3
1:24	77:17 78:12 79:6
onsible 154:3	79:10,24 80:16,17
onsive 19:19	81:11 82:5,10,21
:1 43:1,2 45:5	83:23 84:23 91:16
:12 52:1,4 91:19	93:10 94:20 95:10
:22	96:7 97:12,13,25
onsiveness4:15	98:8 99:15,16
21:6	100:25 101:13
It 72:22 73:2	107:16,17,24
Its 119:20 121:3	110:18 112:2
2:2 126:4,5	115:4,11,20 120:8
in 147:7	120:18 121:9
ined92:10	124:4 126:5,11
9:4	130:16 133:12,13
iner 92:9	134:2,23 138:11
ew31:17 53:23	139:24 141:1,7
:24,25 119:20	148:14
9:22	Rights 89:11
ewed 12:23	rigorous 116:24
16:24	_s_
108:18	S4:l 106:12
114:25 130:25	sack 38:2
ils 87:10	Sacks2:14 118:4,21 145:8 119:17
's65:9	safer 78:3
srt 146:3,13	Salem 143:3,10,24
}:5 151:11	144:10,15 145:2,8
:r 1:15 5:13	Salems 111:16
15:2 134:13	Sales61:25
3:10 137:10	Sat42:9
-*:1^	save 4:14
1113:24	saw 17:7,15 21:22 ;r 2:14,16 33:5 82:21 138:16
23	106:17 143:16,20
7:5 115:13,17	saying 36:21 54:16 5:21,25 116:2,7 77:23 78:23 108:7 5:8,11,18,22 122:19 123:18 7:4,10 118:2,3,9 133:17 135:1
3:21,22 119:7	says 60:22 74:5,5 ?: 11,17 120:2 119:17 126:6 1:2,6,13,21,21 127:7,11,19 131:5
I -9/1 199-1 Q	, ~
1:13 125:2,4,14	scare 53:5
j:24 126:2,4,10	scattered 58:9
>:14 127:1,2,11	scheme 56:10
7:12,14 128:9	Schlesinger 1:9
):22 130:17	23:21 25:1,3,9,17
1:11	25:21 93:3
jr's 128:22	scholar 84:22,25
scholarly 34:20
hly 80:23 87:5	35-24 38:20,22
21	138:13	! 5 2:3
49:21 74:9	scholars 53:10
25	154:11	scholarship 34:22
H4:3	35-2
ing 50:2 116:5	school 33:6 81:2,5
):9	136:18,18,19,22
136:7 37:1	,36:23
:21 5:15 11:3	schools 136:17
6,13,25	76:1	science61:21
7:7 132:21	104:14,21,24
>:15 143:4,11	105:9 106:5 107:9
^15	scientific 53:12
: 15	sensitive 40:3,9 42:2
itifically 74:11	sent 12:4,13 23:4 8:25 139:12 28:12,24 64:9,10 »e6:2 52:10 64:17 93:5,19 94:6 3blings 44:20 146:19 147:1,8 ing 4:11 151:7 152:13
ched 147:11	separately 94:24
nd 20:24 21:14	seq4:7
:9 28:2,19 33:15	series 109:23
:4 98:10 127:11	serve 133:5
8:7 145:23	served 39:2
et46:16 103:16	set56:9 77:1 90:18 0:1 90:21,22 107:20 etaries 29:6 121:3 138:1 148:6 *2:17 42:10,14 156:7
:9 58:12 91:11	sets 109:3
1:21 122:5	setting 74:19 107:1 3:4 129:9,10 136:16
1:24 132:4	severe 129:24
8:14 140:17	Sexton 1:14 3:10 5:6 0:13 5:10 7:22 8:6 9:10 ig5:25 72:4 9:12 11:22 44:6,13
zLd-99^-1^	^n-1» 9^ 66-4 Q1-^
53:9 94:2	94:16,21 95:2,4
2:18,22 103:5 117:17,22 124:8 3:15,18 117:18 131:23 155:7,19 8:6,15 128:3	155:20
131:21	shape 36:16 86:13
:tion54:9	share54:17 61:6,7 :tive 46:13 73:5 76:4 79:23
ng36:5	sheet 127:15
esters 35:9	Shell 1:6
i-truck 50:1	Sherman 6:15,24 112:19 19:14 8:11 9:20 10:1,19 :3 64:18 150:10 52:14 108:13 0:12 152:19 109:2 110:5 138:8 ling 28:15 94:13 142:7
:24 149:17	shift 43:4 140:3
0:7	shoehorned 24:3
or 136:19	SHOOK 1:13
e 14:5 32:24	shortcut 23:11 :6 69:25 71:19 86:23
:2 92:18 104:5	shorthand 23:8,10 0:16 141:22 108:16 156:9
tly 29:23	situation 12:23 87:9
58:9	132:25
®un80:18	Sketch 2:10
®uns58:9	slightest 152:19
s58:9	slope 43:5
711:16 41:23	small 36:7,12 37:7
16	65:24 103:3 37:13,24 58:9 77:7
7:17 122:2	113:23
1:4,9	smaller 34:7 135:9
ring 115:11	smoke 47:3 54:18
is 47:5 123:22	59:12 70:25 71:14
):23	71:17 111:3
>0:15	122:12 127:24
igs 20:9	140:12
40:23	smoked 110:20
iture68:14,17	111:17 137:20
18	138:22 139:7
ficance 119:4	143:6,15
2:15	smokeless 78:3
ficant 45:3	smoker 33:9 46:11
5	122:24,25	53:1 71:6 76:8
ng4:10	105:5,17,23
loiOi-1 ^ n	ion-o/i
arity 122:13	53:17 54:11 55:6,8
Y.2	55:16,22 56:4,12
arly 17:12	58:15 59:7 60:11
le41:4 56:15	62:16 75:19
12	104:15 119:19 ler 40:9	122:10,11,14,23 lify 88:3	132:20 135:3,5 ly 39:17 40:20	140:4
10	42:18 121:2	smoker’s 127:21
): 13,19 151:2	smoking 15:1 16:25
re 71:15	17:8,16,25 18:7
e 58:8	45:7,9 53:4 54:21
irs 86:9	55:22 56:16,20
3:13 31:2	57:5,13,18 58:14
r 19:3,4,10,11	59:6,22 60:17,23
13	83:21 99:21	60:24 62:18 63:4 ):17 43:3 45:20	72:16,24 73:3
13	62:13 66:23	75:13 76:7 77:2,5
19	102:19	77:8,21 78:17,20
*:24	78:24 79:3 80:1
ig 103:7	82:17 83:4 87:5,10
:9,14,18,25 96:5 117:13
:10 97:6 98:15	sorry 29:23 81:23 :18 100:4,7,11 87:23 124:23
0:20,24 101:5	sort7:22 32:10 88:1 1:10,15 102:7 109:25 114:18
2:12,25 103:9	sought4:18
4:16 105:11,25	sound 6:8
6:7 108:19	sounds 7:24 100:2
0:13,17 111:2,8	source 85:19 86:19 5:19 116:14 102:3
8:12,24 121:9	sources 85:12,17
2:3 123:24	South 36:5
5:5,25 126:18	southeast 1:11 6:22 127:3,21 36:10
7:25 129:10	southern 36:13 0:9,25 131:5,15 38:10,14
2:23,24 134:13	space 17:4
6:10,17 137:10	speak93:13 153:5,8
8:10,15,25	speaker 7:23
0:5,10,11,15,20	speaking 154:5
2:21 144:25	specialist 145:14
5:1	specialists 141:24
loolino	cnprifir 9 1 • 1 f\ ZLQ• 1 0
al 14:14,23	82:20,23 112:19
:18 59:15 77:4 132:11 136:22
:14 79:25 103:2	specifically 4:10,12 3:13 104:20 9:3 10:2 17:6 21:5 5:3,9 106:5 21:25 22:10 23:24 7:9 136:10 30:22 45:4 56:11 7:4 56:23 59:10 62:15 sty 21:6 48:13 67:12 75:18 80:11 2:1 122:4 83:8 101:21 109:3 ^logical 53:18 110:12 112:6 5:3 124:22 127:19 84:7 132:17 135:7 40:19 97:1,11 143:25 144:11
:12 101:6	specifics 16:9 37:10 ebody 16:1 63:6 45:24
:20 89:10 150:3	speech 58:6 77:14
0:19	spending 50:3
ewhat 122:11	spent 61:9 92:4
71:11 116:4	spoke 30:7
ter 100:13	spoken 30:2,4 82:8 listicated 117:5 147:3,5
sored 76:14	statistically 122:25
3	statistician 90:17
ting 76:15 80:3	stay 43:6 75:23 86:6
15	89:23
ads 58:10	stayed 47:18,19
ire 1:6	staying 90:21
22	stays 51:7
29:3 125:21	Steinway 114:9
5:3,9,15 128:21	STEVEN 1:10
; 138:2	stick 38:1 56:4 62:5 ces 73:23 105:15
434:1 40:16	sticking 63:21
5:9	stipulated 4:3
4ard61:17,20	stop 35:8 134:15 3:14,15 114:12 140:20
1:17,18	stopped 140:10
4point70:2	store 45:16
2:11	stories 86:20 109:9 5:25 8:7 136:15 140:7
2:10	story 52:23 85:21 ed 87:5 99:18 88:19 135:10
3:7,21101:10	straightll:l
1-1/1 1/10-01	efronrtDlOl-O 100-1
s 100:23	135:1
4:22 45:25	strategy 141:9
1,5,21,21	streak 84:6
1:13 145:6	streamline 6:1 52:9
ment 15:15	Street 1:6
15,17	74:7	stress56:18
5:5 139:17	strictly 135:4
ments 18:5	stronger 98:6
24	101:20	strongly 47:9 126:8
1:6,8,10 108:19	strong-willed 84:5
3:24 109:7,14	struck 14:8 113:19 3:25 139:4 127:9
):9,21	structural 104:14 s 15:4 46:9 104:21,24
23	49:1,2,20,24	student 136:16
11	57:7,12,17 148:24 155:3
2,12	98:12	students 148:19
13	101:7,17 149:9 152:23
-of-the-art78:6	studies 34:13 39:13
10	41:18 42:7 53:23 -specific 49:7 59:18 61:1 63:3,8
:23 71:25	Superman 2:11 66:8 5:16 106:13,17 66:9,13,18 67:1
7:5	supervision 156:10
iy 60:22 63:25	supplemental 2:9 6:20 107:4 11:13 12:2,14,20 9:8 28:11 32:20 39:15 lying 61:10 46:3 63:19 66:18 F 14:1 34:9 70:23 93:8 106:4 :18 64:10,11 108:5 110:6
:3 130:16 153:1	supplied 7:9 11:14 committee 12:8,12 82:2 4:14 116:23 119:12 ject 49:5 120:11
ective 74:12	support 8:22 60:4 :9,14 63:12 65:15 134:1
nitted9:4	suppose 148:8 )oena93:18 153:10
:9	sure 19:9 25:25 'egions 37:11 28:20 32:5,7 35:11 ;equent33:3 38:7 43:23 44:5 :11 95:17 101:2 49:15 50:21 64:5 ;et 32:19 34:7 83:25 95:1 100:14
tfanti™ 8-01	im-HOI 107-01
itle 36:5	121:10 125:12
ess 56:1	128:8 147:17,20
inct 40:12	152:15 153:7
;er 115:7	155:16
icient 16:4	Surgeon 95:8,13,17 :24 96:19,24 97:10,23 jest 55:4 119:25 98:2,14 99:6,14 jested 15:19 100:24 101:2,7 :14 109:7,18
jesting 104:7	surprise 115:3
4:9,14	surprised 121:11
;ests55:13	survey 41:2,21 47:5 ible 85:13 53:20,22 59:2,20 0:15 106:18 117:6,13 e 1:6,20 118:11,24 123:16 26:3 75:5 124:22 125:4 marize48:14 126:5,16 127:12 :9 84:11 132:22 133:11 mary63:8 134:4
7:15	surveys 59:6 61:24 mer 114:12 121:8 133:16,21
5:24	talked23:15 25:18 ey's 127:16 27:19 28:25 30:16 sptible 85:8 47:1 64:21 71:10 ect 131:10 79:10 110:16 zerland 67:21 112:23 142:22
11	146:25 150:25
n5:2 156:5	talking 19:16 31:4 an 129:14 49:11 98:8 108:17 57:14,17 68:1,5 128:24 129:17
8,19	69:2 131:2,20 137:1
--talks 75:1
-—--Tammany 4:22
->1	tape 121:1
i	91:12 92:13	target 55:5,16 56:11 5:8 80:12
120:21	targeted 62:15 ing 120:19 143:25 144:2,10
■on 119:21	tax 45:15,18,18,24 3:1,9,18 48:22,25 49:18,19 red 37:10 49:21 50:9,11,15
ed 86:10,11	taxation 48:5,15,19
35:8 47:20	taxes 45:10,25 47:17 19 68:13 85:24 ai-ik aq-oa aq-6
-:14 108:2	technical 13:17
):20 114:15	69:23 128:13
):6 131:16	133:2
>: 12,19 140:8	technique 62:14
i:10,15 154:7	techniques 53:22
11:6 2:5 4:6	Tecum 2:13 91:10
19,21	21:12	93:22 94:1
10	50:22 91:5	tedious 149:10 5131:25	teenage 17:2 away 88:1,4	teenager 87:7
telephone 1:11 30:8
■aways46:18	119:3
3:14 9:5 11:9	telephonic 26:6 27:1
18	18:15,22	television 98:20
19	27:25 29:20	99:2 101:12
22,23	46:24	tell 19:9 26:22 71:3
9	58:14 66:21	89:2 103:4 115:1,4
11	80:21 102:4	136:1 152:18 5:3,9,12,23	telling 72:10 85:21 7:17,25 141:20	88:18
5:15 152:11	temporally/spatia...
:6	Thanksgiving 103:8
i27:20	thereof 4:17
16:5 51:10 60:15	thesis 36:14
:3 74:24 86:6	thing 66:24 71:18 led 50:14 56:4 72:19 84:1,9 98:9 :13 105:13 110:16 lency 51:10 61:4 113:18 137:16 is 45:15 153:4
i42:3 86:6	things 6:1 14:21 3:1 133:2 29:7 40:23 53:3 is 15:20 41:25 56:21 59:4 69:9 :1 62:11 84:8 72:7 78:2 79:14 :3 89:24 105:8 84:20 85:14,15 8:17 110:23 87:11 89:14 102:4 1:9 121:17 107:18 108:25 tRENCE 1:14 109:5,6,22 120:23 "y 5:10 131:9 138:1 36:11 142:10
id 72:1	think 10:11 22:15 fied 6:11 13:12 24:13 26:23 31:12 :7 33:23 78:7 51:17,19 61:15 :7 92:8 95:22 62:9 64:6 66:20
9-90 19^-6	I'X-l 19 \ 1Q7ZL-^
8:1 154:16,17 79:20 81:2,13 fy 5:3 17:6,13 84:16 87:24 89:18 :1 75:16 78:9 91:11 95:2 100:12 6:6,6	100:16 106:10,19
fying 81:2	107:22 110:9,21
2:17 150:17	121:13 122:23
monies 85:24 123:3 131:10 mony 6:15,18 133:19 134:2,20
1,8,15	8:10	139:15,24 144:21
:18 11:7 20:1,2 146:19 147:1 :12,13 28:20	148:17,18,21
: 1,15 81:10 88:5 149:20,21 154:24
:21 92:23 95:13	thinking26:12 :21 102:21 73:20
4:17 112:10	third 1:11 34:18 8:8 142:20,23 68:13 122:8
9:25 150:2,8	thought 14:9 17:23 6:8 21:23 134:6
nk 13:19 44:5	three 14:20,21 2:6 155:11 39:14 111:21 nks 142:16 119:18 128:2
7:16	52:9 82:9,19 91:18
st 36:15 130:6 100:9 102:19 3:6	103:24 112:1
122:21	132:7 142:17,19
4:16 7:5 13:2,6 155:18
24	15:2,17,22	today’s 111:20
1	17:3 27:21	told 27:14 29:1 52:8
8,17	30:21,23 79:20 86:19
7.8	48:15 50:14 111:19 142:3
2	56:5 57:7,9	top 33:4 39:13
4.9	63:22 72:6 126:13
18	74:8 79:9,16	total 26:3
3	86:21 87:5,17	totally 44:2 51:17
24	89:1,22 92:3 51:18
4	93:12 95:23	town 36:7 113:1
12	100:23	towns 36:12 37:7,13
1:5,10,14	37:24
3:19 109:21	trade 116:14 118:4
7:4 118:17	118:11,22 125:16
3:5 125:9	140:23
):15 131:23	tradition 114:7
5:12 137:20	traffic 132:8
2*11 01 01	tront'/'pi Knrl 1
):15 142:16	105:7 146:23
1:24 146:17	147:1,9 149:17
):21 152:25	150:7,8,9,11,22
5:1	152:6,10,13,19
ly 27:23	156:11
5	5:19,22 16:17	transcripts 149:24 8 47:1 109:9 149:25 151:5,7,8 Y.6 154:17 151:17,25
cco 1:4 2:2 11:4	transitional 123:5
14,15	15:2,8	transmitted 146:23
24	52:25 53:7	transmitting 144:23
17	81:3 82:23 147:8
8	96:1,13 99:5	travel 23:23
1:13 105:10	traveling 132:6
5:6 109:22	travels 132:7
5:25 127:13,18	treated 154:13
1:12 133:21	trends 137:5
*:19 146:12	trial 6:15,16,16,24 ):4 151:10,18 6:25,25 8:11,12,12 ^ 5:13 6:3 24:20 9:20,21,21,25 10:1
9	31:2 42:9	10:1,19,19,20 11:7
: 17,22 30:20,23 29:15 30:8 34:17 :19 49:12 52:14 37:6 39:13 42:6 :15,15 63:11	68:14 69:2,9 81:6
:14 75:17 78:18 83:16 84:14 95:21 :13 83:6 85:24 108:20 111:21 2:21 108:3	119:19,19 121:24
9:16 110:2,4	126:13 127:17,22
3:17 115:1	128:7 131:9
2:6 150:2,8	138:18 150:23
4:18	153:25
s 10:6 11:7	two-and-a-half-h... :11 79:7 108:14 24:15 29:16
161:12 89:23	two-page 117:25
30:21	type 12:4
ble 155:2	types 79:13 90:25 ks 50:5 111:18
6:21,22 10:16	typical 47:2
:21,22 11:2 15:9	typically 34:24
:7 17:16,25 21:2	typos 104:20
:7 49:8,22 72:23	-
:1 80:15 81:21	-SI-
:11,25 83:1,4	U4:l
•^611 8Q-Q	Uh-huh 43:20
2:13 122:22	unambiguous :zu
9:5 135:21	unaware 124:23
1:6,15 142:7,8	unclear 120:18
6:10	underage 55:6,8,16 tworthy85:3 56:11,16,23 57:6 h 156:6 58:14,15 59:6,7,11 >:13 35:17 61:6 60:11 62:16 63:3 :1 88:2 71:17 75:14,19,25 ig 35:16 42:5 132:19,23 135:3,5
:3 44;3 49:15	underestimating :19 73:25 75:2 130:25
:20 78:19	undergraduate 5:17 109:25 35:12,13,19 155:4
1142:10	underlines 123:25
ied 720	understand 8:8 ling 122:21 10:13 16:21 18:16 3:6 29:4 30:2,10 35:7 12-24 19-1 24 35:10,18 42:1 :19 22:19,23 43:15 48:19 53:7 :14,15 25:11,12 54:7,20 57:21 :13 26:11,12,24 60:17,19 64:14
9	75:12 78:6,9	valuative 87:13
1:15 105:5,11	value 46:6 87:16
5:17,23 106:7	values 85:10
7:8 109:12	Vantage 110:25
3:5 134:12,17	111:12 143:3,10
7:21,24	143:24 144:10,15
;rstanding	145:8
25	19:22 20:15	variations 37:13
18	42:6 57:11	varied 48:20 129:24
5:25 108:18	variety 36:8,17
2:25 156:12	64:22 96:17
Tstood 21:23	various 69:1278:4
25	56:2 75:25	130:21
3,5	78:14	vary 49:7
2:19	varying 62:1
ippy37:18,19	ventilation 79:13
ue37:19	venue 150:18
ed 15:4 46:8	154:20
1,12	98:12	venues 133:21
13	101:7,17	vested 85:20 86:3
erse 110:1,3	88:18
1:1	veteran 89:10 1/1 1
l:ll	victims 22:4
alistic 128:14	view72:17,21 inging 114:1 101:25 138:24 ited 92:18 151:5 154:2
1:16 10:3,18	viewpoints 96:13
4,14	68:1,4,8	violated 135:20
22	69:1 70:7,15 144:18
16	visit 30:21
4:15,23 15:14	visiting 94:21
22	41:24 42:3	visual41:18 76:16
23	66:12 75:19 80:4
8	80:17 89:15	vitae 91:20 92:12,21
19	100:10	voice 153:15
1:20 103:2,13	volume7:19
1:6,13 105:3	voluminous 106:10
7:19 141:24	_
1146:7,10	-5V-
154:10	W 118:3,21 123:15
_ 124:13
_V__wag 37:21,22
tion50:4	waived 4:13
teham 106:22 154:13 156:15
ted 24:23	ways 37:19 42:1 110:12 11:16 45:11 46:12 47:10 :6 33:17 35:17 53:8 64:23 79:2 :10 52:8,19 53:5 86:11 96:17 :24 66:24 73:7 120:14 134:17
:22 77:17,25	week 6:12,12 11:15 : 14 87:24 94:14 23:19 24:6,11,16 : 19 108:25 25:11,15 29:13,19 9:1 115:9,10 30:12 31:19 1:4 124:4 125:8 148:22
9:10 132:13	week’s 29:25 31:11 3:16 135:23,25 31:23 32:2
7:13 148:21	weigh 84:23 85:1 4:11 90:25
ted 20:4 27:17	weighing 85:16
:1 76:9 107:24	weight 90:1
ting 121:12	welcome 142:18
ning 96:25	well-known 39:17
: 16,17 98:1,4,6	well-suited 85:3
:10,10,14,24	went 98:6 147:10
:7,14 101:8,15	weren’t 32:25 56:22
Q-1^ 1^1-8	wp'rp 7-99 71-1^
n’t 19:7 25:5,25 95:6 98:8 121:14 :1 27:21 28:6 142:1 147:18 4:23	153:17 155:21
te 155:1	we’ve 5:9 19:16 anan2:15 46:12 50:18 93:21 4:13,16 125:3 130:8 142:22
5:15 126:15	wholly 128:14
9:23 130:7	wide 38:12 53:21 7:18,20 21:14 80:18
:16 38:5 40:4,8	widely 46:16 58:10 :1 60:14 62:20 69:19 : 19 75:11,22,24 win61:7
:2,10,24 80:5	Winston 61:8
:2 87:15 89:5	witness 4:5,24 8:1 :17 104:4 50:21 93:14 5:22 106:11 142:11 153:24 4:20 116:21 155:8,16 156:5
6:3 132:24	witnesses 20:3 88:10
3:5 144:16	woman 83:20 137:5
5:12 149:1	wonder 64:2
2:17 153:4	wonderful 114:11
lering 33:18	Y42:14
160:15 75:23	yeah 19:20 28:24
23	96:7 97:4 29:12 35:7 41:16 7:16 42:12 62:19 63:1 Is 68:24 86:1 63:21 90:4 102:8
8	103:5 116:10 16:2 24:7 26:25 117:7,15 118:7
22	52:9 62:8 123:17 129:4 >:5,6,8,16,21 140:16 147:14 5:19 118:12,24 148:21 150:22 3:8,10 144:8,13 151:21 152:2
Led 84:9	year 13:1 81:1 96:19 ring 23:13 98:19,25 99:5,9
25	54:1 92:4 138:11
):17 104:12	years 17:3 36:4 3:22 118:10 47:15,17 80:23 7:7 151:9 81:6 110:16 1:23 113:11 146:7 ring-class 151:19
kl3	York 16:24 17:11 ls60:20 49:18,21 50:16,17 d69:7 109:12 109:8 113:9,16
1 1/1-9	11/1-1/1 1 ^•'"K
y75:2	young 34:15 39:24 dn't 14:6 51:12 40:9 52:5 54:10
14	102:7 56:3 57:4 58:2,20 *:16 121:11 59:19 72:1 75:13
):12	younger 19:4,11 >ped 153:22 20:13 39:20 42:1 i 43:17 42:22 60:17,25
is 126:14	youngest 13:15,20 ng 107:11 19:10
>: 14 150:3	youth9:6,16 10:23 ;en 54:2 150:16 11:10 14:4,6 21:2 i:2l 21:20 22:1,4,11 ig 44:2 51:17 27:16 30:25 31:7,9
18	58:18,23 32:3 43:18,19 45:9
4	47:10 51:9,10,11 e 153:1 52:20 54:8,8,21
- 57:6 60:5 62:24
-^- 63:13 64:7 65:15
:14 43:24,25 69:18 72:16 75:10
--- 79:22 80:6,12,19
--- 137:1 144:4
;hs21:13 22:3	192814:6
:25 41:13 42:8	1957 7:5 13:1 14:8 :10,16 45:5 46:4 16:2 100:6
:20 59:12	1960s 95:19 96:9 3:25 144:11 136:20
147:12	196495:10,13
--1965 96:19,24
-6- 106:19
>25828(19) 1:4	1969 97:14 98:4 0000(19) 1:3 106:25
----197098:6,13,25,25
-1- 99:1
'3:3,5 11:17,20	1970s 7:8,16 8:14,22 :1,17 13:10 9:7,17 11:1114:6 :13,22 31:18 27:16 30:25 31:9 :20 33:19 34:19 48:6 49:23 52:20 :14 46:3 63:18 60:5 65:16 76:10 :13 66:17 70:23 76:16 77:19 78:21 6:2 107:12 %;9 136:21
8:6	144:25
18:13	197199:12
:4	1973100:10,21,24 1124:11 rni-fi 1 r is
Jl-'	1978127:12
:3	197966:18,25
,29:9	1980118:1,9,20 3:7 122:21 123:13
:12	1980s7:9,16 8:15 -802:14 9:17 11:11 30:25 !1:11 31:9 48:7,9 49:23 3:8 52:21 60:6 62:25 3:11 65:16 77:19 78:21 0:23 131:7
3:12	1981 125:18 128:20
14:7	1982 34:17 124:11 7:6 57:13 60:23 199057:13,17
:25 100:2,7	I994 138:16 140:14
166:16	1995 80:24
10:16	_
H 1:1	_2_
0:2541:1342:8 2 2:10 3:4,11 44:7 :7	44:1151:2
:3,7	2:0024:13
>16:1	2:311:8
S2:9	116:12 134:13
47:8	135:16 138:2
70:25 71:15	60-page 33:2
/2005 36:22	6001:20
1:7 2:5 27:3	641081:16
9	65 97:9,19
7:6	663:5 97:19
7:6	69 98:8
7:6	-
5:20	-1-
6:7 28:3,9	7098:1
1:15	70s 47:24,25 48:8 5:20 57:9,11 62:25 63:1
_ 63:13 95:19,24
3_ 107:7 111:14
1 3:5 66:2,6,15 116:6,12 123:4,7
2,10,12,17	137:6 138:3
14,21	70:8	701 1:6
■82 2:15	701391:6
17:8	7199:9
:20	73100:8 110:16 61:12 139:7
zj:oyi:o,iu	sus 4/:z:> s/:iu
19	93:21 63:13 111:14 51:21 116:12
4	81116:18 119:14
1:6	88109:18
5	9
4	3:6,7,8,10,10 9th 1:7 2:5 7:19,20,24	9:00 24:12 5:19 121:25 913:6
1:9	94109:19 139:7
18:1,8,20 r: 14,17
6:24 47:23,24
6	109:9 1:5,6
6
5	3:8 124:6,10 1:19 125:2 7:24 52:24
24	109:9 116:6