IN the: united states district court
FOR THE DISTRICT OF KANSAS
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	)
)
Plaintiffs,	)
)
VS.	) CASE NO. 9 4-2202-JWL
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO.,)
)
and	)
) .
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
)
• Defendants,	}
DEPOSITION OF JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D.
(PART 2)
February 23, 1996
Job No. 32291
I INITFn
Q-	(BY MR. LEYH) Professor, let me ask if
you agree with this: "Before the early 1950s, there was no reliable scientific evidence suggesting that cigarette smoking caused laryngeal cancer or lung cancer in smokers"?
MS. McDOLE: Can I hear that
again?
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) "Before the early 1950s,
there was no reliable scientific evidence suggesting that cigarette smoking caused laryngeal cancer or lung cancer in smokers."
A.	There are perpetual references in the
literature, but the word there is "scientific," what we define as scientific evidence.
Q.	You don't have an opinion whether or not
that is true or not?
A.	I can tell you there was a lot of
anecdotal, information that was available. If we're talking about systematic scientific inquiry -- that statement may be correct if we're talking about systematic scientific inquiry.
Q.	All right. I'm going to read you another
statement. "In the early 1950s and mid-1950s, respectively, evidence accumulated that was sufficient to raise a scientific concern that cigarette smoking may be related to lung and laryngeal cancer."
A.	Oh, I think that concern was there long
before the 1950s.
q.	So you agree that it was there in the
Fifties, but think it was also there earlier?
A.	Yes.
Q.	One more -- well, just one more. By the
mid- and late 1950s, respectively, there emerged a bona fide scientific controversy as to whether cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and laryngeal cancer?
A.	Yes, I think that is correct.
Q.	And did there in the 1960s, was there a
bona fide scientific controversy in the 1960s as to cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and laryngeal cancer?
A.	I think, that debat i was probably pretty
well over by the time of the Surgeon
General's report.
Q.	In 1964?
A.	Yes..
Q.	And whc won the debate?
A.	Well, I think we all know who won the
debate.
Q.	Why don't you tell us?
A.	Whether it should have been won that way
or not, I don't know. I suppose that those scientists who argue that we shouldn't look at any other factors besides cigarettes won the debate. And I think I indicated those sources much earlier on, those who had talked about pollution in the air, internal combustion engines, factories belching out smoke, various chemical compounds that were being introduced into our environment, so on and so forth.
Q.	Name me a scientist that felt that we
should not look at any other factors.
A.	A scientist who would say that we
shouldn't look at any other factors, I would say and I m not sure whether would call him a scientist or not, but I
would put E. Cuyler Hammond in that category. He certainly never looked at any other factors.
Q.	Who is he?
A.	He was the major figure
Q.	You said Hammond?
A.	Hammond.
Q.	Who else; anybody else?
A.	Well, I can't be sure of what they said
because I haven't studied tnat question, but - -
q.	Well, you just told me that --
MS. McDOLE: Wait a minute. Let him f inish.
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) -- the ones who won the
debate were those who said you shouldn't look at ar.y other factors other than cigarette smoking,
MS. McDOLE: Let's get the --
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) You just said that, didn't
you?
MS. McDOLE: Let's get the last answer back. Let him finish, and then he can answer the next question. Jim, think about the
last answer. He cut you off.
THE WITNESS: What was the last question?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) The last question was --
MS, McDOLE: Let's have her repeat it.
MR. LEfH: No, that's too time consuming.
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Can you think of any other
person -MS. McDOLE: That’s another broken promise.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Other than the one you've
mentioned who said that as of 1964 we ought not look at any other factors other than cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer?
A.	Well, ] think that's a bit of rephrasing
of what - -
Q.	Well, the record will reflect --
MS. McDOLE: Just a minute. Let him finish his answer.
A.	I think we're talking about two different
things. There is a scientific medical debate in the Fifties about the sources of
lung cancer, and the way that the debate comes out in 1964 through the Surgeon General's report is that these other factors may be interesting but they are not worth pursuing. That does not mean that individuals didn't think there may have been other factors that would be a source of lung cancer, but they said smoking was, as I believe it says on the packs today, smoking causes lung cancer.
q,	(BY MR. LEYH' Are those individuals who
said ir. 1964 that other factors may be interesting but they shouldn't be pursued?
A.	Those factors that 1 named from the 1950s.
Q.	Okay. Did they also say that no other
factor other than cigarette smoking ought to be pursued?
A.	They wouldn't want to say that because
that would put them out of business.
Q.	They didn't say that, did they?
A.	No.
q.	Do you have any reason to believe they
believed that?
A.	Well, they haven'- exactly been in hot
pursuit since 1964.
Q.	Who are you talking about?
A.	The scientific community.
Q.	What do you mean they "haven't been in hot
pursuit"?
A.	Well, there are various theories that
float out and about, about, what causes cancer and what causes lung cancer. And from what I read in the newspaper, and I'm certainly no authority on this subject, many individuals now, today, talk about certain kinds of genetic predispositions with respect to cancer in general. I presume that might apply to lung cancer in particular.
Q.	other than your work on this case, have
you ever done an investigation, historical study, of the risks, of the health risks of cigarette smoking?
A.	Besides working on this case?
Q,	That's right.
A.	Well, this isn't the only case I've worked
on, so I would have to answer no, because I'm not a medical scientist, number one; and number two, questions that I ha^e been asked to look at have to do with the
awareness issues.
Q.	So you've never done a historical study of
the scientific community's belief about the risk of cigarette smoking; is that correct?
A.	I've never done a systematic study, no.
q.	You've read the newspaper, but you're not
an expert on that?
A.	I've also read a historical record with
respect to what the scientists were debating in. the Fifties and Sixties.
0.	Would you identify what we've marked as
Exhibit 3?
A.	Yes, that's my general presentation to
Paul Koethe and Steve Kaczynski, dated November 16, 1995, when we met in Houston. They asked me to prepare a summary of what my findings were to date in regard to the questions that I was asked to investigate relating to this case .
Q.	Was that the first written report or
summary you provided to the lawyers for the tobacco companies?
Q.	How long did this meeting last?
A.	I'm going to guess. I think I would say
approximately three hours. No, let me change that, four hours. I think we started around 8:00 a.m. and ended around noon.
Q.	And did they ask you to address points
other t.han those raised in this November 16th report, in your expert report ?
A.	Points other than those raised?
Q.	Yes. Did they ask you to write your
expert report to include matters that you didn't include in Exhibit 3?
A .	No .
Q.	Did they ask you to not address in your
expert report matters you did address in Exhibit 3?
MR. KACZYNSKI; Do you want to see Exhibit 3?
THE WITNESS: I think I remember what it is.
A.	(Witness examines document.) No, I can't
be -- I would say, no. I can't think of anything.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Okay. You say here in your
"Conclusions" section, Page 5, "Only the deaf, dumb, halt, and idiots would not have known about this controversy, both over definition of cigarettes (addictive, et cetera), and possible health consequences of smoking."
Is that a statement that refers to the public awareness in the 1950s?
A,	I guess.
Q,	You wrote it didn't you?
A.	Well, I punched it out on the computer. I
guess I did, didn't I? Yes.
Q.	So does it refer to the public awareness
in the Forties?
A.	Well, I'm sure that what I meant by that
was referring to the massive amount of coverage given to the health issues as they were being presented to the public in the 195 0s.
Q.	Okay. So it doesn't apply to the Forties?
A.	It doesn't apply to the Forties?
Q.	That's my question.
A.	It could apply to the Forties.
you would have to be deaf, dumb, halt, or an idiot to not have known about the controversy?
A.	If you went to public schools, you knew
about the health issues. Whether you knew about the controversy or not, I don't know. The controversy builds into the 1950s. The controversy took place in the 1950s. So if you're talking about the 1940s, it's a little bit difficult to -I' tn sure I must have been referring to the controversies there. I must have been referring to the 1950s.
Q.	You're actually referring to two
controversies, that over the definition of cigarettes and that over possible health consequences of smoke; is that right?
A.	Whatever the opening two questions that
are listed there, which are the two that I was asked to --
Q.	Well, let me show you the conclusion and
ask you if I've correctly stated the two controversies that conclusion refers to.
A.	That's what they refer to.
Q.	Okay. It's your testimony that those
conclusions do not apply to the Forties?
.	MS. McDOLE: That's what he
said.
A.	That's not what I said. I said there was
a controversy. There was no controversy in the 1940s; therefore, so that we're perfectly clear on this, this refers to the 195 0s.
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) I understand.
A.	This says nothing, there is no comment at
all about tl,e 1940s.
Q.	Right. My question was, professor,
whether or not that same statement could be made about the 1940s. I believe you've said, "no." Is that a fair description of what we've heard in the last few minutes?
A.	Well, I hate to say no or yes on
everything because life really isn't that simple when it gets down to it, and every good historian knows that.
Q.	So what's your answer?
A.	Some portion of that statement could apply
to the 1940s. I just said i.hat anybody who went to the public schools and was required to take health education courses
would have known that cigarettes were habit forming, would have known that cigarettes could cause health problems, and we could go on and on about that.
Q.	Look at it and tell me what portion might
apply to the Forties?
A.	Anybody who went to the public {schools and
had health courses in the public schools would have had information presented to them about the habit - forming qualities of cigarettes, and they would have had information presented to them about possible health consequences of smoking, anybody.
Q.	So that you would have to have been deaf,
dumb, or an idiot if you went to the public schools not to have known about those things?
A.	In those states where they required
instruction or they had instruction in public health.
Q.	Kansas was one of those states, wasn't it?
A.	I belieive so.
Q.	So in Kansas in the Forties, you would
have to have been deaf, dumb, or an idiot
not to have known about those matters; is that right?
A.	If you went to the public schools.
Q.	Right.
A.	If you went to school. if you sat in
class and listened.
Q.	if in fact, the teachers taught the
lessons that they were supposed to teach; correcc?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Now, d:.d you prepare any drafts of your
expert report?
A.	Well, you have one right there, right here
(indicating). It says on it "draft."
Q.	Did you prepare any others?
A.	Well, the earliest version of the report,
I wrote between, I'm going to guess, the 10th or about the 15th or 16th of D e c e mb e r .
Q.	What did you do with the first draft you
prepared?
A.	Well, the attorney Paul Koethe came down
and looked at it, and we discussed it.
Q.	What did he say aijout it?
A.	Well, there are notes from that meeting.
t *»* -*■ rwm nv*	/ ■—. «i -*v I	ft 1	A A A a.
Q.	Where are they?
A.	Wherever my notes are. I don't know.
This must be it here.
Q.	Exhibit 5?
A .	Exhibit: 5 .
Q-	Well, you can refer to them if that would
help. what did he say about the draft you showed him?
A.	We talked about why I looked at medical
articles, and I explained I wanted to see whether the information in medical articles was being fairly reflected in the press and other media outlets.
We had a discussion about the nature of the bibliography to be'attached, and that's the reason there are two bibliographies attached to the final report, one which is a narrative and one which is specific.
Paul asked me whether I read any Life magazine articles, and I told him that I had looked at the articles about Ernest Wynder dealing with -- what do we say? I'm trying to think of a convenient way to say it having to do with painting
tar on the backs of my mice. And I said I certainly had. I just neglected to put Life magazine out there.
THE WITNESS: You know, I'm going to take a ten-minute break if we are going to keep going.
MR. LEYH: All right. Why don't you do that and I'll read this and we'll keep going.
It's 3:10 in the afternoon, and ..e've been discussing at various points during the day how long we're going to go. I intend to complete the deposition in part, counsel. You said you wanted to complete it as opposed to adjourning it and continuing it by telephone, which I'm willing and prepared to do. But based on your remarks before the last break, I don't want to get sandbagged and have you walk out of here or the witness walk out of here before I'm done, so I want to know if you intend to leave before I'm
finished.
MS. McDOLE: Well, how long is it going to be?
MR. LEYH: I -MS. McDOLE: Excuse me. Can I finish?
MR. LEYH: Sure.
MS. McDOLE: How long will it be until you finish?
MR. LEYH: It's very hard to predict, but I imagine it will take me three to four hours to finish.
MS. McDOLE: We'll just have to see because, Greg, there's a long history in these depositions of you suddenly pulling the rug from under us.	•
MR. LEYH: When have I done
that ?
MS. McDOLE: Poloay, for example, where we told you it would take two or three days. We didn't even get one full day. Now, I want to finish the break.
{A brief recess was taken;
Ms. McDole was not present when proceedings resumed.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Professor Martin, do you
know what the budget of the tobacco companies was at any time in the twentieth century for advertising?
A.	No, I don't.
Q.	Do you know how much they actually spent
on advertising at any point in time?
A.	No.
(Martin Exhibit No. 6 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Do you know how much any
tobacco company spent at any point in time on public relations?
A.	No.
Q,	Or on Tobacco Institute work?
A .	No .
Q.	I'm handing you what we've marked as
Martin 6. Have you seen that document before?
A.	The only portion of this document that
I've seen before .s Attachment A, which lists the documents I'm supposed to bring
in.
Q,	Okay,
A.	I'm sorry. I didn't look at the last
page. No, I didn't see the last page.
MR. KACZYNSKI: I didn't either.
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Did counsel provide you
with Attachment A?
A.	Yes.
q.	Let's look at Item 1 on Attachment A.
Have you brought all of your documents that are responsive to Item l’s request?
A.	Yes .
Q.	And they are in the boxes that are in this
room?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Have you brought all the documents
responsive to Item 2?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Are there any such documents; medical
records, fox example?
A.	I'm not aware of any medical records, but
materials that I relied upon are in these boxes.	.
Q.	Okay. Let's look at Item 3. Have you
brought all documents responsive to Item 3?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Item 4?
A.	Well, I couldn't bring anything because if
I'm reading it correctly there isn't anything to bring.
Q,	Okay. No such documents exist; is that
right?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Okay. Item 5?
A.	Yes, those materials are here.
Q.	Are there any materials in press?
A.	Yes, they're here.
Q.	Would you tell me what they are?
A.	The chapters that I wrote for the third
edition for the textbook called The America and Its People, those chapters are here in copy edited form. Two unpublished book reviews are here, and an article that I wrote for a naval history are here.
q.	is the first item you mentioned a textbook
in American history?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What are the book reviews reviewing?
A.	One deals with the Indian drinking problem
in Colonial America that will be published in the Journal of Social History, and the other is a book on native Americans in the American Revolution which will be published in a journal called Ethnohistorv.
Q.	Would you look at Item 6 and tell me,
please, if there are any documents that exist; if so, have you brought them?
A.	There are no such documents.
Q.	Item 7, same questions.
A.	There's no such correspondence.
Q,	Is the statement we were talking about for
your time a little earlier, you don't consider that correspondence?
A.	I was advised by my attorney not to bring
that material.
Q.	Right. So that is the only piece of paper
that you didn't bring that's responsive to this; is that right?
A.	So far as I know.
Q.	Which lawyer told you not to bring it?
A.	Sidney McDole.
Q.	Okay. When did she tell you that?
A.	I guess two days ago.
Q.	Did she tell you why she didn't want you
to bring it?
A.	I don't remember that she specified any
particular reason.
Q.	Okay.
MR. LEYH: Let's go off the record.
(Martin Exhibit No, 7 was marked for identification purpores.)
MR. LEYH: Back on the record.
(Ms. McDole entered the deposition room.)
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Professor, I'm handing you
Exhibit 7 and ask you to identify that, please.
A.	Exhibit 7 are the publications and press
that we just discussed.
Q.	Some of those documents, it's a large
rubber band full of documents, have, handwriting on them. Is all the handwriting in Exi ibit 7 your own?
Q.	Your editor's handwriting?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Is any of the handwriting yours as
you look through?
A.	The handwriting at the top of this was
meant to be helpful, "To appear in the Journal of Social History" is m.ine. "To appear in Ethnohistory" is mine. "Draft 5" is tr.ine on this particular paper, Expended but not Wasted. "Third edition, America, and Its People" was mine, and then in the book manuscript for America and Its People. there are very marginal comments where 1 had differences with editors, with the editor.
Q.	Do any of the documents in Exhibit 7
relate to tobacco?
A.	First, I believe it was the second chapter
of the textbook talks briefly about the rise of the tobacco, of the development of -- I'm txying to think of the right word -- tobacco production. The development of the tobacco production in Virginia in the 17th century in the Chesapeake area.
Q.	Is that a second or third edition of the
textbook?
A.	Third edition.
Q.	Is that part on tobacco new to the third
edition, or is that in previous editions?
A.	That's in previous editions.
Q.	When was the first edition written?
A.	I began writing it in 1986, and it was
published in 1989.
Q.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 8 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you identify
Exhibit 8, please?
A.	Newspaper articles, tobacco research,
Springfield News and Leader Sunday papers, January 1955 through August 1955; and then additional years '56, '57, '58, '59 and ' 60 .
Q.	Are there any handwritten notes on any of
those papers in Exhibit 8 or highlights?
A.	There are highlights.
Q.	Who highlighted?
Q.	Where did you get those documents?
A.	These documents were provided by a public
history research firm PHR Consultants in California.
Q.	Have you worked with them before?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Is that a common thing you do, is you get
documents from them?
A.	In one other instance, yes.
Q.	Okay. What was that instance?
A.	That was when I was working on the Richard
Rogers case in Indiana.
Q.	Did you communicate to them in writing
what particular documents you wanted?
A.	I communicated to them by telephone.
Q.	Whom did you talk to?
A.	A person by the name of Shelley Bookspan
who is the whatever. I'm not sure what her title is, but she is in charge of the company, president of the company.
Q.	How did you describe what documents you
were after?
A.	I talked about documents that, in this
case newspaper articles that would have appeared in communities where David Burton
lived between 1950 and 1965 approximately; in other words, the Emporia	for
the years 1954, 1955, and then the early Sixties, and in turn the papers that were published in Springfield, Missouri, where from his deposition it was my understanding and also my conversation with Mr. Kaczynski, my initial conversation, that Mr. Burton had lived between 1955 and 1960.
Q.	Did you tell her what kinds of articles in
those particular newspapers you were after?
A.	Every article that said anything about
smoking .
Q.	Whether it was positive or negative or any
other thing?
A.	That's right, yes.
Q.	Do you recall receiving from her any
articles that suggested there was a controversy in the Sixties or later on whether or not cigarettes caused disease?
A.	In the Sixties or later?
Q.	Yes.
A.	The articles in the Emporia Gazette go
through 1965. I believe that's true of the Kansas City papers which were the regional papers with the highest circulation.
Q.	Up until '65, then?
A.	Up until '65 that dealt with the
controversy?
Q.	The fact that there was a controversy.
A.	Oh, I'm sure some of the articles must
have dealt with the controversy.
Q.	Do you recall whether it was a modest
number?
A.	No, I don't.
Q.	Now, looking at Exhibit 8, the first page
has some "A," "B" written in the left-hand margins with some check marks. Who did that ?
A.	I did.
Q.	What does that mean?
A.	That means "A" articles spoke, if I recall
this correctly, spoke to issues, health-related issues, and "B" articles were not as relevant to health-related issues. It's just an attempt to initially try to get it - -
Q.	The cream?
A.	The articles that were most germane to the
subjects that I was expected, that I was asked to look into.
Q.	Do the checks have any sj.gnificance?
A.	I would think the check means that I read
.	the article.
Q.	Okay. Well, you have written here
something which looks like "Blatnik" after a few of them,
A.	Yes, those «ere articles in which the
Blatnik hearings, I believe those are articles that dealt with the Blatnik hearings.
Q.	what are the Blatnik hearings?
A.	They were called by Congressman John
Blatnik in the summer of 1957 having to do with the filter cigarettes and whether those cigarettes were being misrepresented to the public.
Q.	And then you have "NQ" after several. Do
you know what that means?
A.	Yes, "NQ" in my system means there's a
quotation in there that is of interest.
(Martin Exhibits Nos. 9 and
10	were marked for identification
purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Okay. Would you tell me
what Exhibit 9 contains?
A.	Springfield Leader and Press. January 1955
through June 1959, January 1960 through December 1960.
q,	Would it be fair to say, professor, that
all the highlighting or handwriting notations on these exhibits that contain newspaper articles would be your own hand?
A.	They would either be my own hand or those
of my research assistant.
Q.	And what did your research assistant do
for you in this case?
A.	She followed the same procedure and
divided articles, and then I reviewed her work with respect to dividing articles.
We did that to try to save time.
Q.	What is her name?
A.	Katie Harrison.
q.	What is her experience?
A.	She's a graduate student at the university
of Houston working on her master's degree in U.S. History.
Q.	Okay. Do you know where she did her
undergraduate ?
A.	She studied at, I believe, Southwest Texas
State University in San Marcos; but I believe she finished her degree at the University of Houston, her undergraduate degree.
Q.	Did you read every newspaper article that
was sent to you by this California firm?
A.	I don't think I read every word of every
article, no.
y.	Did you look at every article --
A.	Yes.
Q.	-- at least?
A.	Yes.
y.	Okay. Did she read, to your knowledge,
every v;ord of every article?
A.	In those packages that she went through,
that was her assignment.
Q.	So you read them all, and she read some?
A.	No, what I did because of time shortages,
I asked her to read some of the packages to divide them as to whether they were germane to the questions that I was to look into; and in turn, to let me know,
and then I reviewed everything after she did that. So some of the underlining markings in some of the packages may be hers,
Q.	How did she identify to you those articles
that she thought most germane?
A.	She used the exact same A-B designation
that I used.
Q.	Okay. I've got what we're going to
identify as Exhibit 10, but is that her hand marking?
A.	Yes,
Q.	And have you billed for her time
separately from your own?
A.	Yes.
Q.	How much do you bill her out at?
A.	$25 an hour.
Q.	And how many hours, if you know, has she
worked on this case?
A.	I don't have any idea, a lot.
q.	A lot. Do you know when she began working
on this case?
A.	I would guess by the end of August or
early September of 1995.
Q.	Do you know if all of the time for which
you billed for her has been paid?
A.	I assurr.e so. She hasn't indicated to me
that she hasn't.
Q.	Does she get paid personally, or does it
go to the University?
A.	She doesn't have anything to do with the
University on this project. She bills directly to Jones, Day.
q.	she's an independent contractor on this
one?
A.	Uh-huh.
Q.	Can you approximate how much she's been
paid?
A,	No, I really can't, but I can tell you she
has spent, an enormous amount of time on this project.
Q.	Do you think it's been more than a few
thousand dollars?
A.	I don't know. 150 to 200 hours, we can do
our math and see what we come up with.
Q.	You think 150 or 200 hours would be about
right?
A.	Yes.
q.	Tell us what is contained in Exhibit 10.
A.	Kansas City Kansan, reviewed articles
1954, 1957, 1962, and 1964.
Q.	Why only those years and not every year?
A.	Because those are years in which the
newspaper coverage would have been most extensive because of various public announcements with respect to health-re1ated issues having to do with smoki ng.
Q.	Did you specifically ask for those
particular years?
A.	I don't recal? that I asked for those
particular years, but I must have because '54, '57, '62, and '64 are four of the most newsworthy years.
Q.	And would all of the handwriting contained
in Exhibit 10 be either yours or your assistant's?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 11 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) Would you identify
Exhibit 11?
newspaper articles drawn from the Kansas City Star. August 1954 through July 1964, but actually, that is, these are from the primary years '54, 'S7, '62, and '64. I'm looking to see if there are any other years. These are all '54, '57, '62, and ' 64 .
Q.	Before you put that away --
A.	Okay.
q .	-- do you see the articles in here have a
lime green icky on it? Do you know whose handwriting that is?
A.	That's Katie Harrison's handwriting.
Q.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibits Nos. 12 and 13 were marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you identify
Exhibit 12?
A.	These would be newspaper articles from the
Kansas City Timeg,■
Q.	Whose handwriting is on the top clip in
pencil there or with a pen?
A.	Katie Harrison's. Right here
(indicating)? Is this what you mean?
Q.	I mean all throughout here.
A.	Katie Harrison's. These are 1962 and
1964 .
Q,	For the record, we were looking at the
first page. The entire first page contains handwriting you're suggesting is Katie Harrison's?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And would you tell us what Exhibit 13 is,
please?
A.	Emporia_Gazette, 1954, 1955, 1961, 1962,
1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967.
Q.	Whose highlighting and handwriting is in
that exhibit?
A.	Mine.
(Martin Exhibits Nos, 14 and 15 were marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Identify Exhibit 14,
please.
A.	Two items on Lucy Page Gaston from
approximately 1920.
Q.	Where did you get these articles?
A.	These would probably have been in the
files that I visited in the summer of 1994
at the Arnold &. Porter law firm.
Q.	And where is that law firm's office
located, the one you visited?
A.	Washington, D.C.
Q.	what was the occasion of your visit there?
A.	Well, they had a very extensive collection
of documents with respect to tobacco.
Q.	This is the summer of '94?
A.	The summer of 1994.
Q.	That would have been after the time you
first met Mi.. Raczynski?
A.	Yes.
Q.	How did you come to learn of the
collection at Arnold & Porter?
A.	Well, I'm sure that Mr. Koethe and
Mr. Kaczynski told me.
Q.	Were you there on more than one occasion?
A.	One tine.
Q.	How long did you spend at the law firm
there ?
A.	Approximately a day and a half.
Q.	Okay. Do you know whether or not that law
firm represents any parties in tobacco 1itigation?
Q.	On Exhibit 14, there is a pink tag saying
"Kansas material" on one of the document: s ?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Who wrote that?
A.	Katie Harrison, that's her writing.
Q.	And do you know who wrote the handwriting
labels on the file folders we're going through?
A.	Katie Harrison.
Q.	Would you identify Exhibit 15?
A.	1919 newspaper articles, Lucy Page Gaston.
Q.	Did you get those from Arnold & Porter?
A.	I would say probably, yes, because they're
Burrelle's -- excuse me. They are Burrelle's press clippings. They're from the Burrelle's Press Clipping service which is a nationally known and respected press clipping service. So I believe that would have been from Arnold & Porter.
Q.	Did you make the trip to Arnold & Porter
alone?
A.	No .
Q.	who accompanied you?
A.	I took a graduate student, by the name of
Diana Dean.
Q.	And she looked at documents, and you
looked at documents; is that right?
A.	Well, I looked at documents, arid she was
tagging those documents so that we could get copies of those documents.
Q.	Did you visit with any lawyers while you
were at Arnold & Porter for a day and a half?
A.	Yes, I'm trying to remember the person's
name. I thir.k it is, it's either -- I know the first name is Jan; the last name is Johnson or Johnston. I think it's Johnson without the T.
Q.	Did she exhibit some familiarity with
these documents?
A .	Yes .
Q.	Did you talk to her about tobacco
1i	t igat ion?
A.	I don't remember that we talked about any
particular case at all.
(Martin Exhibit No. 16 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Tell me what Exhibit 16
is.
A.	1920 newspaper articles, Lucy Page Gaston.
Q.	Arnold & Porter collection?
A.	Well, a number of them are Burrelle's, so
I would say yes.
Q.	While you were there at Arnold & Porter
for a day and a half, did you manage to look through their entire collection of newspaper clippings?
A.	Yes .
Q.	To your knowledge, did they have other
collections available related to tobacco?
A.	They have The New York Times, some of the
popular magazines, Newsweek. Time. Life.
I think I saw a Consumer Reports from there. I'm trying to give you, the best I can, examples. They may well have had some regional papers, but I didn't spend much time looking at them.
q.	Okay- But all of the examples you gave me
were examples of publications on tobacco that were collected at Arnold & Porter; is that right?
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you tell us what
Exhibit 17 is?
A.	Articles on Lucy Page Gaston.
Q.	Is that one of the articles you had in
mind when you told me earlier this morning that she would sometimes be prone to disorder?
A.	That she would oe prone to disorder in
what sense?
Q.	Causing a ruckus or violence or
something.
A.	Well, I think I made that comment in
reference to Carrie Nation, not Lucy Page Gaston.
q.	All right. who made the note on that
particular exhibit?
A.	This is Katie Harrison's handwriting.
q.	is that document significant to you in the
context: of your opinion in this case?
A.	Yes, it is.
Q.	Tell me why, if you would.
apparently inspired by Lucy Page Gaston to enforce the Kansas anti-cigarette law. It says here that 35 stores in Topeka were raided on suspicion of violating the law. I'm assuming the law they are referring to is the anti - cigarette law in Kansas.
Q.	What year did that occur?
A.	The article is dated August 5, 1921.
Q. ■ Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 18 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 18?
A.	Oh, this is more material on Lucy Page
Gaston. And because she was so adamant in her idea, she parted company with the International Anti-Cigarette League.- And toward the latter part of 1921, she began what she called the "Clean Life Movement."
MR. KACZYNSKI: Did you see her picture?
MR. LEYH: I didn't take a close look at her.
MR. KACZYNSKI: She said she
looked like Abraham Lincoln at one point.
■	MR, LEYH: I appreciate you
bringing that to my attention.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Is it the Clean Life; is
that what you called it?
A.	She called it the Clean Life Movement.
Q.	What were its principles?
A.	I would venture a guess that it had
something to do with clean living.
Q.	Do you know how that idea was to be
manifested, not hanging out with lawyers?
A.	Yes, I can even give you a quotation.
"'Clean speech, clean sports, clean	^
c
* . ( habits,' and adjures men and women to	<
i
abjure alcohol and tobacco and 'all other types of immorality.'"
Q.	I guess that says it all.	’
A.	Lucy Page Gaston was at this point past
the peak in her career.
(Martin Exhibit No. 19 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 19?
Apparently the Clean Life Movement didn't work out, so she is back to anti-cigarette activity, per se.
(Martin Exhibit No. 20 was marked for identification purposes,)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 20?
A.	1924, Lucy Page Gaston.
Q.	Is there anything in Exhibit 20 of
particular importance to your opinion?
A.	Yes.
Q .	Tell me what.
A.	Lucy Page Gaston died in 1924. She was
hit by an automobile, and she only had minor injuries; however, while at the hospital recovering, they discovered that she had throat cancer, and she would die shortly thereafter of throat cancer. Newspaper after newspaper after newspaper noted the irony of this woman who had battled against cigarettes, who had never smoked, dying with a disease that so often at that time was associated with smoking.
Q.	That ie ironic, fsn't it?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you tell us etfhat
Exhibit 21 contains?
A.	It looks like miscellaneous materials
about the Anti-Cigarette League.
Q.	Is the Anti-Cigarette League one of the
anti-tobacco groups that was busy in the Twenties?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What was its history briefly? When was
it - -
A.	It goes back to its founding in about 1900
as the Anti-Cigarette League. This would be one of the spin-cff versions in the 1920s.
iMartin Exhibit No. 22 was narked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 22?
A.	Materials from the International
Anti-Cigarette League, which was the name that the organization took as I recall around 1919, moved from being the National
to the International Anti-Cigarette League. It contains various types of correspondence along with activities of the League and the annual meeting, a notice of an annual meeting of the League.
(Martin Exhibit No. 23 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) Exhibit 23?
A.	In August of 1994, I made a trip to the
Library of Congress to look up information to get a better sense of materials on tobacco in the early twentieth century. I did a variety of runs from the card catalog to come up with possible materials to look at, and that's what this would consist of. Those are the materials that I ran off the computer at the Library of Congress .
Q.	Who paid for that trip to the Library of
CongreBS?
A.	Two people did or two sources did. Well,
maybe we should make that three. My brother gave ire an <? .tomobile to drive. I was in western New York at the time, and I
paid for all of my expenses, and for my hours at the Library of Congress, I submitted those to Jones, Day.
Q.	You submitted bills to Jones, Day for what
part of your time?
A.	For the time I worked at the Library of
Congress.
Q.	How long were you there in terms of days,
if you know?
A.	I think I spent two full days, but I'd
have to check. I think I spent two full days at the Library of Congress.
Q.	The subject searches are your searches?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And did you read all of the books produced
by your search?
A.	No.
(	•	I
Q.	Okay. Did you go through here and	<
I
handpick the ones you wanted to look at.
A.	Yes.
Q.	And is there any indication in Exhibit 23
of which ones you selected? Do you want to look at it?
(Witness examines document.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you identify
Exhibit 24?
A.	Literature on the WCTU.
Q.	Are those WCTU pamphlets?
A.	Yes, of: various types and kinds, yes.
Q.	Various what?
A.	Various types and kinds of WCTU pamphlets.
Q.	Do they cover any particular time frame?
A.	I would say the 1920s.
Q.	Where did you get those?
A.	Well, they go into the 1930s. I'm really
not sure where these materials came from.
Q.	Can you tell me whose handwriting is on
the first page of the top document?
A.	Yes, Katie Harrison's.
Q.	Was she responsible for acquiring certain
materials?
A.	Yes, but not that group. Not that group I
don't think. I think that group goes back to 1990. I really don't know. I don't remember. They mav have come from the Arnold & Porter materials.
Q.	What documents was Katie Harrison
responsible for acquiring?
A,	Well, she was able to get some material
through the interlibrary loan systo„i at the University of Houston. I'm trying to think of a specific material that she may have brought to the collection.
(Margin Exhibit No. 25 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q*	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you tell us what
Exhibit 25 contains?
A.	Yes, this is a magazine called Health.
various kinds of literature being made available to women and children from various sources, mainly from the 1930s,
Q.	Do you know if you read closely that top
document in that package? There's an article about defending tobacco ads identified at the bottom of that page. Do you recall reading that?
A.	No, I don't recall reading it.
Q.	All right. Do you see any handwritten
notes or highlights in that document indicating that somebody might have been
there?
A.	This (indicating)?
Q.	Yes, that's what I'm talking about.
A.	No, I don't see any notes on there at
all. "Debunking Tobacco"?
Q.	Keep flipping; you'll see "Advertising."
A.	Right here (indicating)? This doesn't
ring a specific bell.
Q.	All right.
(Martin Exhibi-s Nos. 26 and 27 were marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) Exhibit 26?
A.	Lookout. a magazine of religious
education, 1919, 1921, 1922, that time frame.
Q.	Who is responsible for publishing
Lookout? Do you know what religious group?
A.	No, I don't. I don't recall.
Q.	Do you know what the readership at any
point in time was of Lookout?
A.	No.
q.	Do you know if it wa& aver available in
Emporia, Kansas?
A .	No .
Q.	Exhibit 27?
A.	Lookout magazine.
(Martin Exhibit No. 28 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 28, please?
A.	A statement from the National Tobacco
League.
Q.	What year is that statement?
A.	This statement is undated, but I would
presume from the 1920s.
Q.	Where did you get that?
A.	1919 is the date. I can't be sure of
where I got this.
(Martin Exhibit No. 29 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 29?
A.	More materials from the International and
National Anti-Cigarette League.
Q.	Do you know where you got those materials?
A.	I can't say for sure.
Q.	There was a doc :mer.t in Exhibit. 29,
professor, that identified some of the
alleged harms caused by cigarette smoking; and one of them was, I'm looking for it, that you could injure your eyesight. Have you seen that reference before?
A.	Yes,
Q.	Here it; is : "Excessive use of tobacco
injures eyesight." Do you know whether or not there's ever been any scientific proof that cigarette smoking injures eyesight?
A.	I know that there's a disease that was
treated repeatedly in the twentieth century, I can't recall the name of it right now that had to do with dimming of the vision; and after 50 years of treating individuals, the disease was dropped because there was no evidence that the disease even existed.
(Martin Exhibit No. 30 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Tell us, if you would, what
Exhibit 30 is.
A.	An Anti-blue law magazine, The
Libertarian.
Q.	The big "L" Libertarian.
A.	I knew we could find something relative to
that. Materials from the teens and Twenties, well, this is 1921, early 1920s. q.	Do you know where you got that?
A.	No, I can't say for sure.
Q.	Did the tobacco company attorneys send you
any newspaper articles or other sources of information upon which you relied in rendering your opinion?
A.	No .
Q.	Other than the deposition of David Burton,
to the extent you relied on that?
A.	That's right.
(Martin Exhibit No. 31 was marked for identification purposes.)	|
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) Okay. Exhibit 31?	1
A.	"The Anti-Tobacco Crusade after World
War I," dated January 1970. I have no idea where this document came from. q.	Do you recall reading it?
*
A.	I may have read it up to two years ago,
but I don't recall reading it in recent months..
in this case?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay.
A. ■ But that wasn't what my charge was. it was to bring out any material that might in any way be relevant to the subject at hand.
(Martin Exhibit No. 32 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Would you tell us what
Exhibit 32 is, please?
A.	It says "textbooks." That's what it is,
materials from various textbooks.
Q.	Where did you get that?
A.	I can't be sure.
Q.	Have you read it in the last five months?
A.	This material?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I would say that this is stuff that John
Ettling had.
Q.	Who ijs John Ettling?
A.	John Ettling is a historian, was a
historian at the Uni' ;rsity of Houston, is now Dean of Arts and Sciences at the
University of North Dakota. And I can't give you a specific year, but in years past, he worked with Mr. Kaczynski and others.
Q.	Do you know if he ever testified in any
tobacco case?
A.	I don't believe he did.
Q.	when did you speak to him about textbook
materials?
A.	Probably in 1994.
Q.	At that, time was he here or was he --
A.	Yes, he was here. He just moved to North
Dakota last September or August '95.
Q.	Has he to your knowledge published
anything on tobacco?
A.	No.
Q.	Did you ask hirt. for documents he might
have that he thought you might like to see ?
A.	No, he called me up one day and said, "I
have a box of documents in my garage and I'm moving to North Dakota, would you like to have them?"
I said, "Why not."
A.	Well, maybe some of the rest of this
material we'll even go through, yet, this af ternoon.
Q.	Okay. Do you know if any of the
textbooks, copies of which are contained in Exhibit 32, were used in Emporia,
Kansas at any time?
A.	I don't know.
Q.	Okay. Did you rely on the information in
Exhibit 32 for reaching your conclusions about school
A.	No.
Q.	-- information?
A .	No .
(Martin Exhibit No. 33 was marked for identification purpose s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 33?
A.	A miscellaneous, unorganized file dealing
with a whole variety of anti-tobacco groups.
Q.	Do you know where you got. that file?
A.	This could have possibly been Ettling
material. There nre some Burrelle's clippings, which means that some of it may
(Martin Exhibit No. was marked for identification purposes,)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Tell us what Exhibit 34
i s ,
A.	This is an item called "American
Literature Awareness Survey" by Dr. Richard Harp. The document is dated October 27th, 1986. The person by the name I mentioned earlier, by the name of Diana Dean traveled to Cleveland and looked through materials at Jones, Day sometime during the summer of 1994 in	J
reference to the Rogers' case, and this	c
■ ®
was material that she brought back from u that trip.
Q.	Do you know who Dr. Richard Harp is?
A.	I believe he io an English -- if he's
still active, I believe he is an English professor. I'm not sure what institution he teaches at I don't recall.
recall having read any of Dr. Harp's other works?
A.	No.
Q.	Have ycu or your assistants made trips to
other law firms other than Arnold & Porter and Jones, Day in Cleveland to examine documents, ever?
A .	NO .
Q.	Have you ever personally made a trip to
Jones, Day in Cleveland to examine document s?
A.	No.
Q.	For any other reason?
A.	Well, I grew up 25 miles outside of
Cleveland, so I've driven up to Cleveland a couple of times, and we had lunch at the baseball stadium.
Q.	You and Mr. Kaczynski?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Did you rely on Exhibit 34 in
rendering your opinion in the Burton case?
A.	That would be just as general background
material.
Q.	Do you recall readii.r it in the last five
months?
A.	No, I didn't read it in the last five
months.
MR. LEYH: I got one box down. Do you want to take a short break?
THE WITNESS: Sure, why not. (A brief recess was taken; and Martin Exhibits Nos. 35 through 37 were marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) Would you tell us what
Exhibit 35 is, please?
A.	These are antismoking public service
announcements between 1966 and 1987 put out and aired on television by the American Cancer Society.
Q.	I take it that didn't have anything to do
with your report?
A.	Well, it's a little bit beyond the time
frame.
Q.	Where did you get that tape?
A.	From the American Cancer Society.
Q.	When did you receive that tape?
A.	In December of 1995.
Q.	Did you ask for it?
Q.	why?
A.	Well, at that point in time, I had been
asked to look into issues on a case in New Jersey that did deal with the Seventies and the Eighties. That case, however, was quickly dismissed, and this was a process of beginning to get materials.
Q.	Who asked you to potentially work on that
case?
A.	Mr. Kaczynski .
Q.	Do you know the case name?
A.	No, I honestly don't.
Q.	All right. Have you viewed this tape in
the last five iionths?
A.	Yes. '
Q.	Okay. Why did you look at it in the last
five months?
A.	I just got it in December.
Q.	That other case, is that the reason?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What is Exhibit 36?
A.	Part 1 and Part 2, "See It Now," CBS News
special report; a'rred on television 5/31/55, 6/7/55; Fdward R. Murrow, host.
This particular program, two programs, is a summary of the debate over smoking and whether smoking is a source or a cause of cancer .
Q.	Where did you receive Exhibit 36, from
what source?
A.	Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue.
Q.	Did you ask for those tapes?
A.	I must have asked. I think these tapes, I
received these in the summer of 1994. I'm sure I was asking at that point for materials that had anything to do with what appeared on television knowing how difficult it is to get that kind of material,
Q.	Is it your recollection that you may have
made a general request for that kind of television material, and you were provided with, among other things perhaps,
Exhibit 36?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you ever make a specific request of
the Jones, Day lawyers for the CBS News "See It Now" tppes?
A.	Actually, I requested a lot more th*n
that.
Q.	Specifically?
A.	Yes. Well, not that specific, but I was
particularly interested in seeing if it would be possible to get programs that were put out by Bishop Fulton J, Sheen during the 1950s that my father watched and that convinced him that he should stop smoking; Bishop Sheen being a major leader in the Roman Catholic chur h, as -’ell as he had either a half hour or hourly program on national news during the 1950s.
Q.	On television?
A.	On television, yes.
Q.	Have you viewed Exhibit 36 in the last
five months?
A.	Yes, X have.
Q.	On more than one occasion?
A.	I thin.'k the first time I viewed it would
have been shortly after 1 got it, which would have been the summer of 1994. I looked at it again approximately a month ago .
Q.	Did you look at it ir the company of any
Q.	What's Exhibit 37?
A.	CBS news extra on smoking and health,
television coverage of the announcement of the Surgeon General's report. The date is 1/11/54,
Q.	Have you viewed th?t in the last five
months?
A.	This particular tape, no.
Q.	Do you know when you received this tape?
A.	I'm going to guess, I'd say, during the
summer of 19 94.
Q.	That's a tape that was provided by Jones,
Day; is that correct?
A,	That's correct, yes.
Q.	Did you rely on this in forming your
opinion in the Burton case?
A.	Well, Z would say yes, because it is
public national media coverage of the Surgeon General's report.
(Martin Exhibit No. 38 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) Tell us what Exhibit 38
Senator Smoot.
Q.	That must be the speech that Professor
Burnham wrote about.
A.	Yes, he just didn't seem to have the
context correct. And Senator Smoot denounced cigarettes in this particular speech, and he talked about the general habit of cigarette addiction. And since cigarettes were addictive, as he defined them in 1929, they should be put under the control, of the Food and Drug Administration.
Q.	How did he define "addictive," do you
know?
A.	He didn't define it in there. I would
assume that he meant that it was difficult to quit smoking.
Q.	Because that was a common understanding of
addictive at that time, is that why you would make that assumption?
A.	Well, I would only be guessing if I made
that assumption.
Q.	Where did you acquire Exhibit 38?
been in the materials that John Ettling supplied me.
Q.	Do you know whose highlighting is on
Exhibit 38?
A.	That's mine.
Q■	Have you read this in the last five
months ?
A.	Yes .
0-	Did you rely on it in writing your report
in this case?
A.	Yes .
(Martin Exhibit No. 39 was marked for identification purpose s.}
Q,	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 39?
A.	Exhibit 39, "Hearingr before a
Subcommittee11; this is known as the Blatnik hearings, dated July 18 through July 26, 1957. The government publication of the transcripts of that hearing, titled "False and Misleading Advertising (Filter-tip Cigarettes)."
Q.	Do you know what the Committee's
conelus ions were ?
Q.	What were they?
were .
Q,	Do you know -- well, tell me what
Blatnik's conclusions were.
A.	Blatnik's conclusions were that filter-tip
cigarettes were being falsely advertised because there weren't any standards by which to measure tar and nicotine. There weren't commonly accepted tandards at that time.
Q.	Where did you acquire Exhibit 39?
A.	I'm not sure. My guess would be this
would have been -- could well have been out of our own library collections at the University of Houston.
Q.	Did you ask someone to search your library
here, or did you go -A.	I would have asked someone like Diana Dean or Katie Harrison to go find it and make a copy of it.
q,	is there any highlighting on that
document ?
A .	No .
q.	Did you rely on that in writing your
opinion in the Burton case*?
(Martin Exhibit No, 40 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 40?
A.	A copy of the Surgeon General's report
"Smoking and Health," or the report to the Surgeon General on smoking and health, 1964.
q.	Do you know where you got that?
A.	This may have been in the Ettling
material.
Q.	Have you read that document, professor?
A.	I haven't read every word of it. I've
read certain portions of it.
Q.	Is there highlighting in that document?
A.	Just in a few instances.
q.	is it your highlighting?
A.	Yes, if it's blue, it's mine. I thought I
saw - -
q.	Pink. Isn’t there pink in that one?
A.	Sometimes it's pink; sometimes it's blue.
I would say this came from John Ettling in the box of materials that he gave me.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 41?
A.	These are laws, summary of laws, both
national and specific with relation to Kansas anti-tobacco or anti - cigarette -excuse me -- anti-cigarette and tobacco statutes and laws from various states. Included herein is a material that my research assistant, Katie Harrison, we were trying to find out when certain features of the Kansas Anti~Cigarette Act were no longer in effect, since certain portions continued beyond 1927.
One of those features was the banning of advertising. And we contacted the head librarian at the University of Houston law school library who said that they could not provide us with that information, but she gave us names of friends of hers. And one of the people she gave us was a Lissa Lord, with two Ss, and Ms, Lord ran pome documents which she sent to us which as it turned out were not
relevant.
q.	Do you know what those documents; are that
she ran that you think are not relevant?
A.	They had to do with the taxation of
cigarettes. And I would assume that these are Kansas session laws dated 1994; so apparently her, I believe it was a computer-generated Lexus search, would not take the laws back through time. I don't know why.
(Martin Exhibit No. 42 was marked for identification purpose s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 42?
A.	Exhibit 42 would be Gallup poll
information. There «re several published volumes of Gallup polls, and the top pages would be those. And because Gallup does not publish all questions, I asked my research assistant, Katie Harrison, to contact the Roper Public Opinion Center at the University of Connecticut and to do a run of questions asked by the Gallup organization between approximately '■935 and 1965. And the second part of this
document are the results of that computer-generated run.
Q.	Can you -- well, strike that.
Your report on Page 11 makes a reference to a June 1954 Gallup question, "Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung?"
A.	Yes .
Q.	Can you find that, or is t' at question or
answer - -
A.	It's in here.
Q.	It's net in this one?
A.	It's net in that one.
Q.	So what is contained in this exhibit are
two separate documents?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Well, you tell me what the first one is.
A.	One is the, just as I said, published
volumes which are available at almost any research library in the United States, but they do not reprint all the questions, and X have no idea why. So you can work from this document, but if you want greater detail, you have to go to the Roper Center
at the University of Connecticut; and if you're willing to pay a premium, you can get the additional questions.
Q.	Do you know how much it cost?
A.	Yes, it cost me $250.
Q.	Now, professor, with respect to the first
set of documents, pot the complete polling data, but the less than complete data, do you know whether or not these questions and answers are published
contemporaneously with the polling itself in newspapers or magazines?
A.	I would say it would have to depend on
each poll. I really can't say specifically.
Q.	Do you know which among all the questions
contained in both sets of documents in Exhibit 42, whic:h ones of them were published and which ones were not, questions and answers?
A.	In newspapers?
Q.	In any public outlet.
A.	No, I can't.
Q.	Okay. If I may, I'd like to flip through
highlighting apparently that's been copied over. Is that your highlighting?
A.	I'm sure it is.
Q.	Okay. Here's a question apparently
from -- if we can just look at it together. It looks like November 1 through 5 of 1949; is that right?
A.	Yes.
Q.	The question is; "Do you think cigarette
smoking is harmful or not," I believe.
A.	Yes.
Q.	And ths population of cigarette smokers
indicated 52 percent said yes; and 45 percent, no; is that right?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Does that suggest to you a high level of
public: awareness that cigarette smoking is a health risk?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Could you explain how you draw that
conclusion?
A.	Because this is not an "are ycu aware"
question. This is a "believe" question:
Do you believe; you think.
believe if you weren't aware.
Q.	All right. So thinking and believing is
at a deeper level of understanding,- is that a fair way of describing it?
A.	I would certainly think so.
Q.	Okay. And the awareness level is a more
superficial level of understanding?
A.	Yes.
Q.	As compared to the thinking or believing
leve1?
A.	Yes .
Q.	All right. Is it your opinion that
persons who answer affirmatively to think or believe questions have a greater appreciation of the subject of the question?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Object to the
form.
A.	Not necessarily.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Why not, if it's a deeper
level of understanding?
A.	Well, they've gone through some sort of a
process as to whether the information that they have received is -- whether thf*y want
to accept or not accept the information that they have received. So there is a second step, but I don't think that necessarily is a deeper level of thinking. It's a second consideration.
Q.	It's quantitatively more thinking?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Definitely.
Q.	Now, on the next page, the e is s^me
yellow highlighting. Do you know who wrote that?
A.	Yes, that's my handwriting.
Q.	Does that say "1954"?
A.	Yes .
Q.	All right. Is this the question that you
refer -- I guess it isn't the question that you referred to. This question is, it's from an interview dated June 12-17 of 1954. The question is: "What is your Own opinion? Do you think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer or not?" 41 said yes; and 29, no; and 30, undec ided.
level of' public awareness about the health risks?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Explain why.
A.	Because that would mean in order to say a
yes or a no, you would have had to hear or even to be undecided, you would have had to have heard that possibility.
Q.	Okay. So when you use the term "public
awareness" in the context of your expert opinion in this case, you're not talking about people who necessarily believe cigarette smoking -A.	That's correct.
Q.	-- is a health risk, but rather you're
talking about people who have heard whether or not they believe it.
A.	That's correct.
0-	And clearly some of the people who are
aware do not believe cigarette smoking is a health risk; correct?
A.	That is a possibility, yes.
Q.	Well, in this particular question, at
least 29 percent in answer to this question do not believe it, although in
your judgment they're aware?
A.	That's correct.
Q-	If I asked you about this question,
June 27 to July 2, 1957, about heart disease, basically your answer would be the same as the last question?
A.	Exactly.
Q.	Now, professor, there are a lot of
questions in this particular part of Exhibit 42 that we're looking at that relate to smoking and cancer; is that right ?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Why didn't you mention any of them in your
report ?
A.	Why didn't I mention? I did.
Q.	Did you? Right here (indicating). I
meant from the exhibit we're looking at, this part of Exhibit 42, the questions I've asked you specifically about in the last few minutes, for example.
A.	Well, I'll go back to what I was asked to
consider, and I was asked to consider public awareness vhich is not always the same thing as public belief.
Q.	Right. You've explained that,
A.	Yes.
Q.	But isn't the material in this published
set of questions and answers about .vhich we've been talking here, isn't it additional evidence of awareness?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Why didn't you consider it in your
report expressly as additional evidence of awareness?
A.	Well, because there was a question as to
how long the report should be, and there are so many different sources. I could have gone into much more detail. I could probably have given you 200 or 300 pages from all of the varicus sources if we had chosen to do that.
Q.	I appreciate it.
A.	Well - *■
Q.	Have you finished your answer?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did your decision to include the one
question that you included in your report at Page 11 frctr this other list of questions and answers you acquired have
anything to do with the fact that 90 percent answered "yes," and that's a pretty high and clear and direct number?
A.	That is an awareness question.
Q.	Yes.
A.	That is an awareness. I was asked to look
at questions about public awareness with respect to knowledge about smoking and possible health consequences.
Q.	This also -- by "this," I'- referring to
questions we have been talking about -this also tells you about awareness, I think you've said.
A.	That's right.
Q.	This is a better awareness question
than - -
A.	That is an awareness question. These are
not awareness questions that we've been talking about. They are belief questions.
Q.	Which allow you to draw conclusions about
awareness ?
A.	No .
Q.	I thought it was additional evidence of
awareness.
awareness over there, but if we want this to be additional evidence, we can have this as additional evidence. Actually, I cite two questions. I don't knew why we are just talking about one question.
Q.	Okay. Well, the one question that I want
to talk about is the 1954 question, the answer to which is 90 percent. Okay?
A.	Uh-huh.
Q.	If you want to add something about another
question, you can do that.
A.	There's another question.
MR. KAC2YNSKI: Wait until he asks you a question.
THE WITNESS: I thought I was answering his question.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) My question, professor, is:
Did your decision to include the question at the bottom of Page 11, the answer to which is 90 percent, in your report have	j
anything to do with the fact that	!
90 percent of the people answered "yes"?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Asked and answered.
MR. LKYH: Respectfully, I
think his answer was that it was an awareness question.
A.	That's my answer. It's an awareness
question.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} Right. So does that mean
because it's an awareness question, your decision to include that question had nothing to do with the fact that 90 percent of the respondents answered affirmatively?
A.	It's the best awareness question that I'm
aware of from the lS50s.
Q.	Is that the only reason that you put it in
your report?
A.	No .
Q.	What are the other reasons?
A.	I was asked to prepare a report and to
review materials on public awareness with respect to smoking and health. I was asked a second question having to do with public awareness with respect to the alleged habit - forming and/or addictive qualities with respect to smoking.
This question says: Have you seen or heard, and why don't I quote it
directly, either from the report or from this material.
Q.	Would you like a copy of the report?
A.	It would be faster to do it that v.ay.
Q.	Let me find you the exhibit that we've
marked.
A.	And repeat the question.
Q.	I forgot what the question was,
A.	Was I supposed to read --
Q.	I think you wanted -- did you want to look
at the second question? Is that what you were shooting for?
A.	Well, first question: "Have you heard or
read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung?'1
According to my report and according to this question, 90 percent of the respondents answered yes, 10 percent answered no.
Second qaestion that I put in here from Gallup's pollsters in 1957: "Did you happen to read or hear anything about the recent report of the American Cancer Society reporting the results of a study
on the effects of cigarette smoking?"
In this case, 78 percent of the respondents answered yes; and among those who were smokers at that time, £12 percent responded yes.
Conclusion: "The general populous and smokers in general indicated that they were aware of the most recent study relating to smoking and health."
Q.	Now, was that second quest on you read
contained in the more detailed version of the Gallup poll that you separately acquired?
A.	I don't remember.
Q.	All right.
A.	It may be here, or it may be in here
(indicating) . I don't know. I ' tts confusing documents. That's my report. I can't find it, so it must be in that one.
(Martin Exhibit No. 43 was marked for identification purposes.)
0.	(BY MR. LEYH) I have put a separate
exhibit sticker on th's document so that we can keep track ot them. Would you
identify Exhibit 43?
1935-1971," with additional questions of various types and kinds attached.
Q.	That's the less complete version of the
question and answers we've been discussing; right?
A.,	This is the published version
(indicating). This is the unpublished version (indicating).
Q.	Doesn't that have more detailed
information about the questions and answers?
A.	No, that's what I thought when I started
this, but it doesn't. This has different questions than this.
Q .	I see .
A.	So when I contacted, through my research
assistcint, the Roper organization, I said do a run of everything you had between 1935 and 1965. When this material came in and I looked at it, I said but that doesn't have all of these questions and then some because I asked for everything.
So we called them up, and they
said, "Well, you'll have to go into specific categories with us."
And at that point, I said, "I give up," I received that in early January.
MR. KACZYNSKI: So we're clear. That question, "Have you heard about the report" is in here .
THE WITNESS: Okay.
Q.	[BY MR. LEYH) All right. Thank you.
Just so I'm clear, 43 is the published version of the questions and answers, and 42 is the unpublished version?
A.	Right.
Q.	And the questions you cited in your report
come from 42, the unpublished version, the specific questions on Pages 11 and 12?
A.	The second question --
Q,	I think counsel just indicated that the
second question -MR. KACZYNSKI: I don't think it means it's not in there, too.
THE WITNESS: I thought that the second question came from here.
So it's in both locations.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) The first one is only in
42, and the second one is in bot:h7
A.	That's correct.
Q.	All right. Do you know what criteria they
used to decide what to publish and what not ?
A.	I haven't the slightest idea. It's a
very, very confusing area. It would just be nice if they published everything, but they don't.
(Martin Exhibit No. 44 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Let me hand you Exhibit 44
and ask you to identify it.
A.	Television transcripts; CBS News,
cigarette stories from the 1950s, "Surgeon General Leroy Burney Links Smoking to Cancer," and transcripts of the videotape, two Edward R. Murrow programs, "See It Now," May 31 and June 7, and apparently duplicate copie?.
say that they were in the materials that John Ettling gave to me.
Q.	Did you read Exhibit 44 in the last five
months '■
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 45 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exh bit 45"
A.	Could I qualify that?
Q.	Yes.
A.	I did not read the transcripts from the
videotapes because I watched them, so I thought that wculd be redundant.
Q .	What i;3 4 5?
A.	45 is a listing that Katie Harrison	.
prepared of the various American Cancer Society anti-smoking public service announcements from the 1960s and 1970s, so they would be contained on one of the tapes we talked about. There are approximately 50 of these.
Q.	Do you know when she .repared that?
latter part of December, so it would be in late December of 1995 or early January of ' 96 .
(Martin Exhibit No. 46 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) What is Exhibit 46?
A.	Production figures; these are from the
vital statistics of the United States. As I remember, I took these from a copy in my office which is the 1970 edition, or through 1970, "Physical Output of Selected Manufactured Commodities: 1860 to 1970." Provides information on the production of tobacco products,
Q.	Did you rely on that for your report in
this case?
A.	Yes.	'
(Martin Exhibit No. 47 was marked for identification ■ purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 47?
A.	Circulation figures for The New York_Ti_me_s
and four national magazines, Reader's Digest, Newsweek, Time. and Life beginning
in 1950 running through 1965, prepared by Katie Harrison, taken from the Ayer's Guide, which I believe is going to be the next item. 1
Q.	Okay. Did you ask her to prepare the
document 47?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And you used it in this case?
A.	As background information, yes.
Q.	All right. And did you select the
particular magazines and newspapers for her to look up?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	Do you know if the Ayer's Guide contains
Sports Illustrated?
A.	I'm sure it does.
(Martin Exhibit No. 48 was marked for identification purpose s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 4B?
A.	Well, it looks like the title page N. W.
Aver & Son's -- these are standard guides, well known -- Directory of Newspapers and Periodicals. This particular one, this volume is dated 19^5. They come out
yearly, and they give circulation figures for magazines and newspapers across the United States.
(Martin Exhibit No. 43 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 49?
A.	Circulation figures from Ayer's for the
Kansas City Times: 1962 and 1964, drawn from the Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 50 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) And Exhibit 50;'
A.	Circulation figures drawn from the Ayer's
Guide, Kansas City Kansan; 1954-1957, 1962 and 1964.
q.	And did you ask Kelly Harrison to copy
that?
A.	Katie.
Q.	Katie Harrison?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 51 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 51?
A.	Springfield News and Leader. Missouri,
circulation figures from the Ayer's Guide; 1955-1960.
Q.	Whose arrows and handwriting and marks are
on that document?
A.	Well, that could be some unknown student
at the University of Houston.
MR. KACZYNSKI: Defacing public property?
A.	Defacing public property. This isn't
ours. This isn't our marking.
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) All right.
A.	But that would be Katie Harrison's
handwriting.
Q.	And it looks like there was some
defacement in the Springfield ar:a here on the second page of this document?
A.	Yes.
q.	is that there by design; do you know?
A.	Maybe that is ink on this page. I can't
tell. No, because that information is summarized in the sheets that we'll be getting to in a momeii .
Q.	How are circulation numbers important to
you, if they were?
something that is put into circulation.
If I am going to say that Reader's Digest was the most widely read magazine in the United States or one of the most widely read, it would hopefully be based on something more substantial than thin air. So you go to the Ayer's Guide, That would be a standard procedure.
Q,	Do you know how many people lived in
Springfield at the time you had these numbers from the Ayer's Guide?
A.	It will be in the chart coming up very
soon .
Q.	I'm anxious to see it.
A.	Okay. I am, too.
(Martin Exhibit No. 52 was marked for identification purposes,)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} Exhibit 52?
A.	Springfield Leader and Press, Missouri;
1955 to 1960.
(Martin Exhibit No. 53 was marked for identification
purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 53?
A.	Kansas City Star: same, Ayer's Guide;
1954, 1957, 1962, 1964.
Q.	Did you look at that in the last five
months?
A .	Yes.
Q.	Did you look at all of these Ayer's Guide
documents in the last five months?
A,	Yes .
1	(Martin Exhibit No. 54 was
marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR, LEYH) What'3 54?
A-	Ebonv and Jet circulation; 1957, 1960.
Q.	Why did you want that?
A.	Well, I looked at some materials from
Ebonv magazine. We'll be getting to them.
Q.	Why did you look at materials from Ebony?
A,	Well, Ebonv is a magazine which is, from
what I know about it, is a general magazine that relates to issues in the black community and is sold primarily to black Americans.
Q.	At the time you requested information
about circulation in Ebonv. did you have any reason to believe that David Burton read Ebony magazine?
A .	No .
Q.	But you knew he was black?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. That's the only reason you sought
out the information on Ebony magazine; is that right?
A.	Well, it's a magazine that was read widely
in the black community.
Q.	He is black, and so therefore, you wanted
the information about Ebony?
A.	Well, one would assume that had something
to do with it.
Q.	Okay. I just want the record to be as
clear as possible about what the assumptions are.
(Martin Exhibit No. 55 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 55?
A.	Kansas City Kansan. 1958 to 196 3
circulation figures, Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 56 was
marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) That's 56 we're talking
about now. Ayer's Guide for what?
A.	Ayer's Guide for, well, this says Kansas
City Star. Kansas City Times for 1960. I think it must have been separated accidentally from the other material.
(Martin Exhibit No. 57 was marked for identification purposes.}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) ExhiDit 57?
A.	Circulation figures for the Emporia
Gazette; 1954 to 1965, drawn from the Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 5B was marked for identification purposes.}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 5B?
A.	Life magazine circulation figures drawn
from the Ayer's Guide, 1950 to 1965.
(Martin Exhibit No. 59 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 59?
drawn from the Ayer's Guide, 1950 to 1965.
(Martin Exhibit No. 60 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 60?
A.	Circulation figures, Time magazine, 1950
to 1965, drawn from the Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 61 was marked for identification purposes,)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) And what is Exhibit 61?
A.	Circulation figures, The New York Times.
1950 to 1965, drawn from the Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 62 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 62?	‘
A.	Reader's Digest circulation figures, 1950
to 1965, drawn from the Ayer's Guide.
(Martin Exhibit No. 63 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) ^hat is Exhibit 63?
A.	Miscellaneous materials from --
miscellaneous anti-cigarette materials.
Q.	Did you read these materials in 63 in the
last five months?
A,	I think I did, yes.
Q.	Do you know where you got these, Exhibit
63?
A.	No, I really don't. I really dcn't recall
specifically.
Q.	All right.
(Martin Exhibit No, 64 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 64?
A.	A miscellaneous article drawn from the
Science Newsletter, dated March 18, 1961, where a British surgeon calls smoking drug addiction.
q.	Do you know whether or not in lS^l any of
the tobacco companies in the United States thought that cigarette smoking -- excuse me -- thought that nicotine was addicting?
A.	I said earlier, I haven't looked at
tobacco company documents.
q.	Well, do you know from any other source
whether or not the companies in '61
thought that nicotine was addicting?
A.	No, I do not.
(Martin Exhibit No. 65 was marked for identification purposes.}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) 65?
A.	Consumer Reports from April of '51 through
October of 1965.
Q.	Now, there's some yellow Post-its
attached. Did you place those?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	Is your handwriting on the Post-its on the
documents in Exhibit 65?
A.	Yes, it is.
Q.	Have you read those in the last five
months ?
A.	Yes, I did. I read these actually in the
last two weeks because I didn't know I had them. I found them in the Ettling materials, and I pulled them out and read them within the last two to two and a half weeks.
Q.	Have you read them prior to your
preparation of your expert report?
Q.	So you didn't rely on them for that?
A.	Not for the expert report, no.
(Martin Exhibit No. 66 was narked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 66?
A.	Title pages from two volumes dealing with
television programming. I asked Katie Harrison to go to our library and see if she could come up with materials that would at least give us a sense of when certain kinds of programs were on and why and any information about those programs. One of these has to do with the "See It Now" program in a general sense.
(Martin Exhibit No. 67 was marked fcr identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 6 7?
A.	Slang terms related to tobacco with copies
of the volumes from which this material, the summary sheet was drawn.
Q.	Who prepared the summary sheet?
A.	Katie Harrison.
terms?
Q.	Is it fair to say that over time those
terms change in meaning?
A.	I don't believe we call the term "fag11 an
inferior cigarette anymore.
Q.	That's a "yes," I guess?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Did you look at this stuff in order to
prepare your expert report?
A .	Ye s .
Q.	All right.
(Martin Exhibit No. 68 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) And ./hat is 68, please?
A.	A copy of a Ladies Home Journal article,
dated November 1961, dealing with a group who went through a program to stop smoking.
Q.	Did you read that in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 69 was marked f-**r identification purposes.)
A.	This is a book entitled To Smoke or Not To
Smoke, lothrop, Lee & Shepherd publishers, New York, by Luther Terry, Surgeon General at the time of the issuing of the 1964 report, and Daniel Horn, involved in the cancer retrospect -- I'm sorry, cancer perspective studies of the 1950s, copyright 1969. This is a book for children to teach them about health problems related to smoking.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months ?
A.	No.
(Martin Exhibit No. 70 was marked for identification purposes,}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 7 o’?
A.	David Burton, this is the David Burton
deposition, dated November 7, 1994,
Volume I; and I believe there is a second deposition, the second part, Volume II, dated November 8, 1994.
deposit ion?
Q.	I noticed in Volume I some highlighting
had been copied over, so there's some blackened marks. Do you know whose highlighting that is?
A.	No .
Q.	Is it yours?
A .	No .
Q.	You didn't make any marks in either
volume?	.
A.	No .
Q.	what else is in that exhibit?
A,	"First Amended Complaint, Mr. David Burton
vs. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and The American Tobacco Company."
Q.	Did you read that document?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you know approximately when you were
provided with that document?
A.	I would guess approximately six weeks to
two months ago.
"David Burton and Ora Burton, Plaintiffs vs. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Memorandum and Order," dated 3-13-95.
q.	Did you read that document?
A.	Yes .
q.	Within the last six weeks or so?
A.	Yes.
q.	Do you recall the Court's discussion of
warning s ?
A.	Well, I marked something in here. No, I
don't recall at this particular point.
Q.	Where did you mark; on what page?
A.	There are all sorts of markings in here.
Well, I had a question mark; I guess I put this in here. This is on Page 23. It said that "the addictive qualities of cigarettes may have been" -- "the ordinary consumer's knowledge concerning the addictive qualities of cigarettes may have been when (plaintiff) began smoking in 1940." I put a question mark there. I thought that was possibly an erroneous date because if I'm not mistaken, he would have been five years old at that time.
q.	Do you think that's a material difference
in the Court's remarks?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) If you know.
Q.	Okay. What else did you mark, any other
particular issues?
A.	Well, there's a marking here: "It is
interesting that in the context of defending this lawsuit defendants contend that the dangerous properties of cigarettes are common knowledge, while less than one year ago they testified in front of Congress that certain claimed dangerous propensities of their products did not exist at all."
Q.	Why did you mark that?
A.	I have no idea at this point. It was
probably my attempt to understand what this document was about. This is the first time I had ever read this kind of a document.	’
Q,	Do you recall the representatives of the
tobacco companies testifying in front of Congressman Waxman's committee and saying that they believed, under oath, cigarettes and nicotine were not addictive? ■
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you find it ironic, given what you've
described here today and in your expert report as common knowledge -A.	I think we are going to go right back and go over our discussion about the meaning of addiction again. If you would like to do that, I'm ready.
Q.	I really don't want to do that. This is a
new subject, professor. It has to do with whether or not the testimony -A.	This is not new testimony.
Q.	It's new in the sense that it has to do
with the testimony in front of the Waxman committee. Did I ask you this morning about the CEO's testimony?
A.	I'm sure it was mentioned, but at this
point, I'm having a hard time recalling.
Q,	Do you have an opinion as to whether or
not it's ironic that the CEOs testified as they did in light of your statements about the public awareness of addiction?
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
A.	No, I don't have an opinion.
q.	{BY MR. LEYH) Do you have any opinion at
all with respect to the testimony of the tobacco companies' CEOs regarding the nonaddicting -A.	Once again, I was asked to investigate
materials relating to smoking and possible health issues in the period from the early eighteenth century through the mid-1960s, and I was asked to look at those same questions with respect to public awareness and the possible addictive qualities or habit-forming qualities of smoking for the same period.
Q.	Now, would you answer my question.
A.	I answered your question this morning when
I said the term "addiction" has pretty much ceased to have much meaning in our society. That's my personal opinion.
Q.	And is it your opinion that when the CEOs
of the tobacco companies said they believed nicotine was not addictive -A.	I said --
q,	Let me finish. Their use of the word was
meaningless or without much meaning.
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
individuals are saying. I don't have the slightest idea of what those individuals are saying. I'm sure that in the context of that discussion, there was some definition of addiction written somewhere, someplace, sometime that Congressman Waxman was holding them to. I don't have any knowledge of what that definition would have been.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Does it strike you as
ironic that they would say what they said about nicotine and addiction, given what you claim to know about the public awareness of nicotine as an addiction, source of addiction?
MR. KACZYNSKI; Objection.
A .	No .
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Why not?
A.	No.
Q.	Why?
A.	Because it doesn't strike me as ironic.
Q.	For what reasons?
A.	For what reasons?
Q.	Yes, do you have any reasons for that
opinion?
bear some relationship. And in one case in the !.at.e 1980s, you are talking about a scientific definition that has been provided apparently by the Surgeon General; and back in the 1940s and 1950s all the way back until King James I, we were talking about other definitions much more general which, as I've stated repeatedly today, were an indication that it would be difficult to quit smoking.
In irony you must have properties which bear on each other; and what I'm saying is that until you have this formal scientific definition, in the late 1980s you have terms as various as "bewitching,’1 "enslaving," "artificial passion," "addicted to the cigarette habit," and on and on, all of which make it clear that if you start smoking it may be difficult to quit.
Q.	Don't the meanings at both points in time,
1996 and when you were doing your research, at le^st bear on the sense i:i which cigarette smoking is habi t. - forming
behavior or addictive behavior. isn't there that commonality to the various definitions of "addiction"?
A.	Well, I'm not sure there is that
commonality because in one case we had a public pronouncement by a public health official that said we define this for all time; and in the other case, we had a series of popular definitions that rolled through society over a 300- to a 350-year period.
Q.	And the public official you're talking
about that said we should define addiction this way for all time, is that the Surgeon General?
A.	I believe so, yes.
Q.	Is this the report that you haven't read?
A.	That's right.
Q.	You don't know how he defined it in that
report, do you?
A.	No, I do not.
Q.	Why do you say he defined it for all time
or he thought he was defining it for all time ?
from the United States Government with the imprimatur from the Surgeon General.
Q.	So any official pronouncement of a
scientific concept in your judgment was an official pronouncement for all time?
A.	That's not what I said.
Q.	Is it the case?
A.	That's not what I said.
MR. KACZYNSKI: Objection.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Is it the case nonetheless
that any time an official organization of the Government defines a concept, they are defining it for all time?
A.	No.
Q.	Why do you say that's what the Surgeon
General did, then?
A.	The Surgeon General decided that he wanted
to make a certain kind of a definition, for all I know -- since I haven't read it, I don't know why we're having this discussion, if I can make that point for the 28th time today.
Q.	You don't have any particular knowledge on
the Surgeon General's report; is that right?
Q.	Now, tell me why you think the Surgeon
General was defining addiction for all time.
A.	Because I think that it is what he wanted
to do .
Q.	What makes you think that's what he wanted
to do?
A.	Because he was C. Everett Koop.
Q.	What dees that mean?
A.	That C. Everett Koop wanted a specific
definition of addiction so that cigarettes could therefore be declared legally addictive and therefore subject to all sorts of federal regulations that they would not otherwise be subject to.
Q.	I see. You believe he wanted the
Government to regulate, and that colored his definition of addiction in the '88 report?
A.	I haven't read the '88 report, so I don't j
know whether that's the case or not; but	j
my guess is that may have had something to do with it.
Q.	In any case, that's your suspicion about
C. Everett Koop's -A.	If I would research that, that would be something that I would want to investigate; that's correct. Whether that's a possibility, it may be true or it may not be true but it could be a suspicion.
Q.	Well, it is a suspicion of yours, isn't
it?
A.	I said it could be a suspicion.
Q.	Now, do you know who the editors, the
senior editors, of the report were?
A.	I haven't read the report.
Q.	So what? I asked you if you knew who the
senior editors were.
A.	No .
Q.	All right. Nobody has told you, in other
words, anything about who contributed material to the '88 report; is that right?
A.	No.
MS. McDOLE: Okay. I think we should take a break. You two need to take a break.
MK. LEYH: I'm ready to continue. If you folks want to
take a break, then take a break.
If you want to do this for 24 or 48 hours -MS. McDOLE: I think -Wait.	' MR. LEYH: It's not my call.
MS. McDOLE; You don't need to argue.
MR. LEYH: Is it $110 an
hour?
MS. McDOLE: You're asking argumentative questions,
MR. LEYH: We're off the record.
MS. McDOLE: No, we're not off the record.
MR. LEYH: All right. I'm not asking argumentative questions. I'm probing the witness' opinions. He doesn't want to ar.swer about anything beyond the four corners of his document, and I'm entitled to ask him questions that go well beyond the four corners of his document. That's
what I've been doing.
MS. McDOLE: I think we've been here all day long and listened to you ask questions and him give answers that are well beyond the four corners of the document.
You're asking very argumentative questions, you're on the edge of your seat, you're halfway over the table, and you're raising your voice. We're taking a break.
MR. LEYH: That's not true.
I'm not halfway over the table.
(A short recess was taken.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) We're looking at the
Court's Memorandum and Order which is contained in Exhibit 70.	<
. < (Mr. Kaczynski left the deposition room.)	!
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) I've got the Order opened
up to Page 2 1 where you've made a mark in the margins with respect to a quote.
Well, let me just read it. It says, "The relevant inquiry is 'whether the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to
require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law.'"
Is it your opinion just as it relates to the public awareness information in your expert report that the information is very, very one-sided on the side of lots of public information about the health risks?
A .	Yes.
Q.	And you rea*I this when? When did you read
this initially?
A,	Well, I had to read it sometime before I
filed the report because it's in the bibliography. I'd say it came in about the middle of December.
Q.	So you knew that was the standard before
you wrote your report?
MS. McDOLE: Objection to the form of the question; standard for what ?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Strike that. You knew that
was a part of the Court's reasoning in this Memorandum opinion; correct?
A.	Yes, and I would probably have known that
if the preponderance of evidence points in a certain direction, that would determine a case.
Q.	On summary judgment?
A.	Well, I wasn't picking up on that
particular angle.
Q.	On Page 22, there are a couple of other
cases mentioned in a passage that you've got flagged, Roysdon and Paugh. Have you read the opinions in those cases?
A.	No .
Q.	Has anyone described them to you?
A.	No -
Q.	The question mark you put on Page 23 next
to the year 1940, that's a quote from the Rogers case; is that right?
A.	"Stated in Rogers v. R. J. Reynolds...
there is no basis for our judicially noticing what the ordinary consumer's knowledge concerning" -- oh, it's from the Rogers case.
Q.	When you put that question mark you
thought: it was a Burton case?
A.	I think I was assuming it was the Burton
case. I just -- frankly as a historian we
don't put our, I don't know what you describe these as, parenthetical notes, we don't put them in the text. We put them at the bottom of the page or elsewhere.
I'm sure? that as I was reading this, I skipped over i t.
Q.	Page 25, you've got an "N" in the margin.
What does that mean?
A.	Note .
q.	is that to designate it as particularly
important to you?
A.	Yes ,
Q.	Okay. What about that passage is of
particular importance?
A.	"The mere fact that plaintiff was aware of
some dangers relating to the use of	|
<
cigarettes does not necessarily	t
.	r
automatically insulate defendants from	<
warning of other dangers of which plaintiff may have been unaware."
Q.	What, if any, conclusions did you draw
about that?
A.	I think I noted it because it was a
concept that I thought was interesting, perhaps, and I didn't understand because
I'm not used to reading these kinds of document s.
Q.	Is there any more that you can tell me
about why you thought that concept was interesting?
A.	I guess, yes, because we're talking about
dangers in one category do not automatically affect dangers in another category, and that may have been something that I was unfamiliar with as a concept.
Q,	Can you tell me why you made that marginal
note on Page 27?
A.	I guess I must have been interested that
this information was available. "And a videotape" -- it says, "38 television commercials for Camel and Lucky Strike cigarettes."
Q.	You didn't ask for that tape, did you, or
any of that information?
A.	No, I didn't.
Q.	Okay. What is the last document in
Exhibit 70?
A.	"In the United States District Court for
the District of Kansas, David Eurton, Plaintiff, vs, R. J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company and The American Tobacco Company, Defendants; Answer to First Amended Complaint and Affirmative Defenses of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company."
Q.	Did you read that?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What, i;: anything of significance, did you
take from it?
A.	I took virtually nothing of significance
from it because I'm not sure I understood the document.
(Martin Exhibit No. 71 was ■narked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 71?
A.	Benjamin Rush's essays; 1798; entitled
"Observations Upon the Influence of the	;
Habitual Use of Tobacco Upon Health,
Morals, and Property," included in his volume, "Essays, Literary, Moral, and Philosophical"; and a copy of the Rush's "Moral and Physical Thermometer.”
Q.	Where did you get Exhibit 71?
A.	From the Rice Uni ersity Library microfilm
or microfiche collection.
A.	I'm going to guess the fall of 1994 or
early 1995.
Q.	Did you want tc get it in order to learn
more about tobacco-related matters -A.	Yes.
Q.	- - in the context of litigation?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Have you read it in the last five
months ?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 72 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) What's Exhibit 72?
A.	A Countierblaste to Tobacco, imprinted at
London, year 1604, written by King James I. This is a copy of the complete pamphlet that was published in a modern collection entitled Minor Prose Works of King James VI and I. published by the Scottish Text Society, Edinburgh, in 1982.
Q.	Have you read it in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
Houston Library, so we get it through interlibrary loan.
Q.	You specifically sought that volume?
A.	This?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 73 was marked for identification purposes.}
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 73?
A.	Notes from the trip that I took. I have
been aware for years and years of the Arents Tobacco Collection at the New York Public Library. It's the most detailed collection in the United states, if not the world, having to do with tobacco materials. And when Mr. Kaczynski and Mr. Koethe asked me about perhaps doing some research, I said that I thought that going to th^ Arents Collection was a fundamental activity, and these are the notes from two days at the Arents Collection.
Q.	And did they pay for the visit?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Did you manage to review everything at the
collect ion?
A.	That would have been an impossibility.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Two years might have been possible.
Q.	What sorts of documents, if you can
generalize, did you want to review, in fact, review in your two days there?
A.	Well, the kinds of documents that dealt
with everything, I think, right up front in terms of key words, anti-tobacco, activity, attitudes towards the therapeutic use of tobacco, questions regarding nicotine diseases and ailments, and the medicinal use of tobacco.
Q.	How long have you been working on your
book on smoking?
A.	We signed a contract for that book in
approximately July of 1995.
Q.	When did you first decide that you wanted
to write such - book?
for Drinking in America, we constantly ran across materials relating to both drinking and smoking and the relationship between the two. We commented at that time, this would have been in the late 1970s, that this would be a good project to turn to at some future point.
What intervened in the meantime was that I left Rutgers University and moved to the University of Houston, and we were, instead of ^eirg a few miles apart, we were now 1,500 miles apart. So we did not pursue this particular topic at that time.
q,	Have either or both of you ever applied
for any grant money to help defray the costs of preparing the book?
A.	Grant money?
Q.	Yes, from any source.
A.	No .
q.	Do you know whether or not Professor
Linder has been consulting with tobacco companies ?
(Martin exhibit No. 74 was marked for identification
purposes.)
A.	Mr. Fowler's Disquisition on the Evils of
Using Tobacco, by Orin Fowler, published in 18 3 3.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	I've reviewed it in the last five months.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	I can't remember.
Q.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 75 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 75?
A.	Tobacco: Its History. Nature, and Effects
on the Body and Mind, by Joel Shew, S-h-e-w, M.D.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	I've reviewed it in the last five months.
Q.	Do you know where you got it?
(Martin Exhibit No. 76 was marked for identification
purposes.)
A.	The title of this publication is Thoughts
and Stories on Tobacco for American Lads, or Uncle Toby's Advice to His Nephew Billy Bruce. published anonymously in 1852 but written by the Rev, George Trask, T-r-a-s-k.
0.	Where did you get that?
A.	Through interlibrary loan, I believe.
This volume i£ we can find it, I think it came from a college, Bowdoin College, in Maine, B-o-w-d-o-i-n.
Q.	Have you read this in the last five
months ?
A,	Yes .
{Martin Exhibit No. 77 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 71?
A.	"A Mediation on" --
MS, MCDOLE: Wait. 77.
Q.	(BY MR., LEYH) Sorry, 77.
A.	"A mediation ou Tobacco," published in
A.	Yes, I either read it or reviewed it.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	I'm not sure.
(Martin Exhibit No. 78 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 78?
A.	"A New Counterblaste," appeared in
Atlantic, December 1861. I thought the author - - I can't find the author on this. It may be here somewhere. If I could look up my report, I could see where there's a listed author.
Q.	It's not important. Let's just go on.
A.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 79 was marked for identification purposes . )
Q.	(EY MR. LEYH) 79?
A.	"Tobacco: Its Use and Abuse."
Q,	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	Yes, I reviewed this in the last five
months.
A.	I don't recall.
(Martin Exhibit No. 80 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 80?
MS. McDOLE: Where's Exhibit 73? There's 71, 72 and 74.
MR. LEYH: I'm sure I couldn't have misnumbered them.
n.	(BY MR. LEYH) 80?
A.	John Griscom, The Use of Tobacco and the
Evils... Resulting Therefrom: published in 1868; got this from the Library of Congress.
Q.	Read it. in the last five months?
A.	Yes .
(Martin Exhibit No. 81 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 81?
A.	John C. Draper, "Tobaccophagoi and
Tobaccophagism,"
know. I don't recall at this point.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	Yes, I reviewed this.
(Martin Exhibit No. 82 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 82?
A.	"Our Fashionable Narcotic," written by	.
Rev. Pry, appeared in the Ladies' Repository, January 1870.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	I can't be sure.
Q.	Have you read it in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No, 83 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Exhibit 83?
A.	John Cowan, The Use of Tobacco vs. Purity.
Chastity and Sound Health, published in 1870. This includes only the table of contents. We h Jive been trying to get this volume through interlibrary loan, and the
only copy apparently in existence of the full text is in the Arents Collection.
Q.	Do you know where you got that?
A.	Where I got this particular document?
Q.	Yes .
A.	No, I don't know where I got that copy.
(Martin Exhibit No. 84 was marked for identification purposes.)
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is Exhibit 84?
A.	The Tobacco Plug and Cigar. I can't find
the author, although I don't know why; published in 1875.
Q.	Do you know where you got it?
A.	I thought this one came from the Library
of Congress and there's no marking and the title page seems to be missing. So I would have to answer I just don't know.
q.	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	I've reviewed it, yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 85 was marked for identification purpose;.. }
A.	B. W. Chase, Tobacco: Its Physical.
Mental. Moral and Social Influences; published in 1878.
Q.	Have you read that within the last five
months?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No, 86 was marked for identification purpose s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) 86?
A.	This is actually a three-in-one pamphlet. -
So I'll just give the first one, if that's okay. Anti-Tobacco; by Abiel, A-b-i-e-1, Abbot Livermore and others; published in 1883 .
Q.	Do you know where you got it?
A.	Yes, the Library of Congress.
Q.	And have you read it in the last five
months?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 87 was marked for identification purpos e s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 87?
A.	Charles Towns, "The Injury of Tobacco and
Its Relation to Other Drug Habits"; dated March 1912; Century magazine.
Q.	Read it in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Do you know where you got it?
A.	No, I don't remember.
(Martin Exhibits Nos. B8 through 102 were marked for identification purposes.)
MS. McDOLE: ^O you want to put t-he whole stack in front of him?
MR. LEYH: Why didn't I think of that?
MS. McDOLE: For the record, say what the next exhibit is.
THE WITNESS: Do you want me to keep going?
MS. McDOLE; I think so.
A.	Oh, okay. Exhibit No. 88, "The Truth
About Tobacco11, by F. C. Walsh; the Technical World, in 1914.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Read it in the last five
i
months?	i
last five months.
A.	I don't recall.
Q.	Okay.
A.	Exhibit No. 89, The Little White Slaver.
by Henry Ford and others, published in a complete volume in 1916.
Q.	Read it in the last five months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	Through interlibrary loan.
Exhibit No. 90, The Brown God and His White Imps or the Evils of Tobacco and Cigarettes. . . . Theo F. Freeh and L. H. Higley, published in 1916.
Q.	Five months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Where?
A.	I believe this one is from the Library of
Congress.
Q.	Okay.
A.	No. 91, Tobaccoism. by John Harvey
Kellogg. This is the revised edition, published in 1937; original edition in 1922 .
A.	Yes, I think this is from the Library of
Congress, but I'm not positive.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Thank you.
A.	Michael -- I'm sorry. This is No. 92.
Tobacco and Mental Efficiency,
M. V. O'Shea; published in 1923.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	This is from interlibrary loan.
Q.	And have you read that in the last five
months ?
A.	I've given this a very quick scan because
it only came in, I would say, around the middle of December.
Q .	Okay.
A.	Jack Gottsegen, this is No. 93. Tobacco:
A study of Its Consumption in the United States. published in 1940.
Q.	Have you read it in the last five months?
A.	I've reviewed this within the last five
months.
loan. It says the New York Public Library on the front.
Q.	Okay.
A.	94, collection of essays by Ernest Wynder,
W-y-n-d-e-r, The Biologic Effects of Tobacco. published in 1955.
Q.	Have you read that in the last five
months ?
A.	I've reviewed it in the last five months.
Q.	Okay.
A.	No. 95, Science Looks at Smoking. A New
Inquiry Into the Effects of Smoke on Your Health. by Eric Northrup, published in 1957 .
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	Through interlibrary loan.
Q.	And have you read it for this case?
A.	I've reviewed it in the last five months.
No. 96, Smoking.. -I-t_s._iniluence on ths Individual and Its Role in Social Medicine. by C. Van Proosdy,
P-r-o-o-s-d-y.	]
Q.	Did you read that for this case?	1
I
I
A.	I don't; think this is in the University of
Houston Library, so it could have been in the Rice University Library or the Texas Medical Center Library.
Q.	Okay.
A.	No. 97, Tobacco & Your Health: Th_e .Smoking
Controversy, by Harold S. Diehl, 1969.
Q.	Have you read it for this case?
A.	I've reviewed it within the last five	.
months.
Q.	Where did you get it?
A.	From the -- I believe this is from the
University of Houston Library.
Q.	Okay. Next ?
A.	Gordon L. Dillow, this is an article from
American Heritage. "The Hundred-Year War Against the Cigarette," published in 1981.
Q,	Did you read it for this case?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Where did you get that?
A.	I don't know. I don't recall. I may have
gotten it out of ‘ he University of Houston Library, except it says it's a reprint.
MS. McDOLE: That was No. 98.	.
A.	No. 99, again from American Heritage.
"What Was It Like to be Sick in 1884 ," by-Charles E. Rosenberg, published in 1984.
I believe this was copied from the University of Houston Library collection of American Heritage.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH} Did you read it for this
case ?
A.	Yes, I did.	.
Q.	Okay.
A.	The article is --
MS, MCDOLE: Number 100?
A.	No. 100, thank you. John C. Burnham,
"American Physicians and Tobacco Use: Two Surgeons General, 1929 and 1964."
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Did you read that for this
case?
A.	Yes. Published in 1989 in the Bulletin of
the History of Medicine.
Q.	Is that significant that it's in the
Bulletin of the History of Medicine.?
Allan M. Brandt, "The Cigarette, Risk, and American Culture," appeared in a journal called Daedalus in 1990.
Q.	Did you read that for this report?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay.
A .	N e x t - -
MS. McDOLE: No. 10 2?
A.	No. 102, "Cigarette Century," John A.
Meyer. This appeared in American Heritage December of 1992.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Did you read it for this
case?
A.	Yes.
MS. McDOLE: Was that the end of a box, or is that out of the same box?
MR. LEYH: No, we're not at the end of the box, yet.
(Martin Exhibit No. 103 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) I have put in a binder a
bunch of articles that I think belong together and marked it as 103. Can you
tell me what's in it and if they go together?
A.	Yes, these are the medical.-related
articles that appear in the bibliography attached to my report,
Q.	Did you read all of those for this report?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 104 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's Exhibit 104? '
A.	It contains the Kansas Report and the
Kansas State Adopted Textbooks Report prepared by Richard K. Means, Emeritus Professor and Director of Health Education, Auburn University. October of 1995 is the date on it.
Q.	Did you specifically request that material
for this case?
A.	Yes.
Q,	And you read it all?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 105 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) And what is Exhibit 105?
A.	Exhibit 105 is a similar report prepared
for Indiana. It's called the Indiana Report prepared in August of 1994 by Richard K. Means. This was material that was relevant to the Rogers case in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Q.	Doe & Means prepare this for litigation,
pull these materials together?
A.	Yes, I believe so. Yes.
MS. McDOLE: Do you mean just for litigation?
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Have you talked to him?
MS. McDOLE: Objection to the
form.
A.	Yes.
q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Have you asked him for
various documents and in various states in terms of their education?
A.	The two that I have been involved in.
I'll take that back; there was a third one. It was Indiana, Kansas, and New Jersey.
Q.	And briefly, what is the nature of your
requests? What do you tell them you want?
having to do with laws bearing on public education and textbook adoption for the state in question.
Q.	How did you come to find out about
Professor Means?
A.	Well, through two sources, John Ettling,
my former Houston colleague told me and talked to me about Professor Means and his work, and I would say it would have been in June of 1994 approximately, either Paul Koethe and/or Steve Kaczynski also told me about him.
Q.	Okay. This page that is free floating, is
the page that was missing? You said at one point there was a cover sheet that looked like it was missing.
A.	That possibly is the case.
q,	I don't want to mark it, but you can keep
it together with the other documents.
This, however, I will mark.
(Martin Exhibit No. 106 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 106?
conversation that I had with Shelley Bookspan about papers, newspapers that would perhaps be relevant to this case. It's the best of my recollection, or I may have had the telephone conversation with Paul Koethe after I talked to Shelley Bookspan, one or the other.
Q.	Okay.
MS. McDOLE: Are we finished with this box?
MR. LEYH: Yes.
MS. McDOLE: Okay. We are missing that one exhibit.
MR. LEYH: No. 73?
MS. McDOLE: Yes. I couldn't find it, if we did talk about it.
(Martin Exhibit No. 107 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 107?
A.	These are articles appearing in Reader's
Digest from, I believe, the first date is 1924 through October of 1.963, including a list that I asked Xatie Harrison to
prepare for me of the articles and a sample draft of references to heart disease and smoking in some of the articles that I also asked Katie Harrison to prepare for me.
Q.	Okay.
(Martin Exhibit No. 108 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) 108?
A.	Life magazine articles from the 1950s
having to do with smoking and health issues,
{Martin Exhibit No. 109 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) 109?
A.	Articles from Ebonv magazine, dated
i960 - something, I believe 1962 , and 1974 dealing with smoking.
(Martin Exhibit No. 110 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH) What's 110?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 111?
A,	The summary that I asked Katie Harrison to
prepare for me, references to tobacco related to the heart or blood circulation in Good Health Magazine.
(Martin Exhibit No. 112 was marked for identification purposes.)
0.	What's 112?
A.	Good Health Magazine from 1942 to 1953.
Q.	Did you personally look at all of these
Good Health Magazine articles?
A.	Yes.
(Martin Exhibit No, 113 was marked for identification purpose s.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What is 113?
A.	Good Health Magazine. Volume II,
January 1930 to May 1942.
THE WITNESS: I need to take that five-1 inute break.
MS. McDOLE: Sure.
(A short recess was taken; and Martin Exhibit No. 114 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What's 114? It looks like
Newsweek articles, but you tell me.
A.	Newsweek articles.
(Martin Exhibit No. 115 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) 115 looks like Time
articles; is that right?
A.	That is correct, yes.
(Martin Exhibit No. 116 was marked for identification purposes.)
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What I've marked 116 looks
like a big box of New York Times material with a package of Indiana material; is that right?
A.	That is correct.
Q.	Is there one file folder with
miscellaneous?
A.	With miscellaneous newspapers, yes.
to Lucy Page Gaston and the decision by the Kansas Supreme Court and the Nossaman case to sustain the anti-cigarette law in Kansas. I think that's pretty much what's in here,
Q.	All right. Now, does anybody see any
other boxes or documents we haven't been through? I think that covers it.
A.	I'm not aware of any.
Q.	What did you do, if anything, professor,
to prepare for this deposition?
A.	I had initially a day and a half meeting,
sum total of which in that day and a half period of about eight hours perhaps, back in late January at a time when I think the deposition was originally scheduled for some time around the first of February.
I had follow-up meetings as I remember on two occasions, and then two days ago, I came to this hotel and met during the morning hours with Sidney McDole and J. C, McElveen. Yesterday, I was here and met with Steve Kaczynski and
an attorney by the name of Cathy Bjorck. That brings us to today.
Q.	That's a lot o£ meetings?	.
A.	Yes.
Q.	First one was over a two-day period,
approximately eight hours?
A.	Approximately eight hours, yes.
Q.	Who was at that meeting?
A.	Steve Kaczynski and I believe Tom Pavlik,
P-a-v-l-i-k. He was with the firm,
Q.	Jones, Day firm?
A.	Jones, Day, yes.
Q.	Where was the meeting held?
A.	At the -- well, it was in the Galleria
area. Right now the name of the hotel escapes me. I'll remember it in two minutes,	.
Q.	Here in Houston?
A.	Yes, here in Houston.
Q.	Well, tell me what they told you about the
deposition.
A.	Well, they explained the process to me.
And I raised a series of questions with them trying to understand that process, and that's what we talked about.
A.	They told me that I should make an honest
attempt to answer the questions; and above all else, I should make every effort, as it was my sworn duty, to tell the truth.
Q.	What else did they tell you about the
process?
A.	They told me that there would be a record
taken at the deposition, that sort of thing.
q.	Did they tell you anything about what they
anticipated the questions might be?
A.	They asked me a whole series of questions,
yes.
Q,	What kinds of questions did they ask you?
A.	They asked me questions ranging from my
personal views on smoking to concent questions with respect to the documents that I had reviewed.
Q.	Did they, in effect, give you a mock
cross-examination?
i
A.	Well, they asked questions, but I don't	‘
know whether they call that a mock cross-examination or .iOt.
Q.	Did they make suggestions in terms of what
answers were appropriate?
A.	I would say that it was more, why did you
decide to answer that question or this question in that particular manner.
q.	Did they ask you to think about other
possible information that might be provided in answer to a question that you hadn't initially provided?	.
A.	In relation to my report?
Q.	In relation to any question they asked
you ,
A.	Not to the best of my recollection.
Q.	Are you a smoker?
A.	Yes.
q.	How long have you been a smoker?
A.	Well, on and off since I was in college.
q.	How much do you smoke?
A.	At this time, about a pack a day.
Q.	What brand of cigarette do you smoke?
A.	Kent Ultra Lights.
q.	Why do you swoka the ultra lights?
Q.	For health reasons?
A.	Well, I've never, ever, smoked a strong
cigarette. And since I'm very good at quitting for up to seven years or more on certain occasions, I've never wanted to smoke a cigarette that was strong in nicotine; and Kent is very low in nicotine.
Q.	How many times have you quit?
A.	At least three that I can remember.
Q.	Did Mr. Kaczyn3ki or Mr. Pavlik in this
first meeting that you had talk to you about any legal theories in the case?
A,	Legal theories in reference to what? I
don't - -
Q.	In reference to what was important from a
legal point of view with respect to the case?
A.	I think that's difficult for me to answer
since I'm not sure what you mean by "legal theories . 11
Q.	Let me ask it this way: Did they tell you
that one subject or another was important to the lawyers?
Q.	Did they talk to you about common
knowledge relating to cigarette smoking and the hazards?
A.	Well, they didn't at these meetings
because I raised that issue months ago.
Q.	And how did you raise that issue?
A.	I raised that issue because of my own
awareness of what to the best of my understanding has been ruled in alcohol cases, especially in a Texas State Supreme Court case against -- a case of: local citizens against one of the major manufacturers, I believe it was Seagram's.
q.	is that the McGuire case?
A.	I don't know. All I can tell you was that
Drinking in America was cited as a source in that particular case.
Q.	Did you make any notes at this meeting?
A,	At that meeting, no.
q.	Did you make any notes when you got back?
A.	No.
Q.	Did you review any documents at that
meeting?
A.	No .
q.	Did you review any documents in
Q.	When was the next occasion you had to meet
with someone to prepare for your deposit ion?
A.	I think - - and I can only give you
approximate dates. it was about two weeks after that time, so I would guess it was probably around February 7th.
Q.	And with whom did you meet at that time?
A.	I met with Paul Koethe, and I believe Tom
Pavlik was at that meeting,
Q.	Where was that meeting?
A.	Here at the Marriott Hotel.
Q.	How long did you meet with them?
A.	somewhere between two and three hours.
Q.	What did you discuss?
A.	I would say 1 don't remember anything at
this point in particular, but we reviewed some of the --we went over some of the questions that they had asked me at the first meeting. We went over them at the second meeting.
Q.	whose idea was the second meeting?
Koethe would have had something to do with it.
Q.	Did you. have a desire to have an
additional prep session?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. Did you see any documents at that
second meeting?
A.	No.
Q.	Was there a third meeting two days ago
with Ms;. McDole?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Was that; in fact, the third meeting?
A.	Yes, I think that's correct.
Q.	Okay. And tell me where you met,
A.	Here at; the Marriott.
Q.	How long did you meet?
A.	I would say for approximately three hours.
Q.	Tell me what Ms. McDole told you.
A.	Well, she again spoke with me about the
process. And she also showed me the document, and we reviewed the document which stated what materials I needed to bring.
Q.	What document vms that; do you know?
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) Okay.
A.	That was the first time I had seen that
particular page.
Q.	That's when she told you not to bring your
statement, your invoice for time?
A.	I can't remember whether that was then or
some other conversation.
Q.	Okay. What else did she say about the
deposition?
A.	Well, she and Mr. McElveen asked me
questions again.
Q.	What questions did they ask you?
A.	Well, I would say everything from my
attitudes toward smoking, my own personal attitudes towards smoking to -MS. MCDOLE: Jim?
Q.	(BY MR.. LEYH) Your attitudes towards
smoking?
A.	My personal attitudes toward smoking --
Q.	Okay.
A.	-- to questions about the materials that I
had gone through.
about the materials you had gone through.
A.	As I remember, we had talked about the
various kinds of materials and documents that I had been through, and what I thought was consequential and significant about those documents.
Q.	Can you recall a single question that they
asked you?
A.	Yes. What was my attitude -- what was my
personal attitude toward smoking.
Q.	What was your answer to that question?
A,	My personal attitude is that it can be
difficult to quit smoking and that individuals have to weigh the risks, the possible health risks, if they decide to smoke.
Q.	Okay. Did you tell them anything more
than what you just told me about your answer?
A.	I don't recall that I did.
Q.	Do you recall any other specific questions
they asked you?
A.	No.
Q.	Did they tell you -- has any lawyer for
other deposition testimony, other expert deposition testimony in this case?
A.	No.
Q-	Did they ask you any questions at any of
these meetings about advertisements?
A.	Yes.
Q.	What questions did they ask about
advert i sement s ?
A.	They asked me whether I had read
advertisements.
Q.	And you saiH "no"?
A.	I said "no."
Q.	Did they follow that up?
A.	Well, they asked me why I hadn't read
advertisements.
Q.	And you said you thought it wasn't	<
I
I
significant to your assignment?	f
A.	That's correct.	J
Q-	Did they follow that up?
A.	I'm not really sure that they did.
Q.	Did they ask you questions about tobacco
company internal documents?
A.	I don't recall that they did. They may
well have asked at scaie point had I ever seen any tobacco company documents. I'm
sure I answered based on the original principle to tell the truth that I had not seen any internal tobacco company document: s .
Q.	Did they ask you if you wanted to see
some ?
A.	No .
Q.	Do you recall anything else about this
meeting you had with J. C. and Ms. McDole?
A.	Not really.
Q.	And your meeting yesterday was with
Mr. Kaczynski?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	How long did you meet with him?
A.	Well, the day began by -- I had to link up
with my research assistant, and then we hauled the documents out here. And we . went through the documents very carefully according to the statement -MS. MCDOLE: Notice of Deposition.
A.	I can't remember the name of it. Notice
of Deposition to make sure and double--check that I had brought everything that I had or thought might in some way be
other than make sure you had all the documents requested?
A.	We talked about issues again, yes, with
respect to my opinions.
Q.	Which issues did you talk about yesterday?
A.	Well, as I remember, we did some general
weighting of categories of information. That was one activity that I remember.
Q.	How did that activity go?
A.	Well, it's a matter of -- I think we had a
fairly similar discussion. What documents may have been most significant at particular points of time. We also had a discussion about historical context and understanding documents in context and keeping those documents in context.
Q.	Is it your opinion that the best way to
understand a historical document is to situate it in its own historical context?
A.	If you don't do that, then you're making
it up .
Q.	Right. Did you talk yesterday about
whether or not it was common knowledge in
the Fifties that cigarettes caused disease?
A.	The phrase "common knowledge" did not come
up yesterday.
Q.	Public awareness?
A.	Yes, we certainly talked about public
awareness.
Q.	Do you understand there to be any
difference between those two phrases "common knowledge" and ''public awareness"?
A.	Well, public awareness is complete or
overwhelming, and I think one could conclude that common knowledge is present.
Q.	Do you recall anything else that you
discussed yesterday at the meeting?
A.	Yes, we talked about why certain documents
at certain times were more important than other documents at other times; for instance, the United States did not become a fully urban nation by census reports until the 1920s, so that when individuals were writing pamphlets in the nineteenth century, they were a far more impoi'tant source of information than they would be
in an industrializing, urbanizing, and communications-oriented society in the twentieth century.
I remember talking specifically about the Livermore pamphlet and how individuals like Livermore would go out traveling from community to community to community in rural areas and that this would be a major event as a way of communicating information and learning about issues, that sort of thing. And that goes back to why pamphlets perhaps were so important in the nineteenth century as compared to today when we have instant communication. We can turn on a television, radio, whatever it might be, to get the same kinds of information.
q.	in any of the discussions you had with the
defense lawyers that related to the weighting or ranking of the categories of documents, did any of those discussions include where tobacco advertisements might fit had you included them?
A.	No.
Q.	Have you had at various times telephone
conversations with anybody to prepare for this deposition?
A.	Well, I've had calls saying would you be
available at a certain point in time; but we didn't have any specific discussions that I can recall at this time beyond, well, where would you like to meet, and this is the time that I would be available given other activities and responsibilities in my schedule.
Q.	Did you do anything to prepare for this
deposition other than what you've already described?
A.	No.
Q.	Okay. I want to go back to Exhibit 5 a
moment with you.
A.	Okay.
Q.	First page of which says "Case File, David
Burton."
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Did you prepare the information on that
page?
A.	Yes, I did.
Q.	Okay. And did rou prepare it on the bisis
conversation with somebody? How did that go?
A.	That document, I must have put on my
computer the same day, I'm going by the date, that Steve Kaczynski called me about this particular case.
Q.	I think if we look here, there's an
8/11/95 note somewhere here?
A.	I think that's correct.
q.	So you and he were talking, then either
after the conversation or during, you prepared this?
A.	That's right.
Q.	So this is based on what Steve Kaczynski
told you?
A.	Yes .
Q.	Okay. Second page is called "David Burton
Case - Research Items."
A.	Yes.
Q.	Describe the circumstances you prepared
that document, if you did in fact prepare it.
A.	This document would have been prepared
after the meeting in Dallas, which T think I described earlier. It was late ir.
August, but approximately the 24th of August or 25th of August. I think there are notes about that meeting, too, about the kinds of research that we discussed.
Q.	Is that the page of notes?
A.	Yes, that's correct,
Q.	So what you in effect did with both of
these first two pages of Exhibit 5, you took written notes, then you transferred them into the computer system?
A.	That's correct, just as a form of trying
to stay on top of information.
Q.	All right. Now, with regard to the
handwritten notes you prepared dated 8/11/95 - -A.	Uh-huh.
Q.	-- it looks to me like it says
.	r
"March-August 1995 -- little	*
preparation"; is that what that says?	^
h
, t A.	Yes, I guess that is what it says.	-
q.	Do you know what that means?
A,	In this context, I don't really recall.
q.	Do you have an idea whether that would be
something Steve may have told you or
what I meant by that particular notation.
Q.	Okay. And it says "April 2, 1996” --
something. What is that word?
A .	"Prepped."
Q.	What does that mean?
A.	I presume it means that one would have to
be prepared to file a report by October 2, 1995. "Prepped" would be *eferr IA ^ tO prepared.
Q.	Okay. It says, "expect case to go to
trial"; is that right?
: A.	That's what I wrote.
Q.	Is that what he told you?
; A.	I guess that's what he must have said.
Q.	Do you recall what else he said in
connection with the comment that he expects the case to go to trial?
A.	No.
Q.	Is that -- what does the next line say?
A.	That my principal contact would be Paul
Koethe.
A .	"Work prin."
Q.	Okay. These are the issues that
Mr. Kaczynski identified for you that you've indicated "l}11 and "2}"?
A.	Yes.
Q.	He told you all the information contained
in this handwritten -A.	I asked him for information.
Q.	And he reported back, and you wrote it
down?
A.	Well, that was part of the telephone
conversation; tell me about the case; tell me about what's going on.
Q.	What is the word down here in front of
"track," looks like nuclear?
A.	"Unclear."
Q.	It says "unclear"?
A .	"Unclear."
Q.	Unclear what; track?
A.	"Unclear track 55-60." I think what Steve
was saying to me, he wasn't quite sure where David Burton had lived, but this was a recollection that he had.
Q.	And did he mention to you Rick Means?
A.	Rick Means, we talked about him in common
because I had worked with Richard Means on
Q.	Flipping to the second page, it is
apparently your note from the August 25 meeting; correct?
A.	Ye s .
Q,	And you've got "Meeting Dallas, J,D,R,P."
What does that all mean?
A.	Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue.
Q.	Who was at this meeting?
A.	Sidney McDole and Steve Kaczynski.
Q,	Okay. And you've got here, "two distinct
projects pre-1950 and 1950 forward." Who drew the distinction there between those two projects, them or you?
A.	I don't: really recall at this particular
point because there weren't two distinct projects pre- and post-1950.
Q.	You don't know? In other words -- go
ahead.
A.	That may have been a suggestion that I
made, but there were not two distinct pre-and post-1950 projects.
Q.	It says "did read Time. 11 Is that there
because they tcld you David Burton read Time?	'
TTM TTDFi DPTJnDTTMrt TNTT	fifll - Qfi/in
Q.	Why is "biography Henry Luce" there?
A,	Henry Luce was the long-time editor of
Time magazine. And I think I must have considered the possibility or suggested, well, rnaybe it would be worth learning something about Henry Luce, and that was not pursued.
Q.	"Katie to Cleveland," is that a reference
to sending her to Jones, Day -A.	Yes.
Q.	--to look at documents?
A.	Well, they said they have quite a
collection of documents, and I said, well, I'll talk to her about this case and send her up and see if she can find anything.
Q.	Did they suggest chat somebody from your
office, as it were, go to Cleveland to look CLt documents?
MS. McDOLE: Did we suggest
it?
MR. LEYH: Yes.
Q,	{BY MR. LEYH) Did the lawyers suggest it?
A.	Actually, I don't think that would have
been true in this particular case because
I had sent a person, I think I mentioned before, Diana Dean to Cleveland for the Rogers case.
Q.	Did Katie, in fact, go to Cleveland for
this case?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Did they tell you what kind of
documents they had in Cleveland?
MS. McDOLE: I'm sorry. Did we tell him in Dallas, or are you saying when somebody went to Cleveland, did somebody tell that person?
Q.	{BY MR. LEYH} I mean at this meeting of
August 2 5.
A.	No, I still really don't know specifically
what kinds -- I don't know the extent of the collection. I've never seen it.
Q.	Down here it looks like you've written
"athletic angle -- did message get through." Can you explain what that means ?
A.	I am sure I asked because of general
familiarity, did Tavid Burton participate in athletics. I think it was a very
natural thing for a person in my own position to ask because I had participated extensively in athletics in high school and into college; and I can remember more than one coach admonishing us not to smoke because we would be thrown off the team for breaking rules and because of the adverse effect it would have on our s t amina.
Q.	When were you in high school?
A.	1957 to 1961.
Q.	Now, beneath that you've got 11 Ebonv and
Jet possible" -A.	"Black paper in Kansas City."
Q.	Okay.
A.	I was asking whether there was a separate
black newspaper that was published in the
‘	u
region. There is, indeed, a separate	*
<
black newspaper published in Houston, and 1
i
I wondered if there was a source of	>
<
information, and to the best of: my knowledge, I don't know whether -- we couldn't find anything about a possible separate publication specifically for the black community.
q.	Did they suggest to you, they being the
lawyers at this meeting, that Mr. Burton read a black newspaper?
A.	No, that's my question.
Q.	Okay.
A.	That's why I've got the notation "local
black paper."
Q.	Here's a copy of a letter that you
apparently sent to Professor Means dated November 4, 1995.
A.	Yes.
q.	it says thank you "for sending me a copy
of your letter to Allen Purvis"?
A.	Yes.
Q.	is that letter in your file?
A.	I don't, know where that letter is, quite
honestly.
Q.	Do you recall what the contents of the
letter were?
A.	I called Dick because when I read the
Kansas Course of Study for 1932, Ot which there is a separate copy in one of the boxes, that I thought that was a very significant document, and he had no* reproduced it completely. And I said is
there any way to get me a copy of that particular document, the Kansas Course of Study dated 1932?
.	And he said he would see if there
would be some fast way to get it, that he had no plans to go back to Kansas in his immediate future. So I think that he called up Allen Purvis, whom I met in 1986 as I recall or maybe it was later as an attorney in the Kansas City area, and asked Allen if he might find some way to get a copy of that document. I think that's what that is in reference to.
Q.	Have you talked to Allen Purvis since that
initial meeting in '86?
A.	I talked to him once on the phone in 1994,
and I honestly can't remember what it was about. I think it was during the summer of 1994, and it may have been in reference to something having to do with the Rogers case. That was the last time that I talked to him.
0.	Do you recall if he called you or you	t
c
called him?
Q.	You've got a document here dated
November 16 saying "Draft -- Summary Agenda." Can you tell me if you prepared
it?
A.	No, Katie Harrison prepared it.
Q.	Was that document prepared before the
meet ing?
A.	No.
Q.	After the meeting?
A.	After the meeting.
Q.	Was it a document --
A.	I simply asked her to prepare reminders of
things that I might want to look into.
Q.	All right. I've got a document dated --
it says "Re: Notes December 19, 1995 meeting," looks like to you from Harrison,-is that right?
A.	Yes.
I
Q.	Would you describe it?	,
I
A.	I think these were various things that we J
talked about after I had done an initial draft of the report. I can give you some examples, consutr.pt ion figures for the 1950s. Paul KGethe a»ked me whether my figures were correct, and I wrote -- or
Katie jotted down for me to remind me to double-check them. Those figures, for example, I did double - check, and I included a copy of the consumption figures in the materials that 1 brought today.
These are reminders, like I forgot to include Life magazine at one point. I didn't have a sentence, as I remember saying that health courses were required in high school. I just assumed it, so the suggestion was made that I add a sentence saying yes, or a phrase that public health courses were also required in Kansas high schools.
Q.	Whose suggestion was that?
A.	I think that was Paul Koethe's.
Q.	You've got a page of handwritten notes
i
dated "12/12/95, Paul Koethe," This is	•
*<
from a meeting with him?
A.	No.
Q.	Telephone conversation?
A.	I would say it must have been a telephone
conversation.
q.	You've got "Burton deposition out
there, general awareness." What does that
MS. McDOLE: Don't speculate; say what you remember.
A.	I don't know.
Q.	(BY MR. LEYH) What do you think?
A.	I write things down when I'm talking on
the phene .
Q.	What do you think it refers to, professor?
A.	General awareness.
Q.	What does that mean; general awareness of
what, whose?
A.	Public awareness with respect to the
issues that I was asked to look into.
Q.	What's "out there" to refer to?
A .	" Out there 11 ?
Q.	Is that what it says?
A.	I have no idea what "out there" refers to.
Q.	What does the next line say?
A.	"He was aware, too." Was he aware, too?
I'm sure that I said that I couldn't answer that question.
Q.	And the line beneath that says what?
A.	"Advertising (drowned out.)." Did
A.	I didn't investigate that question.
Q.	Did he ask you about that question?
A.	I really dbn't know.
Q.	Now, bottom part of this page, did you
write that during or shortly after this conversation, or did you write it in some other setting?
A.	Well, I just have a tablet on my desk. It
looks like "13 December 1995" I thought it would be appropriate to review the deposition that we have discussed, David Burton's deposition that we have discussed previously, and that's what I did. And I just noted certain items there.
Q,	All right,
A.	That I thought were of interest that I	JJJ
<s>
. i ■ - ® wanted to keep in the back of my mind.	in
io
Q.	You've noted that he had two wives; is	£
that right?
A.	Yes.	.
Q.	Is that significant to your opinion for
some reason?
A.	No.
Q.	Do you know why you wanted -- is it
something you thought at the time you wanted to keep in the back of your mind?
A.	Yes, I must have.
Q.	What about his arrests that you've noted?
Is that relevant to your opinion in this case ?
A.	No .
Q.	Do you know why you wrote that down?
A.	Well, when one goes through and one is
trying -- he describes his life. That's,
I think, what I was trying to do was to get a sense of his life, and I think all of those notations relate to that process. I would do that if I was trying to understand anything.
Q.	And you indicate here that you've written
"Camels are good for you. 11	0
K
A.	Right.	I
u
Q.	That refers to Mr. Burton's testimony?	n
- t-j
A.	I believe so, yes. That's even the page ®
number in which he made that comment.
Q.	Do you believe th~t comment was made with
regard to advertising about Camels?
a.	i can'c ceil you Decause we would have to
look it up in the deposition at this point in t ime.
Q.	Okay. Now, there's a note dated 1/3/96.
Is that from a meeting with somebody?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Paul Koethe?
A.	Telephone conversation with Paul Koethe
saying we would meet here at the airport to look, over my report one more time.
Q.	All right. Did he make suggestions for
changes at that meeting?
A.	At the meeting on the 5th?
Q•	Yes.
A .	No .
Q.	How about in the conversation?
in
A.	I think we had a discussion about a	^
.	*	cn
comment at one point.
N)
K
Q.	How about in the conversation, did he	£
suggest changes?
A.	No.
Q.	In the telephone conversation dated 1/3?
A .	No .
Q.	Now, you say he^e, "In forming my
opinions, I havs reviewed a wide
TTN TTP.n REPORTING. TNP . (713) 681 - 9800
assortment of historical materials including...," and then you list some.
Why did you write that down?
A.	Because at this point, it was unclear
whether I was going to prepare a narrative bibliography or a full item-by-item bibliography. And I was not getting clear directions on thaL, and Paul and I talked. If I was going to prepare a narrative bibliography, what would be the appropriate way for me to state it, and I think those words appear in my report, something to that effect at the beginning, what is the source material in the narrative bibliography.
Q.	Did he suggest any of those words?
A.	Well, we talked about them together
because I had never prepared a report like this in my life, and I didn't know what the right thing to do was.
Q.	Did the two of you talk about what you've
marked as part "B." here, the sentence that reads, "My opinions are also based on my education and experience as a historian." I don't know what the rest of
A.	Right. I remember at that time we were
talking about would I need to include some sort of a statement about my qualifications, my background, training, academic training, that sort of thing.
The suggestion, if I remember correctly, was why don't you go ahead and include a vita, which I believe was included with the final statement, that you ought to put a statement in there to the effect that I have background and training in history.
Q.	Then Item "C," is that also a subject that
the two of you discussed?
A.	Yes.
q.	Would you read that into the record?
A.	"Short reference to Burton, perhaps. This
information was available in the cases where D. Burton resided. Nothing should have prevented him from having access to this information."
q.	is that what Mr. Koethe told you?
A.	No, we talked about that. I sa;.d that I
was concerned that this report wasn't grounded in any way. So we talked about
should a statement appear, and I believe that in the end, I decided to include a version of the first statement there. X believe that does appear on the report.
MR. LEYH: No more questions. Do you have any questions, counsel?
MS. McDOLE: No.
(Deposition concluded.)
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN~ Ph.D.
THE STATE OF TEXAS	)
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO BEFORE ME, the	i
I
*	I
undersigned authority, by the said JAKES KIRBY	1
i
MARTIN, Ph.D., on this the_____ day of	|
__, 1996.
Notary Public in and for
the State of Texas
My Commission Expires:_____
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	)
)
Plaintiffs,	)
VS.	) CASE NO. 94- 2 2 0 2 -JWL
)
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO., )
)
and	}
)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
)
Defendants.	)
I,	DONNA J. HOWSON, Certified Shorthand Reporter in and for the State of Texas, hereby certify pursuant to the Rules and/or agreement of the parties present to the following:
That this deposition transcript of JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D., deposed on February 23, 1996, is a true record of the testimony given by the witness named herein, after said witness was duly sworn by me.
Given under my hand and seal of office on this the L'rth day of	_, 1996 .
DONNA J. HOWSON, CSR Certificate No. 60 3 7 Date of Expiration: 12-31-97 United Reporting, Inc.
7407 Old Katy Road Houston, Texas 77024 (713) 681-9800
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	)
)
Plaintiffs,	)
)
VS.	) CASE NO. 94-2202-JWL
)
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO.,)
)
and	)
)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
)
Defendants.	)
DEPOSITION OF JANIES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D.
February 23, 1996 18700 John F. Kennedy Boulevard Houston, Texas
DONNA J. HOWSON, CSR United Reporting, Inc.
7407 old Katy Road Houston, Texas 7 7024
I, DONNA J. HQWSON, Certified Shorthand Reporter in and for the State of Texas, being neither attorney for, related to, nor employed by any of the parties or any attorneys of record in this cause and having no financial interest in the matter, hereby certify pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and/or agreement of the parties present to the following:
That the witness was duly sworn by me;
That the transcript is a true record of the testimony given by the witness,-
That the original deposition transcript signature page was submitted to the witness or to the attorney of record for the witness for examination and return to United Reporting within
3 0 days, on__, 1996;
That changes, if any, made by the witness in the transcript and otherwise are attached hereto or incorporated herein;
That the original deposition transcript/signature page was/was not returned to the officer by the witness.
That the original deposition transcript, or a copy thereof in the eve.it the original */as rot returned to me, together with copies of all
exhibits, was delivered for safekeeping and use at trial and hearings, to Mr. Gregory Leyh, on ____ 1996;
That pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 30(f), a copy ot this certificate was served on all parties made known to me at the time said testimony was taken, to wit:
Mr. Gregory Leyh Humphrey, Farrington & McClain 221 West Lexington, Suite 400 Independence, Missouri 64050
Counsel for Plaintiffs
Ms. Sydney Bosworth McDole and
Mr. William E. Marple Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue 2300 Trammel Crow Center 2001 Ross Avenue Dallas, Texas 75201
Counsel for Defendant
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
Mr. Stephen J. Kaczynski Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue 901 Lakeside Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44114
Counsel For Defendant
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	>
)
Plaintiffs,	)
)
VS.	) CASE NO. 94*2202-JWL
)
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO.,)
)
and	)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
)
Defendants.	)
DEPOSITION OP JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D.
February 23, 1996 1B7D0 John F. Kennedy Boulevard Houston, Texas
DONNA J. HOWSON, GSR United Reporting, Inc.
7407 Old Katy Koad Houston, Texas 77024
I, DOwNA J. HOWSON, Certified Shorthand Reporter in and for the State of Texas, being neither attorney for, related to, nor employed by any of the parties or any attorneys of record in thie cause and having no financial interest in the matter, hereby certify pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and/or agreement of the parties present to the following:
That the witness was duly sworn by me;
That the transcript 1b a true record of the testimony given by the witness;
That the original deposition transcript signature page was submitted to the witness or to the attorney of record for the witness for examination and return to United Reporting within 3 0 days, on__' t_19 96;
That changes, if any, made by the witness in the transcript and otherwise are attached hereto or incorporated herein;
That the original deposition transcript/^Tgnature page was/mnrwwt returned to the officer by the w1 tr an.
That the original deposition transcript, or a copy thereof in the event the original was not returned to me, together with copies of all
exhibits, was delivered for salekeeping and use at trial and hearings, to Mr. Gregory Leyh, on
Ut| ■ „M,
That pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 30(1), a copy of this certificate was served on all parties made known to me at the time said testimony was taken, to wit:
Mr. Gregory Leyh Humphrey, Farrington & McClain 221 VfeBt Lexington, Suite 400 Independence, Missouri €4050
Counsel for Plaintiffs
Its. Sydney Bosworth McDole
and
Mr. William E. Marple Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
2	3 00 Tr&uimel Crow Center 2001 Roes Avenue Dallas, Texas 75201
Counsel for Defendant
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
Mr. Stephen J. Kaciynaki Jones, Day, Reavis b Pogue 901 Lakeside Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44114
Counsel For Defendant
R. 1. Reynolds Tobacco Company
Mr. M. Warren McCamieh Williamson & Cubbieon 78 4 Ann Avenue Kansas City, Kansas 66101
Counsel for Defendant
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
Hr. James Mirro and
Mr. Bruce G. Scheffler chadbourne £ Parke 30 Rockefeller Plaza Mew Yoik, New York 10112
Counsel for Defendant:
The American Tobacco Company
■	Mr. JameB D. Griffin
Blackwell, Sanders, Matheriy,
Weary & Lombardi 40 Corporate Woods, Suite 1200 S'401 Indian Creek Parkway Overland Park, Kansas 66210
Counsel for Defendant
The American Tobacco Company
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO by the undersigned
on this the	day of rvyth ck.___
] 996 .
DONNA J. HOWSON, CSH Certificate No. 6037 Date of Expiration; 12-31-97 United Reporting, Inc.
7407 Old Katy Road Houston, Texas 77024 (713) 6B1- 9800
should a statement appear, and I believe that in the end, I decided to include a version of the firat statement there. I believe that does appear on the report.
MR. LEYH: No more questions. Do you have any questions, counsel?
MS. MCDOLE; NO.
(Deposition concluded.)
\ frAMKS KIRByJmARTIN, Ph.D.
THF! STATK OF TEXAS	)
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO BEFORE HE, the undersigned authority, by the said JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D., on this the	day of
Pr^CjL .... 1996 .
i>uuijoi'ni«n|,-nirir^jU,J*,l>p*f1	the State of Texas
My Commission ’Expiree:	j' 1 ‘Q /	_
CORRECTIONS BY THE WITNESS Pag* Line From	To	Reason for Change
t> u 34 T <*»**-
xh is:	»**£l!££:T'
1& 3L	.33» j& x ajio^ou_____m*&ji
|»ln*fh wU»tA ^ J u$ m j^Vfcr»M^, U HN^A^OKWMJl B^>lk___3&>
m ^ gv^ata^Co^^M. N*ra»*
Xg J_ AiW ^__moii^4Un|^
303 in	__
XK	> awi^n_
<rfU» ^TA^C*__ J
my ^ \ cjo*j>u!t _ _ «*»jftSjC*< ; j.i«i<n;y<(tL o
XSKrn, Ji ttl* t<KK___
Mt _f_
Xt^ is Cll***«»>^c Jo t»m«wlk Ct^ui^
DAVID AND ORA BURTON,	)
Plaintiff!, )	COPY
)
VS.	) CASE NO. 94-2202-JWL
)
R,J, REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO.,)	•
)
and	)
)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., )
)
Defendants.	)
EXHIBITS TO THE DEPOSITION OF JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, Ph.D.
February 23, 1996
.	Z.'Boe
*
' J ;
*
Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edU/tobacco/d
irton Case
have prepared this report in response to two questions I ced to investigate* in my capacity as a professional Lan. First, I was asked to investigate the extent of awareness in the United States regarding the possible risks associated with smoking from the 1800s to the mid-Second, and for the same time period, I was asked to 3r the subject of public awareness in regard to the alleged Lve or habit-forming qualities of smoking. In both ses, I was asked t:o assess whether this information was sd and understood by the general public, have gone through an extensive range of historical als and have come to these conclusions:
.) In response to the first question, a wide variety of ation has been disseminated to the general public and has ed in very high levels of public awareness and tanding about the possibility of serious diseases--and even are death--being associated with smoking. Prominently ed in this information are references to heart and atory diseases.
.) In response to the second question, a vast amount of ation has been disseminated to the general public and has ed in very high levels of public awareness and tanding with respect to potential difficulties in quitting
g.	These materials invariably discuss nicotine in
ation with the difficulties just noted. Numerous sources, r back to the late 1700s, employ the term "addictive" or ilent terms, such as "enslaving." These terms were often .oosely and interchangeably with terms such as "habit" and ^-forming." Regardless of the terminology, the materials fed the message that for some persons, quitting smoking be difficult.
:n reaching these conclusions, my investigation encompassed il categories of historical information. These include: i.) Laws and Materials Relating to Primary and Secondary :ion. Since the late 1800s, states have required iction in certain basic curricula, such as health, and have lated certain texts as acceptable for classroom adoption and In addition, states have required teachers to become lied to teach in designated special fields, including health ;ion. Kansas was no exception. This state developed an sive curricula at the primary and secondary levels in regard ilth-related issues and also designated what health texts acceptable for classroom instruction. These texts, dating :o the early twentieth century, uniformly describe tobacco sit-forming and as a possible source of disease, including -related diseases. For example, one key Kansas curriculum tin, entitled Course of Study in Health Education with al Reference to the Effects of Alcohol and Narcotics (1932), fied that teachers were to begin informing students in the
grade about the dangers of smoking. Such instruction, ing on cigarettes, was to continue at every grade level gh junior high school. Kansas also required such action at the high school level. After the early 1930s,
1 children in Kansas could not have proceeded from the first gh twelfth grades without having been informed in repeated room presentations about the alleged health consequences of ng and habit-forming qualities of tobacco consumption, es textbooks, teachers in the 1940s and 1950s also began to isual materials about smoking, including educational films, assroom presentations.
B.) Anti -Smoking' Organizations. Dating back to the early , anti-smoking organizations have concerned themselves with ehensive public education about the possible health quences of smoking. For example, as part of the :rance/prohibition movement related to alcohol consumption, :ev. George Trask of Massachusetts organized the American Tobacco society during the 1850s and called for national .nence in the use of tobacco products. Other organizations-Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU), the National ■Cigarette League, and the International Anti-Cigarette le--likewise sponsored widespread educational campaigns ist smoking. Invariably, these groups stressed that smoking, started, could be difficult to quit. Lucy Page Gaston, rintendent of the International Anti-Cigarette League in r spent a portion of that year in Kansas seeking to spread
ague's anti-smoking message, helping t:o form the Kansas Igarette League, and working to uphold the state's dtory law in regard to cigarette sales and consumption {see ow) ,
!.) Government Involvement and Actions. During the early the WCTU mounted a national petition drive calling for a tutional amendment that would prohibit the manufacture or >f cigarettes in the United States, in 1893 Congress ed the matter to the states, stating that the maintenance •lie health was a state issue. State governments reacted by ,ng laws prohibiting the sale of cigarettes to minors--i did so in 1899--and in some instances to adults as well, i adopted such a prohibitory law in 1909, which remained in : until 1927. Municipalities in some states likewise id various bans, including smoking prohibitions on public rances. In the post World War II era the federal government
*	heavily involved in sponsored research regarding the i effects of smoking. Congress held hearings of various with widespread press coverage, and public education .gns also became a thrust of federal activity through the jn General's office and other government agencies.
).) Court Cases ajid Rulings. Courts on the national, and local levels provided a variety of rulings relating to ig. In 1900, for instance, the U. S. Supreme Court in i v. Tennessee ruled that it had "no reason to doubt" that siting the sale of cigarettes in Tennessee was "designed for
□tection of the public health." The court also stated communications are constantly finding their way into the press denouncing their [cigarettes'] use as fraught with danger to the youth of both sexes." In 1920 the Kansas e Court, drawing upon the Austin ruling and similar cases, unanimously in the Nossaman case to uphold its state itory law. In so ruling, the court stated: "For a number rs there has been a well-settled opinion that the use of ttes especially by persons of immature years was harmful, e courts have recognized that they were deleterious in effects." As a third example, a lawsuit was brought during n the U. S. District Court in Kansas City involving tions by John T. Ross that he had contracted throat cancer moking cigarettes. The trial of this case in 1962 received ive newspaper coverage, particularly in Kansas City ipers, because of high public interest, indicating >read public knowledge and concern about the possible health [uences of smoking.
!.) Newspapers and Popular Magazines. Beginning in the newspapers, whether national, regional, or local in .ation, including those published in Kansas and Missouri, extensive coverage to medical and medical-related studies lg with the possible health risks associated with smoking, articles made available to the general public findings ally reported at medical conventions and later published in al, medical-related, and scientific journals. Widely-
ating popular magazines, such as Iim£, SeSfiKfiSk, Li£&, and 's Digest, followed the same pattern. Reader's Digest, for e, having one of the highest circulation rates of any r magazine, began covering smoking-related issues in the Thereafter the Digest continued to provide extensive ge of health issues related to smoking and also published es dealing with ways and methods to stop smoking. Between ind 1953, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg's Good Health Magazine :edly published articles that focused on the possible health [uences associated with the use of tobacco. A number of the [ealth articles addressed heart and heart-related diseases .ation to smoking. Several articles likewise warned of the id "addictive" nature of smoking.
j1.) Books, Pamphlets, and Articles. These, items exist in number. Anti-smoking organizations produced them, as did med ministers, public health officials, and well-known ss like the auto manufacturer Henry Ford. Ford's The Little Slaver (I9l4-l9l(i) , for example, summarized the thinking of il prominent anti-smoking proponents, among them Thomas A. i and Booker T. Washington. Ford distributed the four nent parts of Little White Slaver through his auto rships. The title itself summarizes a widely-held public ption of cigarettes--habit-forming, addictive, enslaving, likewise was one of a number of prominent employers who d smoking among their employees. As a group, these books, lets, and articles consistently reiterated the message that
g adversely affected health and was also habit-forming (a phrase was getting "addicted to the cigarette habit") e of the presence of nicotine in tobacco. As another e, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (noted above in E.)( was a ic writer and authored the widely-read Tobaccoi^m (1922, d 1937). Kellogg produced a number of health textbooks, mes in co-authorship with Professor Michael V. O'Shea of iversity of Wisconsin, which addressed both the health s and habit-forming nature of smoking. Various O'Shea and g health textbooks received approval for classroom use in during the 1920s, and Kellogg's and O'Shea's writings were ively quoted in the Kansas Course of Study... of 1932 {see ive) for instructing school children about smoking. Kellogg se popularized the concept of "tobacco heart," which ■ed to the stress thought to be placed on the nervous and atory systems by smoking. Kansas teachers were expected to ict school children about the consequences of smoking in .on to "tobacco heart," heart disease, and related .atory illnesses.
}.) Medical and Medical-Related Research and Writings. An mce of information derived from medical-related research ritings reached the public. Nineteenth- and early Leth-century anti-smoking tracts invariably described ig in terms equivalent to habit-forming, and some mentioned and heart-related problems. Between 1920 and 1950,
Lonal medical-related articles considered smoking in
on to heart disease, cancer, and other health difficulties. 1950 the number of medical and scientific articles grew intially and were covered extensively by the media, chers such as E. Cuyler Hammond and Daniel Horn conducted dological studies concerning the health consequences of ig. The Hammond-Horn study involved over 187,000 :ipants and received widespread media coverage in 1954 after .tial report to the American Medical Association. Hammond >rn also considered the statistical association between ig and various forms of heart disease. The Emporia Gazette, istance, carried stories about the Hammond-Horn findings, ling the statement: that "the effect [of smoking] found on jart is much more important than the effect found in lung :. . . " (Nov, 12, 1954). Other statistical studies, such :old Dorn's investigation of about 290,000 World War I ms (completed in the late 1950s), received press coverage LI. Newspapers also carried articles in which medical cities and scientists debated the role of smoking in Lon to variety of other factors like industrial pollution as ale sources of modern-day health problems. The release of aport of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General, na and Health (1964), which summarized the findings of ous medical and scientific research, became one of the major stories of the decade. This study also dealt with possible ctions between smoking and cardiovascular diseases. On the nal level, magazines such as Time and Newsweek, which gave
ive coverage to the report, likewise referenced the le linkage between smoking and cardiovascular diseases. On cal level, the Emporia Gazette (Jan. 13, 1964) stated: here was an association--but not yet a proof of cause--n cigarettes and heart and blood vessel disease,..." In an r article on the report, the Emporia Gazette (Jan. 11, noted the possibility of amputation of limbs in referencing n cardiovascular diseases.
;.) Television Presentations and Popular Culture Sources.
infancy during the 1950s, the medium of television quickly d as another major source for the dissemination of lation about the possible health consequences of smoking.
5 CBS television featured in its highly-regarded See It Now im (May 31 and June 7, hosted by Edward R. Murrow) the il-scientific debate over possible linkages between cancer toking. Based on printed transcripts, the CBS television :k gave extensive coverage to Surgeon General Leroy Burney's : announcement in 1957 that "there is an increasing and stent body of evidence that excessive cigarette smoking is : the caysative factors in lung cancer." Possibly even more igh was television, news coverage given to the 1964 Report of ivisory Committee to the Surgeon General. Television news ams, as such, served to inform the general public repeatedly the possible negative health effects of smoking. So too popular culture sources. The mass production of cigarettes, began in the 1880s, quickly resulted in a series of slang
Bions that denoted public perceptions. By the late 1880s ans were employing the slang term "coffin nail1' in relation arettes; and by the 1920s other slang terms, including n stick” and "coffin tack," "gasper," "little white hearse ," and Ford's "little white slaver," had become part of a public vocabulary. "Cancer stick" also gained widespread Such terms worked their way into popular literature such as and into movies and other sources. The message conveyed se expressions was that cigarettes were not only habit-g but could also shorten life because of potential adverse effects.
have every reason to believe that the body of knowledge d from the historical sources and materials described in eceding sections was widely available in the areas where Burton resided.
?rom a historical perspective, the accumulated evidence ;trates that the general public received and understood this nation. mI am basing this conclusion on the following lerations:
L.) The sheer volume of surviving records--and their aread circulation among the populace--strongly supports this ision. For example, Reader's Dicrest had one of the highest ription circulation rates of any popular magazine in January tfhen it published "How Harmful Are Cigarettes?" by Roger
m Riis. This article, according to the editors, generated e volume of reader response and "aroused more discussion proval than any recent magazine feature." As a result, the decided to reprint articles from earlier issues on how to moking. Other examples would include questions from ned individuals that produced published responses from s newspaper columnists. "Dear Abby," strongly anti-smoking opinion column, repeatedly answered questions about the forming nature of smoking and possible health effects. So d the nationally-syndicated columnist, Peter J. Steincrohn, whose advice appeared in the Kansas City star during the 1960s. Local M. D.'s, such as Dr. Edwin P. Jordan, also ch a column that addressed smoking-related concerns, in ase in the Springfield, Missouri, Leader & Press. Persons not have asked such questions or expressed such concerns, uld the columnists have responded in print, had there been or no public awareness or understanding of the issues raised.
.) Public opinion polls conducted by the highly regarded ' organization and others serve as another confirmation of gh levels of public awareness and knowledge. For instance, ie 1954, the Gallup organization asked: "Have you heard or nything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may :ause of cancer of the lung?" Ninety percent of the idents answered yes. As a second example, in June-July after public announcements of the completed findings of
id and Horn (see G. above), Gallup pollsters asked: "Did appen to read or hear about the recent report of the :an Cancer Society reporting the results of a study on the ts of cigarette smoking?" Seventy-eight percent of the idents answered yes. Among those respondents: who were cs, 82 percent responded yes. As such, the general ace, and smokers in particular, indicated that they were of the most recent study relating to smoking and health.
3.) Government involvement came in waves of legislative, istrative, and judicial action. For instance, some fifteen s adopted laws between the 1890s and 1920s that in some way bited the sale and consumption of cigarettes within their ctive borders. These laws did not arise in a vacuum of c knowledge or opinion. Nor did government officials act in i of public pressure. Effective educational campaigning and ing by Lucy Page Gaston and the Kansas Anti-Cigarette League 3 prevent the repeal of the Kansas prohibitoiy law in 1920. education boards and school administrators, as in Kansas, ted teachers to inform and instruct students about the -forming nature of smoking, as well as possible health quences, and they provided support materials in the form of e of study curriculum guides and approved textbooks. In the findings of a special federally-sponsored study group oking and health influenced Surgeon General Dr. Leroy y's decision to issue a national warning about the possible h effects of smoking, with particular reference to cancer.
r*s statement received extensive press coverage. Also in when asked whether a warning label should appear on atte packages, Burney indicated that information about the ale health consequences of smoking was already thoroughly ninated to the general public, stated Burney: "Our Lon is that we have informed the public through the Lent coverage of the press, radio, and TV." So too with the Report to the Surgeon General. This document also received 3hensive media coverage and generated widespread public ssion of the issue.
1.) Newspapers and other media sources assumed awareness nderstanding on the part of the general public. As with c1$ pigest and other magazines, they carried a stream of to" articles in regard to quitting smoking. Such articles for granted that persons wanted to learn about methods to break their habit. Typical of such coverage were a number tides in the 1964 Kansas City Kansan that focused on local smoking" meetings sponsored by the Seventh-Day Adventist
h,	which conducted such programs nationally and made them able to any person interested in quitting smoking. In the 1960s the Emporia Gazette, as another example, carried es on local clinics and programs designed to assist persons at community to stop smoking. When considered in the light dical columns and other forms of newspaper coverage, such as xtensive coverage given the John Ross case (see D. above), formed public was showing its concern about smoking, which
not have been the case had persons not known about the forming qualities of smoking or possible health Lienees.
.) Another way in which the general public demonstrated areness and understanding was through the rapid shift to -tipped cigarettes during the 1950s. The public did so out cem over medical and scientific findings, to which the gave extensive coverage, about cigarette tar as a possible of cancer. In 1950 only a small percentage of persons filter-tipped cigarettes, but by the end of the decade ver half of all smokers had switched to filter tips. That tage would continue to climb during the 1960s. In on, during periods when reports flooded the media about the ■le adverse health effects of smoking (1953-54 and 1964, for e), cigarette sales declined briefly but dramatically, sudden downward shifts in sales and consumption further te that the public was not only receiving the message, but ly cases was also acting on the information being presented, ’o summarize, persons living in the United states could not tvoided coming into contact with materials and information
m
the alleged habit-forming nature of smoking or possible i consequences, the latter in relation to cancer and various of heart and circulatory diseases. Every person who led public schools, spoke with others about smoking, read ipers, magazines, books, listened to radio and/or watched Lsion could not have escaped receiving that pervasive and
;tent message. Built on a legacy of writings and anting commentary dating back to the late 1700s and even to sr times, such knowledge was not a well-kept secret, but : was constantly in circulation through society. Thus, the : was not only aware but also had a common understanding of sssible habit-forming qualities and health consequences of lg. Historical evidence is overwhelming in support of this asion.
Source Materials.) In the process of forming my opinions, I reviewed a wide variety of historical sources. These as include the following: Books, pamphlets, and articles, iating to the late 1700s, that focus on the subject of co use, consumption, and possible health consequences; n books and articles, including medical and medical-related es, dating from about 1940 to the present, that address the ct of tobacco use,, consumption, and possible health quences; U. S. government records and documents pertaining bacco use, consumption, and possible health consequences, about isjpo to 1965; state laws and statutes regarding the ation and prohibition of tobacco sales and consumption, with al reference to Kansas, from about 1890 to 1930; court ions, again with special reference to Kansas, pertaining to prohibitory laws regarding tobacco sales and consumption; t records of various anti-smoking organizations, including rational and International Anti-Cigarette leagues;
:ional materials relating to state laws and statutes,
:ulum mandates and guides, textbook selection procedures and .on lists as well as selected textbooks, and teacher .ng and certification requirements, from about 1890 to 1970, special reference to Kansas; national, regional, and local ipers, including the New York Times and papers from Kansas Missouri and Kansas, Springfield, Missouri, and Emporia, s, for selected years between 1950 and 1965; miscellaneous ipers from select«5d years of the twentieth century; popular Lnes, including Reader's Digest.	Time. Newsweek, and
, for various years between about 1940 and 1965, and Good a Magazine for the period 1900 to 1953; television ^tary addressing the debate over smoking and possible health 3uences and anti-smoking television commercials, from about bo 1970,- national polling information for selected years, about 1935 to the present; miscellaneous visual materials, eenth and twentieth centuries. In addition, I have read Burton's two-part; deposition, dated November 7 and November 94; the Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint; the Answer to Amended Complaint and Affirmative Defenses of R.J. Reynolds
*
co Company; and the Memorandum and Order of the United s District Court, District of Kansas, dated March 10, 1995.
My opinions and conclusions are based on my research and iw of these historical materials as they pertain to this case •n my academic training and experience as a professional
ian specializing in the field of United States history, have attached a copy of ray curriculum vita which describes lining, qualifications, and professional experiences and :ontains a list o£ my publications.
: have been compensated at a rate of $195.00 per hour for [pent researching and reviewing historical materials and ring this report.
; have not testified as an expert at trial or by deposition 1 the past four years.
James Kirby Martin January 10, 1996
m
SOURCE MATERIALS
NINETEENTH- ADD EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY BOOKS,
PAMPHLETS, AND ARTICLES (Chronological Listing)
Fre-Nineteenth Century
3 I, King]. A Counterblaste to Tobacco. London: R. B.,
L604. Reprinted in James Craigie, ed., Minor Prose Works of Cinq James VI and I. Edinburgh: Scottish Text Society,
L982.
Benjamin. "Observations Upon The Influence Of The Habitual Jse of Tobacco Upon Health, Morals, and Property," Essays, Literary. Moral.& Philosophical. Philadelphia: Thomas & Samuel P. Bradford, 1798.
Nineteenth Century
al of Health. Selected issues, Philadelphia, Pa., 18301831.
r, Orin, A. M. (pastor of the First Congressional Church). Disquisition on the Evils of Using Tobacco and the Necessity of Immediate and Entire Reformation. Providence: S. R. weeden, Market Square, 1833.
Joel, M. D. Tobacco: its History. Nature, and Effects of the BodvLand Mind, n. p., circa 1840.
k, Rev. George] . Thoucrhts.and Stories on Tobacco for American Lads; or Uncle Toby's Anti-Tobacco Advice to his Nephew Billy Bruce. Boston: Published for the Author, No.
5 Comhill, 1852.
. Y.]. "A Mediation On Tobacco," National Magazine (November 1855): 434-439.
, Rev. George, ed. Anti-Tobacco Journal. Selected issues, Fitchburg, Mass., 1859-1873.
nson, T. w. "A New Counterblast," Atlantic (December 1861): 696-705.
>, Rev. J., D. D. Tobacco. The Bane of the Times. Boston: Hutchinson and Bullard, 1861.
icco: Its Use and Abuse," Cornhill (November 1862): 605613.
m, John, M. D. The Use of Tobacco and The Evils. Physical. iental. and Social. Resulting Therefrom. New York: G. P. utnam & Son, 1868.
, John C. "Tobaccophagoi and Tobaccophagism," Galaxy June 1870): 751-757.
;ev. B. St. J. "Our Fashionable Narcotic," Ladiesf ;epository (January 1870) : 58-61.
John. The Use of Tobacco vs.^Purity. Chastity, and Sound [ealth. New York: Cowan & Company, Publishers, 1870.
une, I. C. The Tobacco Plug antL_Cigar. By the author,
.875.
Rev. B. W., A.M. TQkaccOi_Its Physical. Mental. Moral
ind__ Social Influences. By the author, 1878.
lore, Abiel Abbott. Anti-Tobacco. Carpenter, Rev. Russell
,ant. A Lecture.....On Tobacco., and Witter, G. F., M. D.
:*he Use of Tobacco. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1883.
Early Twentieth Century
Charles B. "The Injury of the Tobacco and Its Relation To )ther Drug Habits," Century (March 1912): 767-771.
, F, C,, M. D, "The Truth About Tobacco," Technical World (April 1914): 180-185.
Henry. The Case_Against the Little White Slaver. Detroit, lichigan: By the author, 1914-1916.
, Theo. F., A. M., D. D., and Higley, L. H. The Brown God and Bjs White Imps. Butler, Indiana: L. H. Higley, Publisher, 1916.
jg, JohivHarvey. Tobaccoism. Battle Creek, Michigan: The Modern Medicine Publishing Co., 1922; revised 1937.
a, Michael V. Tobacco and Mental Efficiency. New York: MacMillan, 1925.
egan, Jack J. Tobacco: A Study.of Its Consumption in the [Tnited States. New York: Pitman Publishing Corporation, 1940.
MODERN BOOKS MID ARTICLES (Chronological Listing)
nn» A Ul 4	a r T	AM . T 4 ^ ► 1 A D VAt.tM a
3
, E. L. "Neoplastic Diseases,11 in E. L. Wynder and J. arland, The Biologic Effects of Tobacco. Boston: Little, rown, 1955, pp. 102-132.
up, Eric. Science Looks at Smokincr: A New Inquiry into he Effects of_.Sinoking._on Your Health. Intro, by Harry S.
. Greene. New York: Coward-McCann, Inc., 1957.
y, C. Van. Smoking—Its Influence on the Individual and ts Role in Social Medicine. Foreword by Richard Doll, msterdam: Elsevier Publishing Co., 1960.
Harold S. Tobacco & Your Health;_The SmoKlng
ontroversy. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1969.
, Susan. Cigarette Country. New York: Praeger ublishers, 1971.
Robert.	They Satisfy. New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 978.
Gideon.	Smoking Paradox:_Public Regulation in the
loarette	Industry. Cambridge, Mass.: Abt Books, 1979.
Gordon L. "The Hundred Year war Against the Cigarette," merican Heritage (February/March 1981): 3-15.
:hler, A. Lee. Smoking and Politics. 3rd ed. Englewood :iiffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1983.
■( Ronald J., and Markle, Gerald E. Cigarettes-. The Battle )ver Smoking. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1983.
>erg, Charles E. "What It Was Like To Be Sick In 1884," imerican Heritage (October/November 1984): 23-31.
Robert Smith. Prohibition in Kansas:_A Higtpry.
jawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986.
, Harvey* Fit For America:_Health. Fitness. Sport, and
American Society. New York: Pantheon Books, 1986.
Sylvia Noble. Hidden Arguments. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988.
am, John C. "American Physicians and Tobacco Use: Two Surgeons General, 1929 and 1964," Bulletin of the History of medicine (Spring 1989): 1-31.
t, Allan M. "The Cigarette, Risk, and American Culture," Daedalus (Pall 1990): 155-176.
John A. "Cigarette Century," American Heritage (December L992): 72-80.
MEDICAL AMD MEDICAL - RELATED ARTICLE!!
(Chronological Listing)
Dn, W. M. "Tobacco Smoking: A Clinical Study," Journal of she American Medical Association. 93 (1929): 665-667, 1909.
i, Bayard T. "The Outlook In Thrombo-angiitis Obliterans" Journal..of the^ftmerican Medical Association. (1938): 2184-£189.
sh, John P., and Berkson, Joseph. "Tobacco and Coronary Disease," Journal of the American Medical Association. 115
(1940): 1327-1329.
tr, E. L. , and Graham, E. A. "Tobacco Smoking as a Possible Btiologic Factor in Bronchogenic Carcinoma,"' Journal of the American Medical Association. 143 (1950): 329-338.
r, E. L., Graham, E. A., and Croninger, A. B. "Experimental Production of Carcinoma with Cigarette Tar," Cancer Research. 13 (1953): 855-864.
nd, E. C,, and Horn, D. "The Relationship between Human Smoking Habits and Death Rates: A Follow-up of 187,766 Men," Journal of the American Medical Association. 155 (1954): 1316-1328.
r, Sidney J. "A Review of the Statistical Evidence on the Association Between Smoking and Lung Cancer,” Journal of the American Statistical Association. 50 no. 270 (June 1955): 267-283.
g, F. M., et al. "Smoking and Health: Joint Report of the Study Group on Smoking and Health," Science. 125 (1957): 1129-1133.
mr, E. L., and Wright, G. "A Study of Tobacco Carcinogenesis, Part l (The Primary Fractions;)," Cancer. 10 (1957); 255-271.
H.	F. "Tobacco Consumption and Morality from Cancer and Other Diseases," Lancet. 275 (1958): 137-139.
nd, E. C,( and Horn, D. "Smoking and Death Rates--Report on Forty-Four Months of Follow-up of 187,783 Men. Part 1 (Total Mortality), Part 2 (Death Rates by Cause)," Journal of the American .Medical Association. 166 (1958); 11591172, 1294-1308.
d,	E. C. "Smoking and Death Rates--A Riddle In Cause and ffect." American Scientist, 46 (1958): 331-353.
Harold, F. "Tobacco Consumption and Mortality From Cancer nd Other Diseases," Public Health Reports, 74 (1959): 58193.
id, E. C. "Smoking in Relation to Heart Disease," Journal If public Health, 50 (I960): 20-26.
David M., and Nathan, Daniel J. "Smoking Habits and ioronary Atherosclerotic Heart Disease," JAMA.: Journal of he American.Medical,Association, 177 (1961): 119-124.
id, E. Cuyler. "The Effects of Smoking," Scientific Jtierican. 207 (1962) ; 39-51.
Sigmund L., and Cassius, Plair M. "Cigarette Smoking and irteriosclerosis," Science, 138 (1962): 975-977.
EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS
Richard K. The_Kansas Report. September 1995.
Richard K. Kansas. StAts .Adopted^Textbooks Report.
)ctober 1995.
NEWSPAPERS
irk Times. 1948-1965 S City Star, 1954; 1957; 1962; 1964 j City Kansan. 1954; 1957; 1962; 1964 } City Times. 1962; 1964
jfield Leader & Press. 1955; 1956; 1957; 1958; 1959; 1960;
•	1964
jfield News-Leader. 1956; 1957; 1958; 1959; 1960
La Gazette. 1954; 1955; 1961; 1962; 1963; 1964; 1965;
1966; 1967
Llaneous News Service Clippings
POPULAR MAGAZINES
iLs.-Dlg.es t. 1924-1965 1950-1965 !£kf 1950-1965 1950-1965 1962, 1974 lealth Magazine. 1900-1953
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS
L929 Congressional Record, Volume 71
L957 Congressional Hearings (Blatnik Hearings)
Surgeon General’s Report, Smoking and Health
is State and Municipal Laws relating to Prohibitions on Smoking
3 Supreme Court Case, State v. Nossaman i States Supreme Court Case Appeals, Austin v. Tennessee
NATIONAL POLLS
p Polls, 1935-present
On-line Services, 1935-present	(
i
TELEVISION
m-
t Now. CBS News, May 31, 1955. Visual Education
t Now. CBS News, June 7, 1955, visual Education
rig and Health. CBS News Extra, January 11, 1964.
Visual Education
llaneous Transcripts, CBS News, Surgeon General Leroy Burney, 1957
Smoking Announcements, American Cancer Society,
1967-1988
'	7
OTHER SOURCES
Laneous Manuscripts, National Anti-Tobacco League and itemational Anti-Tobacco League
Laneous Materials, Woman's Christian Temperance Union laneous Pamphlets and Articles, Twentieth Century laneous visual Materials, Nineteenth and Twentieth
January 10, 1996
1,IM| : 01/11/1996 11: NAME : UH HISTORY DEF FAX : 713-743-3216 1EL :
DATE,TIME	01/11 11:12
DLJRATigN^	9102688216586790049659250765
RESULT	OK
MODE	STANDARD
ECM
FAX COVER SHEET to; "Srtsvtr
FAX#: _ .U^-STE-OMl._
FR: ^H>& fofc&T fV\AferW
FAX#	sTas
If you have any auestionj; or problems receiving this fax, please call la-THb-Mo’T (voice) and ask for	.
THIS FAX IS % PAGES INCLUDING COVER.
'fc ,
*
«-
FAX 71>743-3219 PHONE 713-70306}
DRAFT SOURCE MATERIALS DRAFT
MMiik	mmmtmmr
NINETEENTH- AND EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY BOOKS,
PAMPHLETS, AND ARTICLES (Chronological Listing)
Pre-Nineteenth Century
es I, King]. A Counterblaste to Tobacco. London: R. B.,
1604. Reprinted in James Craigie, ed., Minor Prose Works of King James VI and I. Edinburgh: Scottish Text Society,
1982.
, Benjamin. "Observations Upon The Influence Of The Habitual Use of Tobacco Upon Health, Morals, and Property," Essays. Literary. Moral & Philosophical. Philadelphia: Thomas & Samuel F. Bradford, 1798.
Nineteenth Century
nal of Health. Selected issues, Philadelphia, Pa.( 18301831.
er, Orin, A. M. (pastor of the First Congressional Church). Disquisltion_Qn_the_Evils of Using Tobacco and the Necessity of Immediate and Entire Reformation. Providence: S. R. Weeden, Market Square, 1833.
i, Joel, m. L). lobaccoj-its History, Nature, and Effects of the Body and Mind, n. p., circa 1840.
isk, Rev. George]. Thoughts and Stories on Tobacco for American Lads: or Uncle Toby's Anti-Tobacco Advice to his Nephew Billy Bruce. Boston: Published for the Author, No.
5 Cornhill, 1852.
p. y.J. "A Mediation On Tobacco," ya,fcional Magazine (November 1855): 434-439.
3k, Rev. George, ed. Anti-Tobacco Journal. Selected issues, Fitchburg, Mass., 1859-1873.
jinson, T, W, "A New Counterblast," Atlantic (December 1861): 696-705.
38, Rev. J., D. D. Tobacco. The Bane of the Times. Boston: Hutchinson and Bullard, 1861.
oacco; Its Use and Abuse," Cornhill (November 1862): SOS-613.
iom, John, M. D. The Use of Tobacco and The Evils. Physical. Mental. and Social. Resulting Therefrom. New York: G. P. Putnam & Son, 1868.
sr, John C. "Tobaccophagoi and Tobaccophagism," Galaxy (June 1870): 751-757.
Rev. B, St. J. "Our Fashionable Narcotic," Ladies1 Repository (January 1870): 58-61.
i, John. The Use of Tobacco vs. Purity, Chastity, and Sound Health. New York: Cowan & Company, Publishers, 1870.
:ome, I. C. The Tobacco Plug and Cigar. By the author,
1875.
Rev. B. W., A.M. Tobacc-Sj_Its Physical. Mental. Moral
and Social Influences. By the author, 1878. .
rmore, Abiel Abbott. Anti-Tobacco. Carpenter, Rev. Russell Lant. A Lecture On _Tobacco.. and Witter, G. F.( M. D. On The Use Of Tobacco. Boston; Roberts Brothers, 1883.
Early Twentieth Century
3, Charles B. "The Injury of the Tobacco and Its Relation To Other Drug Habits," Century (March 1912): 767-771.
i, F. C., M. D. "The Truth About Tobacco," Technical World (April 1914): 180-185.
, Henry. The £ase Against the Little white Slaver. Detroit, Michigan: By the author, 1914-1916.
n, Theo. F.A. M., D, D., and Higley,	L. H. The Brown God
and His White Imps. Butler, Indiana:	L. H. Higley, Publisher, 1916.
ogg, John Harvey. Tobaccoism. Battle Creek, Michigan: The
Modern Medicine Publishing Co., 1922;	revised 1937,
ea, Michael V. Tobacco and Mental Efficiency. New York: MacMillan, 1925.
segan, Jack J, Tobacco: A Study of Its Consumption in the United States. New York: Pitman Publishing Corporation, 1940,
MODERN BOOKS AND ARTICLES (Chronological Listing)
3
*r, E. L. "Neoplastic Diseases," in E. L. Wynder and J.
Sariand, The Biologic Effects of Tobacco. Boston: Little, Brown, 1955, pp. 102-132.
irup, Eric, Science J^ooks at Smoking;__A New Inquiry into
the Effects o.£_.Smoking..on Your Health. Intro, by Harry s.
N. Greene. New York: Coward-McCann, Inc., 1957.
:dy, C. van. Smoking;_Its Influence on the Individual and
Its Role in Social Medicine. Foreword by Richard Doll. Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Co., 1960.
Harold S. Tobacco & Your Health;_The Smoking
Controversy. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1969.
jr, Susan, cigarette Country. New York; Praeger Publishers, 1971.
L, Robert. They Satisfy. New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978.
i( Gideon. Smoking Paradox,:_Public Regulation in the
Cigarette Industry. Cambridge, Mass.: Abt Books, 1979.
3w, Gordon L. "The Hundred Year War Against the Cigarette," American Heritage (February/March 1981); 3-15.
schler, A. Lee. Smoking and Politics, 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1983.
ar, Ronald J., and Markle, Gerald E. Cigarettes: The Battle Over Smoking. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1983.
nberg, Charles E. "What It Was Like To Be Sick in 1884," American Heritage (October/November 1984): 23-31.
r, Robert Smith. Prohibition in Kansas:_A History.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986.
n, Harvey. Fit For America;_Health. Fitness. Sport, and
American Society. New York; Pantheon Books, 1986.
, Sylvia Noble. Hidden Arguments. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988.
ham, John C. "American Physicians and Tobacco Use: Two
Surgeons General, 1929 and 1964," Bulletin of.....the History jof
Medicine (Spring 1989) : 1-31.
dt, Allan M. "The Cigarette, Risk, and American Culture," Daedalus (Fall 1990): 155-176.
:, John A. "Cigarette Century," American Heritage (December 1992): 72-80.
MEDICAL AND MEDICAL-RELATED ARTICLES (chronological Listing)
3on, W. M. "Tobacco Smoking: A Clinical Study," Journal of the American Medical Association. 93 (1929): 665-667, 1909.
Dn, Bayard T. "The Outlook In Thrombo-angiitis Obliterans" Journal of the American Medical Association. (1936) : 21842189.
ish, John P., and Berkson, Joseph. "Tobacco and Coronary Disease," Journal of the American Medical Association, us (1940): 1327-1329.
er, E. L., and Graham, E. A. "Tobacco Smoking as a Possible Etiologic Factor in Bronchogenic Carcinoma," Journal of the American Medical Association. 143 (1950); 329-338.
er, E. L.( Graham, E. A., and Croninger, A. B. "Experimental Production of Carcinoma with cigarette Tar," Cancer Research, 13 (1953) : 855-864.
ond, E. C., and Horn, D. "The Relationship between Human Smoking Habits and Death Rates: A Follow-up of 187,766 Men," Journal of the American Medical Association. 155 (1954): 1316-1328.
er, Sidney J. "A Review of the Statistical Evidence on the Association Between Smoking and Lung Cancer," Journal of the American Statistical Association. 50 no. 270 (June 1955): 267-283,
ng, F. M., et al. "Smoking and Health: Joint Report of the Study Group on Smoking and Health," Science. 125 (1957): 1129-1133.
er, E. L., and Wright, G. "A Study of Tobacco Carcinogenesis, Part l (The Primary Fractions)," Cancer. 10 (1957): 255-271.
l,	H. F. "Tobacco Consumption and Morality from Cancer and Other Diseases,» Lancet. 275 (1958): 137-139.
iond, E. C., and Horn, D. "Smoking and Death Rates--Report on Forty-Four Months of Follow-up of 187,783 Men, Part l (Total Mortality), Part 2 (Death Rates by Cause)," Journal of the American Medical Association. 166 (1958): 11591172, 1294-1308.
:>nd, E. C. "Smoking and Death Rates--A Riddle In Cause and Effect," American Scientist. 46 (1958): 331-353.
, Harold, F. "Tobacco Consumption and Mortality From Cancer and Other Diseases," Public Health Reports. 74 (1959): 581593.
and, E. C. "Smoking in Relation to Heart Disease," Journal of Public Health. 50 (I960): 20-26.
n, David M., and Nathan, Daniel J, "Smoking Habits and Coronary Atherosclerotic Heart Disease," JAMA; Journal of the American Medical Association. 177 (1961): 119-124.
ond, E. Cuyler. "The Effects of Smoking," Scientific American. 207 (1962): 39-51.
ns, Sigmund L.r and Cassius, Plair M. "Cigarette Smoking and Arteriosclerosis, 11 Science. 138 (1962): 975-977.
EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS
s, Richard K. The Kansas Report. September .1995.
s, Richard K. Kansas State Adopted Textbooks Report.
October 1995.
NEWSPAPERS
York Times. 1948-1965
ias City Star. 1954; 1957; 1962; 1964
ias City Kansan, 1954; 1957; 1962; 1964
:as City Times. 1962; 1964
.nafield deader & Press. 1955; 1956; 1957; 1958; 1959; 1960;
1964
.ngfield News-Leader. 1956; 1957; 1958; 1959; 1960
3ria Gazette. 1954; 1955; 1961; 1962; 1963; 1964; 1965;
1966; 1967
;ellaneous News Service Clippings
POPULAR MAGAZINES
;r's Digest, 1924-1965	.
1950-1965 reek. 1950-1965 1950-1965 1962, 1974 Health Magazine. 1900-1953
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS
1929 Congressional Record, Volume 71
1957 Congressional Hearings (Blatnik Hearings)
Surgeon General's Report, Smoking and Health
3us State and Municipal Laws relating to Prohibitions on Smoking
as Supreme Court Case, State v. Nossaman
ed States Supreme Court Case Appeals, Austin v. Tennessee
NATIONAL POLLS up Polls, 1935-»*?-iM>^^T r On-line Services, 1935-present
-	TELEVISION
It Now. CBS News, May 31, 1955. Visual Education
It Now. CBS News, June 7, 1955. Visual Education
ina and Health. CBS News Extra, January 11, 1964.
Visual Education
ellaneous Transcripts, CBS News, Surgeon General Leroy Burney, 1957
OTHER SOURCES
llaneous Manuscripts, National Anti-Tobacco League and International Anti-Tobacco League
llaneous Materials, Woman's Christian Temperance Union llaneous Pamphlets and Articles, Twentieth Century llaneous Visual Materials, Nineteenth and Twentieth
m
TIME : 01/08/1998 12:2< NANE : UH HISTORY DEPT FAX ; 713-743-3216 TEL :
DATE.TIME	01/08 12:22
FAX NO./NAME	9102880216579021249659256765
DURATION	00:06:24
PAGE(S)	10
RESULT	OK
MODE	STANDARD
ECM
FAX COVER SHEET
N*.. .Steve Kp.c2.mste i
TO:	P -JOWlfiS (
fax#: £«a-stn-Q3UTL-FR: JXfNa.	rfXAcfcTlK^
FAX#	"7tA~	__
If you have any questions or problems receiving this fix, please call "ftA “T*3-5lO*I (voice) and ask for ZTlf*. OhMMilKa .
THIS FAX IS	_PAGES INCLUDING COVER.
111 , r
FAX71J.74M21C
PHOME713-74MCW
PEAFT^PEAF.T
Burton Case
I have prepared this report in response to two questions I Lsked to investigate in ray capacity as a professional irian. First, I was asked to investigate the extent of .c awareness in the United States regarding the possible :h risks associated with smoking from the 1800s to the mid-5. Second, and for the same time period, I was asked to .der the subject of public awareness in regard to the alleged ;tive or habit-forming qualities of smoking. In both mces, I was asked to assess whether this information was Lved and understood by the general public.
I have gone through an extensive range of historical rials and have come to these conclusions:
1.)	In response to the first question, a wide variety of rmation has been disseminated to the general public and has lted in very high levels of public awareness and rstanding about the possibility of serious diseases--and even ature death--being associated with smoking. Prominently uded in this information are references to heart and ulatory diseases.
2.}	In response to the second question, a vast amount of rmation has been disseminated to the general public and has lted in very high levels of public awareness and rstanding with respect to potential difficulties in quitting ing. These materials invariably discuss nicotine in
iation with the difficulties just noted. Numerous sources,
3 back to the late 1700s, employ the term "addictive" or alent terms, such as "enslaving." These terms were often loosely and interchangeably with terms such as "habit" and t-forming." Regardless of the terminology, the materials yed the message that for some persons, quitting smoking be difficult.
In reaching these conclusions, my investigation encompassed al categories of historical information. These include:
A.) Laws and Materials .Relating to Primary and Secondary ition. Since the late 1800s, states have required ■uction in certain basic curricula, such as health, and have mated certain texts as acceptable for classroom adoption and In addition, states have required teachers to become fied to teach in designated special fields, including health ition. Kansas was no exception. This state developed an isive curricula at the primary and secondary levels in regard ■alth-related issues and also designated what health texts acceptable for classroom instruction. These texts, dating to the early twentieth century, uniformly describe tobacco ibit-forming and a& a possible source of disease, including ;-related diseases. For example, one key Kansas curriculum stin, entitled Course of Study in Health Education with Lai Reference to the Effects of Alcohol and Narcotics (1932), Lfied that teachers: were to begin informing students in the
3
grade about the dangers of smoking. Such instruction, ing on cigarettes, was to continue at every grade level gh junior high school. Kansas also required such uction at the high school level. After the early 1930s,
>1 children in Kansas could not have proceeded from the first gh twelfth grades without having been informed in repeated room presentations about the alleged health consequences of ng and habit-forming qualities of tobacco consumption, les textbooks, teachers in the 1940s and 1950s also began to risual materials about smoking, including educational films, .assroom presentations.
B.) Anti-Smoking Organizations. Dating back to the early s, anti-smoking organizations have concerned themselves with rehensive public education about the possible health iquences of smoking. For example, as part of the ;rance/prohibition movement relaced to alcohol consumption, lev. George Trask of Massachusetts organized the American -Tobacco Society during the 1850s and called for national Lnence in the use of tobacco products. Other organizations--Roman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU), the National Anti-rette League, and the International Anti-Cigarette League--wise sponsored widespread educational campaigns against ing. Invariably, these groups stressed that smoking, once ted, could be difficult to quit. Lucy Page Gaston, rintendent of the International Anti-Cigarette League in , spent a portion of that year in Kansas seeking to spread
.eague's anti-smoking message, helping to form, the Kansas ■Cigarette League, and working to uphold the state's ibitory law in regard to cigarette sales and consumption (see
ilOW) .
C.)	Government Involvement and Actions. During the early
3	the WCTU mounted a national petition drive calling for a :itutional amendment that would prohibit the manufacture or
of cigarettes in the United States. In 1893 Congress rred the matter to the states, stating that the maintenance jblic health was a. state issue. State governments reacted by ting laws prohibiting the sale of cigarettes to minors--as did so in 1899--and in some instances to adults as well, as adopted such a prohibitory law in 1909, which remained in ct until 1927. Municipalities in some states likewise ted various bans, including smoking prohibitions on public eyances. In the post World War II era the federal government me heavily involved in sponsored research regarding the th effects of smoking. Congress held hearings of various s with widespread press coverage, and public education aigns also became a thrust of federal activity through the eon General's office and other government agencies.
D.)	Court Cases and .Rulings. Courts on the national,
e,	and local levels provided a variety of rulings relating to ;ing. In 1900, for instance, the U. S. Supreme Court in ;in v. Tennessee ruled that it had "no reason to doubt" that libiting the sale of cigarettes in Tennessee was "designed for
rotection of the public health." The court also stated communications are constantly finding their way into the : press denouncing their [cigarettes'] use as fraught with danger to the youth of both sexes.” In 1920 the Kansas ne Court, drawing upon the Austin ruling and similar cases, unanimously in the Nossaman case to uphold its state aitory law. In so ruling, the court stated; "For a number ars there has been a well-settled opinion that the use of ettes especially by persons of immature years was harmful, he courts have recognized that they were deleterious in effects." As a third example, a lawsuit was brought during in the U. S. District Court in Kansas City involving ations by John T. Ross that he had contracted throat cancer smoking cigarettes. The trial of this case in 1962 received sive newspaper coverage, particularly in Kansas City apers, because of high public interest, indicating pread public knowledge and concern about the possible health quences of smoking.
E.) Newspapers arid Popular Magazines. Beginning in the newspapers, whether national, regional, or local in ilation, including those published in Kansas arid Missouri, extensive coverage to medical and medical-related studies ng with the possible health risks associated with smoking.
*	articles made available to the general public: findings .ally reported at medical conventions and later published in :al, medical-relatesd, and scientific journals. Widely-
.lating popular magazines, such as Time. Newsweek. Life, and r's Digest, followed the same pattern. Reader's Digg^. for ile, having one of the highest circulation rates of any ar magazine, began covering smoking-related issues in the . Thereafter the Digest continued to provide extensive age of health issues related to smoking and also published :les dealing with ways and methods to stop smoking. Between and 1953, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg's Good Health Magazine itedly published articles that focused on the possible health iquences associated with the use of tobacco. A number of the Health articles addressed heart and heart-related diseases slation to smoking. Several articles likewise warned of the red "addictive" nature of smoking.
F.) Booksf Pamphlets, anti Articles. These items exist in : number. Anti-smoking organizations produced them, as did >rned ministers, public health officials, and well-known res like the auto manufacturer Henry Ford. Ford's The Little i Slaver (1914-1916), for example, summarized the thinking of :al prominent anti-smoking proponents, among them Thomas A.
>n and B«oker T. Washington. Ford distributed the four inent parts of Little White Slaver through his auto srships. The title itself summarizes a widely-held public ^standing of cigarettes--habit-forming, addictive, enslaving, likewise was one of a number of prominent employers who sd smoking among their employees. As a group, these books, nlets, and articles consistently reiterated the message that
Lng adversely affected health and was also habit-forming (a on phrase was getting "addicted to the cigarette habit") ise of the presence of nicotine in tobacco. As another pie, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (noted above in E!.), was a
i.fic writer and authored the widely-read TobaccoiBm {1922, sed 1937). Kellogg produced a number of health textbooks, times in co-authorship with Professor Michael V. O'Shea of University of Wisconsin, which addressed both the health cts and habit-forming nature of smoking. Various O'Shea and ogg health textbooks received approval for classroom use in as during the 192Cs, and Kellogg's and O'Shea's writings were nsively quoted in the Kansas Course, of Study... of 1932 (see bove) for instructing school children about smoking. Kellogg wise popularized the concept of "tobacco heart," which rred to the stress thought to be placed on the nervous and ulatory systems by smoking. Kansas teachers were expected to ruct school children about the consequences of smoking in tion to "tobacco heart," heart disease, and related ulatory illnesses.
G.) Medical and Medical-Related Research and Writings. An .dance of information derived from medical-related research writings reached the public. Nineteenth- and early itieth-century anti-smoking tracts invariably described :ing in terms equivalent to habit-forming, and some mentioned :t and heart-related problems. Between 1920 and 1950,
Lsional medical-related articles considered smoking in
ion to heart disease, cancer, and other health difficulties.
■	1950 the number of medical and scientific articles grew lentially and were covered extensively by the media.
.rchers such as E. Cuyler Hammond and Daniel Horn conducted imiological studies concerning the health consequences of ng. The Hammond-Horn study involved over 187,000 cipants and received widespread media coverage in 1954 after litial report to the American Medical Association. Hammond lorn also considered the statistical association between ng and various forms of heart disease. The Emporia Gazette, nstance, carried stories about the Hammond-Horn findings, iding the statement that "the effect [of smoking] found on leart is much more important than the effect found in lung ;r, . . " (Nov. 12, 1954). Other statistical studies, such irold Dorn's investigation of 290,000 World War I veterans >leted in the late 1950s), received press coverage as well. >apers also carried articles in which medical authorities and itists debated the role of smoking in relation to variety of : factors like industrial pollution as possible sources of :n-day health problems. The release of the Surgeon General's report, Smokincr and Health, which summarized the findings of -ous medical and scientific research, became one of the major stories of the decade. This study also dealt with possible ictions between smoking and cardiovascular diseases. On the jnal level, magazines such as Time and Newsweek, which gave \sive coverage to the Surgeon General's report, likewise
enced the possible linkage between smoking and ovascular diseases. On the local level, the Emporia Gaz^t-t-g 13, 1964) stated: "And there was an association--but not . proof of cause--between cigarettes and heart and blood :1 disease,..." In another article on the Surgeon General's t, the Emporia Gazette (Jan. 11, 1964) noted the possibility iputation of limbs in referencing certain cardiovascular .ses.
H.) Television Presentations and Popular Culture 'Sources. s infancy during the 1950s, the medium of television quickly fed as another major source for the dissemination of ■mation about the possible health consequences of smoking.
'55 CBS television featured in its highly-regarded "See It program (May 31 and June 7, hosted by Edward U. Murrow) the :al-scientific debate over possible linkages between cancer smoking. Based on printed transcripts, CBS and the other : networks gave extensive coverage to Surgeon General Leroy sy's public announcement in 1957 that "there is an increasing :onsistent body of evidence that excessive cigarette smoking le of the causative factors in lung cancer." Possibly even thorough was television news coverage given to Surgeon :al Luther Terry's 1964 report. Television news programs, as served to warn the general public repeatedly about the Lble negative health effects of smoking. So too with popular ire sources. The mass production of cigarettes, which began le 1880s, quickly resulted in a series of slang expressions
denoted public perceptions. By the late 1880b Americans employing the slang term "coffin nail” in relation to ettes; and by the 1920s other slang terms, including "coffin " and "coffin tack," "gasper," "little white hearse plumes," ord's "little white slaver," had become part of a common c vocabulary. "Cancer stick" also gained widespread use. terms worked their way into popular literature such as s and into movies and other sources. The message conveyed tese expressions was that cigarettes were not only habit-.ng but could also shorten life because of potential adverse ;h effects.
I have every reason to believe that the body of knowledge red from the historical sources and materials described in jreceding sections were widely available in the areas where 1 Burton resided.
Prom a historical perspective, the accumulated evidence istrates that the general public received and understood this rmation.^ I am basing this conclusion on the following Lderations:
1.) The sheer volume of surviving records--and their spread circulation among the populace--strongly supports this lusion. For example, Reader's Digest had one of the highest cription circulation rates of any popular magazine in January when it published "How Harmful Are Cigarettes?" by Roger
am Riis. This article, according to the editors, generated ge volume of reader response and "aroused more: discussion pproval than any recent magazine feature." As; a result, the t decided to reprint articles from earlier issues on how to smoking. Other examples would include questions from rned individuals that produced published responses from us newspaper columnists. "Dear Abby," strongly anti-smoking r opinion column, repeatedly answered questions about the -forming nature of smoking and possible1, health effects. So id the nationally-syndicated columnist, Peter J. Steincrohn,
, whose advice appeared in the Kansas City Star during the 1960s. Local M. D.'s, such as Dr. Edwin P. Jordan, also uch a column that addressed smoking-related concerns, in case in the Springfield, Missouri, Leader & Press. Persons I not have asked such questions or expressed such concerns, rould the columnists have responded in print, had there been .e or no public awareness or understanding of the issues f raised.
2.) Public opinion polls conducted by the highly regarded ip organization and others serve as another confirmation of ligh levels of public awareness and knowledge. For instance, xne 1954, the Gallup organization asked; "Have you heard rettes cause lung cancer?" Over 89 percent of the indents answered yes. As a second example, in June-July , after public announcements of the completed findings of and and Horn (see G. above), Gallup pollsters asked: "Did
tappen to hear or read about the recent report of the .can Cancer Society reporting the results of a study on the :ts of cigarette smoking?" Seventy-seven percent of the indents answered yes. Among those respondents who were jrs, 82 percent responded yes. As such, the general .ace, and smokers in particular, indicated that they were i of the most recent study relating to smoking and health.
3.) Government involvement came in waves of legislative, listrative, and judicial action. For instance, some fifteen is adopted laws between the 1890s and 1920s that in some way Lbited the sale and consumption of cigarettes within their active borders. These laws did not arise in a vacuum of ic knowledge or opinion. Nor did government officials act in id of public pressure. Effective educational campaigning and ^ing by Lucy Page Gaston and the Kansas Anti-Cigarette League ed prevent the repeal of the Kansas prohibitory law in 1920. e education boards and school administrators, as in Kansas, cted teachers to inform and instruct students about the t-forming nature of smoking, as well as possible health equences^ and they provided support materials in the form of se of study curriculum guides and approved textbooks. In , the findings of a special federally-sponsored study group moking and health influenced Surgeon General Dr. Leroy ey's decision to issue a national warning about the possible th effects of smoking, with particular reference to cancer. iey's statement received extensive press coverage. Also in
when asked whether a warning label should appear on ette packages, Burney indicated that information about the ble health consequences of smoking was already thoroughly minated to the general public. Stated Burney: "Our ion is that we have informed the public through the lent coverage of the press, radio, and TV." So too with the Surgeon General's report. This document also received ehensive media coverage and generated widespread public ssion of the issue.
4.) Newspapers and other media sources assumed awareness nderstanding on the part of the general public. As with r's Digest and other magazines, they carried a stream of to" articles in regard to quitting smoking. Such articles for granted that persons wanted to learn about methods to break their habit. Typical of such coverage were a number -tides in the 1964 Kansas City Kansan that focused on local i smoking" meetings sponsored by the Seventh-Day Adventist :h» which conducted such programs nationally and made them .able to any person interested in quitting smoking. In the r 1960s the Emporia Gazette, as another example, carried Les on local clinics and programs designed to assist persons lat community to stop smoking. When considered in the light sdical columns and other forms of newspaper coverage, such as axtensive coverage given the John Ross case (see D. above), iformed public was showing its concern about smoking, which i not have been the case had persons not known about the
:-forming qualities of smoking or possible health squences.
5.) Another way in which the general public demonstrated awareness and understanding was through the rapid shift to =r-tipped cigarettes during the 1950s. The public did so out uncern over medical and scientific findings, to which the a gave extensive coverage, about cigarette tar as a possible ce of cancer. In 1950 only a small percentage of persons ed filter-tipped cigarettes, but by the end of: the-decade over half of all smokers had switched to filter tips. That entage would continue to climb during the 1960s. In tion, during periods when reports flooded the media about the ible adverse health effects of smoking (1954 and 1964, for pie), cigarette sales declined briefly but dramatically, e sudden downward shifts in sales per capita further indicate the public was not only receiving the message but in many s acting on the information being presented.
To summarize, persons living in the United States could not avoided coming into contact with materials and information t the a]J.eged habit-forming nature of smoking or possible th consequences, the latter in relation to cancer and various is of heart and circulatory diseases. Every person who :nded public schools, spoke with others about smoking, read [papers, magazines, books, listened to radio and/or watched ►vision could not have escaped receiving that pervasive and jistent message. Built on a legacy of writings and anti-
ing commentary dating back to the late 1700s and even to ier times, such knowledge was not a well-kept secret but er constantly in circulation through society. Thus the ic was not only aware but also had a common understanding of possible habit-forming qualities and health consequences of :ing. Historical evidence is overwhelming in support of this ilusion.
Source Materials.) In the process of forming my opinions, I
>	reviewed a wide variety of historical sources. These :ces include the following: Books, pamphlets, and articles,
>	dating to the late 17 00s, that focus on the subject of icco use, consumption, and possible health consequences;
;rn books and articles, including medical and medical-related lies, dating from about 1940 to the present, that address the ject of tobacco use, consumption, and possible health sequences,■ U. S. government records and documents pertaining tobacco use, consumption, and possible health consequences, n about 1900 to 1965; state laws and statutes regarding the llation aod prohibition of tobacco sales and consumption, with ;ial reference to Kansas, from about 1890 to 1930; court Lsions, again with special reference to Kansas:, pertaining to ce prohibitory laws regarding tobacco sales and consumption; ant records of various anti-smoking organizations, including National and International Anti-Cigarette leagues; cational materials relating to state laws and statutes,
xulum mandates and guides, textbook selection procedures and :ion lists as well as selected textbooks, and teacher ling and certification requirements, from about 1890 to 1970, special reference to Kansas,* national, regional, and local papers, including the New York Times and papers from Kansas r Missouri and Kansas, Springfield, Missouri, and Emporia, is, for selected years between 1950 and 1965; miscellaneous papers from selected years of the twentieth century; popular sines, including Reader's Digest., Life. Time, Newsweek, and
i,	for various years between about 1940 and 1965, and Good ch Magazine for the period 1900 to 1953; television *ntary addressing the debate over smoking and possible health squences and anti-smoking television commercials, from about to 1970; national polling information for selected years, about 1935 to the present; miscellaneous visual materials, teenth and twentieth centuries. In addition, I have read d Burton's two-part deposition, dated November 7 and November 994; the Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint; the Answer to t Amended Complaint and Affirmative Defenses of R.J. Reynolds cco Company; and the Memorandum and Order of the United es District Court, District of Kansas, dated March 10, 1995.
My opinions and conclusions are based on my research and ew of these historical materials as they pertain to this case on my academic training and experience as a professional orian specializing in the field of United States history.
[ have attached a copy of my curriculum vita which describes lining, qualifications, and professional experiences and contains a list of: my publications.
I have not testified as an expert at trial or by deposition a the past four years.
James Kirby Martin
JSuUMt'f % (
*
GENERAL PRESENTATION November 16, 1995
introduction
A.	Public Impressions (or Awareness) of the Possible Health Consequences of Smoking, in this case in relation to smoking and Heart Related Diseases
B.	Public Impressions {or Awareness) ol! the Alleged Addictive Qualities of Smoking, with special reference to Cigarettes.
C.	Conclusions at Outset: Information widely if not completely disseminated through society, dating back to the first introduction of tobacco products in European and western culture. Use of tobacco has been always controversial--and that persistent controversy has produced overwhelming amounts of information to make the public aware on both counts.
D.	Point may be established by quote from King James I of England from his (1604) pamphlet, A Counterblaste to Tobacco■■ "A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the brain, dangerous to the lungs..." (Offer brief context).
E.	Resulted in major debate in Europe over next two centuries re. the consumption of tobacco. Huge scientific, medical debate (Arents materials: 227 diseases use of tobacco would have positive effects; 51 diseases, ailments induced by tobacco). Note; We can check heart-related diseases.
(Debated within humoral theory of disease, balancing four bodily humours of blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile--binary qualities hot and cold, moist and dry). Point; phlegm, for instance, was cold and moist, blood hot and moist--too much phlegm, take tobacco because properties were hot and dry, restore humoral balance. Tobacco help expel excess moisture from body, so good for treating colds, reducing swelling, dealing malaria and cholera. Also important in alleviating hunger and thirst.
E. Debate carried over to the American provinces, aftar Revolution the United States.
Nineteenth-Century Pamphlets and Tobacco-Alcohol Temperance ;e
A.	Enter Benjamin Rush (1746-1813), pre-eminent .cian, signed Dec. Independence. Great interest health-:ed issues, publishes extensively, inc. 1784 Inquiry, moral >hysical thermometer, then 1798 publishes "Observations upon influence of the Habitual Use of Tobacco upon Health, Morals, Property" (1798). Quote: "The progress of habit in the use ibacco is exactly the same as in the use of spirifcous
■	S. The slaves of it begin, by using it only after dinner-See also p. 265, pulmonary example, and p. 270, tobacco lirst.
1.	Father of temperance movement, father of :an psychiatry, rightfully should be considered father of ;obacco movement in the United States.
2.	Pamphlet sets tone and range of. arguments.
A.	Speaks of tobacco as enslaving (addictive)
B.	Suggests health consequences
C.	Defies earlier medical knowledge: makes rnt that tobacco can lead to strong drink because causes illy unquenchable thirst.
D.	By implication makes mental, moral (vices), Lseases link.
E.	Remember, an advocate of temperance, not
jit ion.
B.	Go over nineteenth-century anti-tobacco sentiments.
A.	Kindred spirit of temperance/prohibition
mt.
B.	From the Journal of Health, no. 3,
ielphia, October 7, 1929: "Tobacco is, in fact, an absolute
i." "The almost constant thirst occasioned by smoking and ig has, in numerous instances, it is to be feared, led to itemperate use of ardent spirits." "So detestable and ;ious a habit." (Did not look for heart or addict snces; most likely there. Arents Doc. 3191).
C.	Rev, George Trask, 1850s-1870s, out of aurg, Mass., published Anti-Tobacco Journal. 1853 Uncle
5 Advice to Bqvs. various comments ATJ: July and August "They ... [snuffing women] are all slaves." April and May "Tobacco is evidently the cause of a vast amount of nary disease." Oct.,Nov., Dec. 1873: [very early reference s use of cigarettes] "Do you say no decent young man would inarry a lady addicted to smoking?" (Again from Arents, same tit as above) .
Trask, American Anti-Tobacco Society, also had a e: "We, the subscribers, believing the use of tobacco, er in tl^ form of smoking, snuffing, or chewing, to be anly, unhealthy, and expensive, hereby pledge ourselves to in from its use totally and forever." Dated April 4, 1852.
D.	Go into pamphlets, emerging themes of mental,
, and health problems, esp. as related to alleged addiction eart problems.
Lucy Page Gaston (1860-1924) and Kansas
A.	Perhaps rise of LPG and mass production cigarettes ncoincidental. Grew up in temperance family; gets involved TU; puts special emphasis on cigarette--cigarette face,
1	TT V	Hi 1 1	W 1	a 4- mnM	-i Vt
hroat cancer.
B.	LPG significant because results in national
nt against the cigarette--Chicago Anti-Cigarette League to al Anti-Cigarette'. League to international Anti-Cigarette 1899-1920S [major educational campaigns, such as ation of The Boy and newspaper out of Harvey, Illinois]. 1890s pressure Congress, respond health a state issue, s in what will be fifteen state Prohibition laws against tte between 1890s and 1920s.
C.	1920 LPG runs for presidency, also goes to Kansas, so works to have Kansas Anti-Cigarette law upheld. [use
nt from supreme court ruling, also selected articles]. Law lly approved 1909, modified 1927 in favor of strict law t sale o£ cigarettes to minors under age twenty-one.
roader Effects of Anti’Cigarette Campaign
A.	Analysis of Henry Ford's The.Little White Slaver.
[discuss pamphlet, share copies, remember to draw ion to comments by Booker T. Washington, pp. 49-50]
B.	Industrialists, large firms make clear won't hire s( ban smoking of cigarettes, and the like--<Thomas Edison,
Roebuck, and Co., Montgomery ward, others. Reasons lentally same "make good boy go bad." Rush arguments,
., moral, physical.
C.	John Harvey Kellogg (1852-1943) and the "good
l" movement, biologic living. Battle Creek Sanitarium. >pment of certain "health" foods, such as corn flakes.
I the good health message far and wide. Two primary ways:
1.	Analysis of Good Health magazine [handouts] Probably about 25,000 copies printed per
.y issue but no one knows for sure; may have been more,* also irticles reprinted in wide circulating Literary Digest.
2.	Kellogg as textbook writer. In 1888 his First ,n Physiology, and Hygiene appeared (Harper & Brothers) for y grades. Then in 1908 began collaboration with Michael V. i of University of Wisconsin, writing for the Macmillan
ly. Kept collaboration going into 1920s. A prolific
also authored Tobaccoism. summary materials Good Health.
3.	No doubt influenced key individuals such as Ford, and textbook writings will have a national influence sseminating Kellogg's health concerns re. tobacco and sttes (addiction and heart disease).
rimary, Secondary Education with Special Emphasis on Kansas
Case of Kansas
1.	1899 began practice uniform textbook adoption
2.	Certification for hygiene and health jction was required beginning in 1886
3.	Beginning in 1894, if not before, state
h i nn	Kanan iosinnn	nf	iniri'ii'ulnm
and manuals, etc., specifying what materials and themes irs should emphasize in the classroom. In area of tlogy and hygiene (health education), great amount of .al on tobacco.
4.	Although health education not required at itary level until 1944, regularly a part of curriculum based :t adoption lists.
5.	One of most important of curricular guides,
: OF STUDY IN HEALTH EDUCATION "With Special Reference to ifects of Alcohol and Narcotics." Note contains outlines .1 elementary and middle school grades (1-6). Curriculum mentions Kellogg's writings 7 times and Michael O'Shea 5 (in partial copy), No reason to assume this guide not used .940s. [Give examples from pamphlet].
6.	Textbooks: Elementary--Emerson, Charters, i; secondary: Cockefair, Burkard (Advertising), Andress, irs, Burkard (tobacco heart), Wilson (Raymond Pearl)
ransitiom National Publications and Cancer Scare
U If Good Health did not have a huge national audience,
:■s Digest circulated in the millions. Carried forward on 3 from Kellogg and others. [see handout].
1.	RD helps set tone for decade of 1950s when william Riis article, "How Harmful Are Cigarettes?"
:ed in January 1950. Summary of previous statements,
3ns.
2.	Also in 1950 Drs. Evarts Graham and Ernst : of Washington University School of Medicine began to
: (retrospectively) on cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
350 article in JAMA based on 684 cases, titled "Tobacco ig as a Possible Etiologic Factor in Bronchogenic noma.11
3.	New phase of medical inquiry, rise of epidemiological ss which would feed into and build on findings of Graham and r. By 1954 safe to say cancer scare: But what of heart
se?
1251--Major event initial release of Hammond and Horn niologiq^l study involving 187,766 white males ages 50-70.
1.	unclear information re. Gallup polls. Thought Iced something about were you aware that smoking may be a e of lung cancer with high percentage response. Poll I have page 1247, an opinion, do you think smoking is a cause of cancer?
D.	1252--Major events: l. Study Group on Smoking and
h,	released March-April; 2. Final Hammond and Horn report,
3.	Surgeon General Burney's response and public ncement re. warning on cancer, July; 4. Sen. Wallace tt proposes warning label; 5. Blatnik hearings, Surgeon al Burney and John Heller of National Cancer Institute; 6. p Poll material and public awareness, esp. in relation to
. 1958--1. May 1958, Ernst Wynder Seventh-Day Adventist article Time, no local coverage; 2 Harold F. Dorn, chief tician for National Institutes of Health, Veteran's study, local coverage Springfield), Remember: Scientific an 1962 article Hammond, comparisons Dorn.
•	1962--1. Royal College of Physicians' Report, March; 2. Terry begins process of appointing group to study smoking alth, June,- 3. Possibly Celebrezze said not role ment to tell people to stop smoking, December; 4. local n Kansas City, local coverage, John T, Ross v. Philip
. 1964--Surgeon1s General's Report on Smoking and Health ed in January; movement toward warning label by PTC, leads . 1, 1966, warning label;
iscellaneous
African-American publications: articles in Ebony.
i.	Miscellaneous items on addiction: Reed Smoot, 1929; s cites from news magazines,- 1961 Science News Letter.
!. Items not available: educational films, other forms of s, broader range popular magazines, television and radio eports.
Conclusions
:he deaf, dumb, halt, and idiots would not have known about :ontroversy, both over definition of cigarettes (addictive, and possible health consequences of smoking.
mr
BURTON OUTLINE DRAFT ICAL AWARENESS OF HEART/CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE & ADDICTION
m RELATION TO TOBACCO
. Benjamin Rush - 1798 "Observations upon the Influence
of the Habitual Use of Tobacco"
-Tobacco as a poison
-Tobacco as an "enslaver"
I.	Nineteenth Century Pamphlets - background literature
a.	George Trask Thought and Stories for American Lad's or Uncle Toby's anti-tobacco advice to hie nephew Billy Bruce"
b.	Henry Ford's "Little White Slaver"
(Edison, Penny, Ward, Field)
c.	Anti-Cigarette Movement begins to broaden as the Cigarette grows ( )	■
Associated with: 1. Evil Women >a. mental
2.	Bad Boys >b. moral
>c.physical
II.	John Harvey Kellogg - background
a.	Battlecreek Sanitarium
b.	20th Century American Health Guru
c.	Two Primary Influences
1.	Good Health Magazine 1900-1955
-???articles dealing with heart disease -???articles specifically use term addiction
-???articles use dopefiend, slave, etc. -???articlee deal with circulatory problems and disease ,
-??? articles deal with why athletes m	should not smoke
3 in which warnings>
2.	JHK major influence on Industrial leaders
such as Henry Ford, refused to employee smokers. "Little White Slaver" deals with heart disease.
d.	Textbooks & Publications
-textbook with O'Shea -Health Almanac
-publications in popular science and medical journals
7. Lucy Page Gaston - background & Kansas
a.	Anti-Cigarette League{International organization)
b.	Anti-Cigarette Legislation, Kansas State Supreme Court Case - 1907
c.	Baptist material (WCTU ??)
. Kansas Legislation
a.	Kansas Supreme Court
- Nov. 1920 State v. Nosman upheld anti-cigarette sales law, "responsibility of the government to protect citizens for their good health
b.	repealed in 1920s only because the WWI veterans lobbied to have the right to smoke
I. Education - Mean's Report (laws & health ed materials)
a.	textbooks (health)
b.	school courses
c.	1929 - Senator Smoot Resolutions - labeling law
XI. Newspapers/Magazine Articles - Time/Newsweek 50’s/60's
-medical association & scientific community filtered into the local newspapers/magazines (audio-visual -TV?)
a.	1954 Hammond & Horn Study 187,776 men {JAMA) -Numbers are increasing with lung cancer, however the statistics between smokers' various forms of heart disease is 62 times more than lung cancer (?)
1957 Group Smoking & Health Report - Science
1957	Blatnik Hearings - "Don't need labels everyone is aware that there is health hazard. Sen Wallace Bennett, Utah wants
m	label, re: circulatory problems
1958	Hammond & Horn Study Results of 187,776 men (JAMA)
1958 Dorn study of 200,000 Veterans
1958 Wynder study 7th Day Adventists
1962 Hammond study
1964 Surgeon General's Report
-Chapters 11-15 heart disease
b.	Gallup Poll
-proves the awareness by questioning smoking as a cause of heart disease
I.	Black Magazine/Newspaper Articles * Ebony/Jet
Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edU/tobacco/d
Benjamin, "Observations Upon The Influence Of The Habitual se of Tobacco Upon Health, Morals, and Property," Essays, iterary. Moral & Philosophical. Philadelphia: Thomas & amuel F. Bradford, 1798.
"The progress of habit in the use of Tobacco is exactly the same as in the use of spiritous liquors. The slaves of it begin, by using it only after dinner--then during the whole afternoon, and evening, afterwards before dinner, then before breakfast, and finally during the whole night."
19th Century Paiqphlets
, Orin, A. M.(pastor of the 1st Congressional Church). isauisition on the Evils of Using Tobacco and the Necessity f Immediate and Entire Reformation. Providence! S. R. eeden, Market Square, 1833.
"Tobacco is in fact an absolute poison."
"...Tobacco burns out the blood, the teeth, the eyes, and the brain."
Joel, M. D. Tobacco: Its History, Nature, and Effects of he B_ody_and Mind, circa 1840.
--tobacco makes the "rounds of the circulation."
--"A nervous palpitation of the heart is often caused by the use of tobacco."
--tobacco has been the cause of heart disease in many instances. ..addicted to smoking...n
Y.]. "A Mediation On Tobacco," National Magazine. November, 1855): 434-439.
"A slow poison verily!"
ison, T. W. "A New Counterblast," Atlantic. (December, .861): 702.
"The injurious effects of excessive smoking,'parital paralysis,...narcotism of the heart',"
Rev. J., D. D. Tobacco. The Bane of the Times. Boston: lutchinsen and Bullard, 1861.
"Snuffing, smoking, and chewing are bad habits, and we advise any gentleman who is not hopelessly addicted to either, to give it up."
;co: Its Use and Abuse," Cornhill. (November, 1862): >05-613.
Consequences of excessive smoking include angina pectoris, pulse increase, increase in heart's action, and nervous palpitation of the heart. Tobacco is poisonous to the blood and poisons the nervous system.
i,	John m.d. The Use of Tobacco and The Evils, Physical, sntal, and Social. Resulting Therefrom. New York; G. P. itnam & Son, 1868.
Tobacco produces a "great debility of the circulation..." "The action of the heart is affected by it [tobacco] directly through the nervous system." "This same exhausting influence upon the nervous system, and upon the circulation of the blood, is observable in many habituated to it,..."
John C. "Tobaccophagoi and Tobaccophagism," Galaxy. rune, 1870): 751-757.
HEART-- "The physiological effects of tobacco are very varied. In its antispasmodic and narcotic or anodyne effect, it resembles lobelia, while its eiction on the heart is not unlike that of digitalis. In this latter respect, it has in some instances originated very puzzling phenomena, such as the permanent establishment of an irregularity in the heart's action, whereby every third or fourth beat is omitted." "He fancies that compared with such drugs his tobacco is innocuous, when in reality it contains equally if not more deadly poisons;..." Tobacco is considered a "deleterious drug."
2V. B. St. J. "Our Fashionable Narcotic," Ladies1 spositorv. (January, 1870): 58-61.
Quoting a French paper by physician Claude Bernard "Nicotine, the poisonous principle of tobacco, acts as a heart poison." It was also "observed that it paralyzed the central organ of the circulation--thence sudden death."
--compares symptoms to angina pectoris --reports over one hundred cases "respecting the pernicious action in the functions of the heart, caused by smoking tobacco." "This is now an accepted fact in medical science, and there is scarcely a practitioner who does not prohibit smoking, or, at least, who fails to recommend the greatest moderation in it to such of his patients as are liable to even the slightest perturbations of the functions of the heart."
John. The Use of Tobacco vs. Purity. Chastity, and Sound ealth. New York: Cowan & Company, Publishers, 1870. "Tobacco, in all its forms, an active poison,..."
me, I. C. The	Tobacco .Plug..and Cigar. 1875
Tobacco is	the primary cause of many maladies and fatal
diseases.	It is charged with causing heart diseases, etc.
Rev. B. W., A.M. Tobacco:_Its Physical. Mental. Moral
nd Social Influences. By the author, 1878.
"The circulation of the blood is impeded by this worse than fatal narcotic." "...the Tobacco-user finds the pulsations of the heart slow, feeble, and irregular, and in other cases rapid and violent."
ore, Abiel Abbott, Anti-Tobacco. Carpenter, Rev. Russell ant, A Lecture On Tobacco., and Witter, G. F., M. D., Qn he Use Of Tobacco. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1883.
"The effect produced by tobacco on the heart is caused by its paralyzing effect on the minute vessels of the capillaries." "Dr. B, w. Richardson, f. R, S., says •that smoking produces disturbances in the blood,...; on the heart, causing debility of the organ and irregular action...1." "Richardson declares 'that in the confirmed smoker there is a constant functional disturbance which extends to the blood, the stomach, the heart, the lungs, the brain, and the nerves.1 John Quincy Adams, former President of the United States, after using tobacco in early life, and giving up the habit, remarked: 'I have often wished that every individual of the human race, affected with this artificial passion, would prevail upon himself to try, but for three months, the experiment which I have made, and am sure it would turn every acre of tobacco land into a wheat-field, and add five years to the average human life'."
20th CENTURY PAMPHLETS
Charles B. "The Injury of the Tobacco and Its Relation To )ther Drug Habits," Century. (March, 1912): 767-771. --"slow poisoning"
--"every athlete knows its hurts the wind; that is, injures the ability of the heart to respond quickly to extra work.”
--heightens blood pressure
, F. C.,*M. D. "The Truth About Tobacco," Technical World. (April, 1914): 180-185.
"...tobacco has been a frequent factor in the production of arteriosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries." "...arteries suffer particularly from this continuing poisoning.'1
h,	Theo. F., A. M., D. D., and Higley, L. H. The Brown God and His white Imps. Butler, Indiana: L. H. Higley, Publisher, 1916.
"the use of tobacco injures the red corpuscles of the blood and greatly disturbs the action of the heart and blood vessels, "...the average pulse of those addicted
.___ ______ — i: .u. —. —.	J « —. J	M J	II
g, John Harvey. Tobaccoism. Battlecreek, Michigan: The odern Medicine Publishing Co., 1937.
"Your blood-vessels are hardened and shrunken, greatly increasing the work of your heart, while the heart heart is degenerated and weakened, the usual effects of nicotine; and so a vicious circle is formed."
"Nicotine is a heart poison." Also uses term addiction.
gan, Jack J. Tobacco_A Study of Its Consumption in the
nited States. New York: Pitman Publishing Corporation, 940.
Tobacco affects the circulatory system. "Tobacco heart generally occurs in some who smoke immoderately."
"Other circulatory disorders have been attributed to the use of tobacco."
(Chronological Listing)
a, W. M. "Tobacco Smoking: A Clinical Study," Journal of he American Medical Association, 93 (1929): 665-667, 1909.
r. Johnson studied 150 patients and the effect of smoking ir blood pressure. He concluded that the effect on smokers actically negligible." He noted that the blood pressure of s is somewhat lower and may suggest the "possibility of eakening of the myocardium after the prolonged use of
o." He also studied the "tobacco habit as an etiologic in angina pectoris." "Practically all authorities take it anted that tobacco is a potent cause of angina, and are ous in advising its withdrawal in such cases." In ding, he stated that tobacco smoking has no apparent ent effect on the blood pressure, and he doubted whether
0	plays a role in the etiology of angina pectoris.
, Bayard T. "The Outlook In Thrambo-angiitis Obliterans” ournal of the American Medical Association. (193$): 2184189.
>r. Bayard T. Horton focused on thrombo-angiitis obliterans, he defines as a chronic occlusive arterial disease ing chiefly the extremities. Dr. Horton based his study on tients, most of whom he observed at the Mayo Clinic. These its were evaluated based on age, race, sex, and degree of Lg. He noted that 93% of these patients who had thrombo-is obliterans were smokers and concluded that amputations ire frequent in smokers than in nonsmokers. He stated that iber of investigations have held that tobacco is the primary igic agent in the production of this disease." He admitted :obacco was not the cause of the disease in the majority of ises, but that excessive smoking made the symptoms worse,
1	some cases there were "numerous exceptions even to this
i Coverage: Good Health Magazine. February 1939]
)h, John P., Willius, Fredrick A.f and Berkson, Joseph. •Tobacco and Coronary Disease," Journal oC the American
tediCfl3L Association. 115 (1940): 1327-1329.
3rs. English, Williue, and Berkson studied 1,000 cases with 3 to coronary disease and the influence of tobacco smoking affects the disease. They assumed that smoking was not a but could influence the course of coronary disease. In jsion they found that a greater incidence of coronary se occurs among smokers younger than 50 than among akers. In the older age group "the possible harmful effects
lacco smoke are less evident than the other factors ■ned in the production of atherosclerosis." "At this time," ilso stated, "physicians are not yet ready to agree on this isingly important subject."
i Coverage: Good Health Magazine. 1940]
E.	L., and Graham, E. A. "Tobacco Smoking as a Possible ttiologic Factor in Bronchiogenic Carcinoma," Journal of ;he American Medical Association. 143 (1950): 329-338.
In suggesting that smoking may play a part in bronchiogenic loma, Drs. Wynder and Graham admit that "well controlled and scale clinical studies are lacking." This study was an 3t to determine the factors that cause bronchiogenic loma. They investigated 684 cases. Wynder etnd Graham cited studies that emphasized a possible etiologic relationship in cigarette smoking and cancer of the lung. In conclusion : and Graham stated that "excessive and prolonged use of ;o...seems to be an important factor in the induction of liogenic carcinoma."
x coverage: Newsweek 6/12/50]
r, E. L., Graham, E. A., and Croninger, A. B. "Experimental Production of Carcinoma with Cigarette Tar," £a££££
Research. 13 (1953)? 855-864.
Drs. Wynder and Graham attempted to determine whether ances, namely cigarette tar, contained carcinogenic its. They extracted tar substances from cigarettes and ed the "tar" on the backs of mice. In conclusion they i that 44% of the mice with painted backs developed some of carcinoma.
a Coverage: Life. 12/21/53, and evidence disputed in a r to the editor by Charles Cameron, ACS medical director.]
nd, E. C., and Born, D, "The Relationship between Human Smoking Habits and Death Rates: A Follow-up of 187,766 Hen," Journal of the American Medical Association. 155 (1954): 1316-1328.
Hammond and Horn undertook this prospective study in late to determine if smoking affects death rates in relation to cancer. They reported that their information indicates that eath rates from coronary artery disease and cancer are r in men who regularly smoke. Of the 708 "excess" deaths
■	smokers, 375 or 53% were caused by disease of the coronary ies. They concluded that a cause-and-effect relationship
r disease and lung cancer.
i	coverage: New York Times. Reader's Digest. Newsweek, Kansas City Kansan, and Emporia Gazette.
Sidney J. "A Review of the statistical Evidence on the Association Between Smoking and Lung Cancer,*1 Journal of :he American Statistical Association, 50 no. 270 (June L955): 267-283.
[n this review article Cutler reported, "there is a reement whether the evidence at hand warrants a conclusion smoking and lung cancer are causally related." He went on :e that some studies have linked the rising rate of lung r to environmental factors, which include: increased use of ;ttes, increased atmospheric air pollution and factory f and increased occupational exposure to known cancer ;ing substances. Cutler does not attempt to assign a Lve weight to each possible factor; however, he does place phasis on smoking based on recent epidemiological studies.
j, F. M., et al. "Smoking and Healthi Joint Report of the Study Group on Smoking and Health,” Science, 125 (1957); 1129-1133.
A.	study group organized by the American Cancer Society, can Heart Association, the National Cancer Institute, and ational Heart institute. "The evidence of a cause-effeet ionship [in relation to smoking and lung cancer] is adequate onsidering the initiation of public health measures." ional research is still necessary, however. Three stical investigations show an association between tobacco ng and reduced longevity,- the study group believed this ction requires further research before the exact meaning can termined. They also found that no clinical evidence that ng per se has a causative role in cardiovascular disease.
a Coverage: Newsweek and Springfield Leader__& Press 1
r, E. L., and Wright, G. "A Study of Tobacco Carcinogenesis, Fart 1 (The Primary Fractions),” Cancer, 10 (1957)i 255-271.
Another study attempting to determine whether tobacco tar , cancer causing agent. Wynder sought to prove this possible :ction by painting the backs of mice with tobacco tar. He fright concluded that "condensed cigarette smoke is nogenic to mouse skin."
.a Coverage: Life 4/22/57]
J. F. "Tobacco Consumption and Morality from Cancer and ther Diseases,” Lancet, 275 (1958): 137-139.
lis summary comment from the Seventh International Cancer 58 on Dorn's 290,000 veterans study, reported that the correlation of lung cancer with cigarette smoking cannot itly dismissed." The comment noted that lung cancer deaths 3% higher among smokers than non-smokers. Along with other pective and prospective investigations Dorn's study argues association between smoking and lung cancer. It was also oy Richard Doll, who commented on the study, that itary tendencies and air pollution may be relevant s."
d,	E. C., and Horn, D. "Smoking and Death Rates--Report on orty-Four Months of Follow-up of 187,783 Men. Part 1 Total Mortality), Part 2 (Death Rates by Cause)," Journal f the American Medical Association, 166 (1958): 1159172, 1294-1308.
inal reports on their prospective study, information ted earlier to the American Medical Association. Hammond rn conclude: "There is a high degree of association n total death rates and cigarette smoking..." Coronary disease was the cause of 5,297 (44.6%) deaths for all s involved in this study. Cigarette smokers, claim Hammond rn, had a higher death rate {measured in "excess" deaths) eart disease than did non-smokers. Hammond and Horn : "Coronary disease accounted for 52.1% of the excess among cigarette smokers."
Coverage: Newsweek 11/25/57]
>d, E. C. "Smoking and Death Rates--A Riddle In Cause and :ffect," American Scientist, 46 (1958): 331-353.
reviewing his prospective study, Hammond asserted that "it itually Certain that an association exists between cigarette ig and coronary artery disease." He also stated: "The very number of excess deaths from coronary artery disease in itte smokers was perhaps the most important finding in our *ctive study." There was no evidence at present, however, smoking influences the occurrence of atherosclerosis of the iry arteries. Hammond also emphasized that in any of the ;es possibly linked to smoking, there were other factors at but he did not define.
Harold, F. "Tobacco Consumption, and Mortality From Cancer and Other Diseases," Public Health Reports. 74 (1959): 581593.
Dorn, in this prospective study carried out in cooperation the National Cancer Institute, summarized mortality rates of 249,000 veterans (usable replies) holding life insurance ies with the U. S. government. He concluded that the death from all causes was 32% higher in men who used tobacco than who had never smoked. "The leading cause of death among the ^holders is coronary heart disease," Dorn stated. He also : "The death rate from coronary heart disease among regular of cigarettes only is 63 percent higher than the rate for okers." In another measure Dorn asserted that 45% of the s deaths among smokers were related to heart disease.
red in Ngw York Times, Tim, Springfield Leader & Press 1
nd, E. c. "Smoking in Relation to Heart Disease," Journal of Public Health. 50 (1960)t 20-26.
Hammond reviewed recent epidemiological studies, beginning Raymond Pearl's longevity study in 1938. Hammond theorized if the lungs are damaged from smoking cigarettes, then this e could cause a strain on the heart. Among other possible heses, Hammond proposed "that cigarette smokers tend to have in other habits; and that it is these other habits which nt for their high death rate from coronary artery disease."
, David H., and Nathan, Daniel J. "Smoking Habits and Coronary Atherosclerotic Heart Disease," JAMAi Journal of the American Medical Association, 177 (1961): 119-124.
At the outset Drs. Spain and Nathan stated that "no definite usions" have been made in the possible causal relationship en cigarette smoking and cardiovascular diseases in general. ,eir study of 3,000 males they observed a "statistical iation" between heavy cigarette smoking and the occurrence ironary atherosclerotic heart disease. They stated that an question still remains as to whether this statistical :iation indicates a causal relationship in the development of tary atherosclerosis. In conclusion they reported that e is suggestive evidence that cigarette smoking may play a in the precipitation of acute myocardial infarction in piduals who already have advanced coronary atherosclerosis."
md, E. Cuyler. "The Effects of Smoking,* Scientific American, 207 (1962): 39-51.
to the body. In his summary of the evidence Hammond ed that, in his opinion, "the inhalation of tobacco smoke is a number of very harmful effects and shortens life span -n beings." He cited Wynder and Dietrich Hoffmann who had . type of filter that removed "almost all the phenols." He (d more recent statistics to the conclusions of Harold veterans study. He believed that "research should be iken to determine the effects of various constituents of ;te smoke and to find means of removing those that are most
It
Sigmund L., and Plair, Cassius U. "Cigarette Smoking and rteriosclerosia," Science, 138 (1962)s 975-977.
:s. wilens and Plair asserted that cigarette smokers may :her characteristics, such as diabetes, hypertension, lolesteremia, and obesity. The results of their study ;ed "that an association exists between smoking practices ; development of arteriosclerosis or lesions resulting :om, ...is at best tenuous and inconclusive."
m
1954
L REPORT--
Journal of the American Medical Association
7, 1954 E. Cuyler Hammond, Sc.D. and Daniel Horn, Ph.D. eport in JAMA on a prospective study on 187,766 men age 0-70 that began in 1951.
INATION OP INFORMATION TO THE PUBLIC--
NEW YORK TIMES
2,	1954 Front page of the New York Times reports Cigarettes Found to Raise Death Rate in Men 50 to 70" reporting on the Hammond and Horn Study finding that the Leath rate from heart attacks and coronary artery disease fas 504 higher in smokers than non-smokers, Hammond and torn stated "it seems probable that nicotine is at least »artially responsible for the findings in relation to Lisease of the coronary arteries."
:7, 1954 Reports on the Hammond and Horn Study presented at :he 103rd American Medical Association Convention. The preliminary report claims that cigarette smokers age 50-70 lave a higher mortality rate and die mainly from cancer and leart disease. "The effect of nicotine in coronary heart Lisease is fairly clear."
!9, 1954 Dr. Charles Cameron, ACS Medical & Scientific >irector of the American Cancer Society sees "a clear cause-ind-effect relationship between cigarette-smoking and cancer >f the lung and coronary heart disease,..."
!7, 1954 Hammond reported at the Sixth international Cancer Congress in Sau Paulo that he was "more convinced than ever ;hat cigarette smoking had an important influence on deaths lot only from lung and other cancers but from coronary heart lisease." While lung cancer appeared to be on the increase, *ith 22,000 deaths reported, coronary heart disease killed approximately 500,000 in the United States last year.
ar 23, 1954 James Adams, Vice Chairman ACS, wants to have =t conference of federal and voluntary public health agencies to study health problems now being associated with smoking, sased on new evidence involving heart and arteries.
READER'S DIGEST
L954 "How To Stop Smoking" When you smoke "your blood ressure goes up.” "...blood vessels undergo a snstriction." "Tobacco smoke retards these natural cocesses by constricting your arteries, slowing down the Lood circulation."
NEWSWEEK
B,	1954 Surprisingly, a report presented at the San rancisco "offered statistics to show that the principle ause of death among heavy smokers was not lung cancer, as reviously suspected, but heart disease." Nicotine was sportedly a probable cause for diseases of the heart and sronary arteries.
TIME
, 1954 E. Cuyler Hammond reported at the AMA convention hat heavy cigarette smokers die younger than non-smokers, Tiainly of heart disease and cancer..." Reportedly the eath rate from heart disease and cancer among moderate nokers was also significantly higher.
Kansas City Fans am
2,	1954 "Tobacco Shares Break Sharply" As a result of report (Hammond & Horn) presented at the AMA convention he New York Stock exchange reported a drop in tobacco hares ranging in as much as dollar.
Emporia Gazette
, 1954 "Smokers Still Puff Away Despite Recent Medical eports on Cigarettes"
r 20, 1954 Dr. Hammond stated that it would be mpossible to prove conclusively whether smoking is or is ot a fa»tor in cancer or heart disease. In Hammond's ddress to the ACS he urged the invention of harmless obacco which he felt would take less time than proving the resent tobacco is a specific factor in disease.
er 11, 1954 Reports Dr. Ochsner's recently published book moking and Cancer.__a Doctors Report. He claims that igarettes are a cause in lung cancer and heart disease,
er 12, 1954 "Cancer Study Found That Smoking Led To ncreased Risk of Heart Troubles" The Hammond and Horn tudy found that "the effect found on the heart is much more mportant that the effect found in lung cancer...”
Kansas City Star
sr 11, 1954 The study by Hammond and Horn reports that iart disease was more significant than lung cancer since lart disease is the more frequent killer. "It has been >ng known that smoking can make tiny blood vessels narrow >wn, kick up pulse rate, and blood pressure."
1957
L REPORT--
une 1957	Study Group on Smoking and Health
he results of a study that began in June of 1956 on Smoking nd Health appeared in Science in June 1957. Conclusion ore research is needed in this area.
INATION OF INFORMATION TO THE PUBLIC--
Ngygycsh,,
l, 1957 Reports on a story in The Atlantic Constitution hat pre-released results of the study on Smoking and ealth.
Springfield Leader & Press
22, 1957 Reports on The Atlantic Constitution "exclusively totained" story regarding the study on Smoking and Health.
'he group claimed to establish a positive cause and effect ink between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
lL report--
’Inal Report of the Hammond & Horn Study given at the jnerican Medical Associations 106th Annual Meeting in 1957
[INATION OF INFORMATION TO PUBLIC--
Newsweek
.7, 1957 Hammond and Horn presented their final study at ;he 106th Annual Meeting of the AMA. Reporting that smoking ls believed to be one of causes of coronary artery disease.
Kansas City Star
l,	1957 The final reports on smoking habits presented by lammond Stnd Horn at the AMA convention "showed a clear-cut issociation between cigarette smoking and several other lilments, notably coronary artery disease, the doctors reported." 52.1% of excess deaths among the smokers studied n?ere attributed to coronary artery disease.
Kansas City Star
S, 1957 Tobacco reportedly began recovering after the "inaction" it suffered due to the "impact of the American lancer society's adverse report" two days ago.
uly 1957 Surgeon General Burney's Response to Report (Smoking & Health Group & Hammond & Horn Study)
Springfield Leader & Press
2,	1957 Surgeon General Burney comments on the Study on moking and Health have "reported that lung cancer occurs uch more frequently among cigarette smokers than among non-mokers,.,." Burney's statement was "There is an increasing nd consistent body of evidence that excessive cigarette moking is one of the causative factors in lung cancer."
Springfield Hews - Leader
4,	1957 Surgeon General Burney made an official government tatement regarding "excessive smoking."
Kansas City Kansan
5,	1957 Surgeon General Burney issued a statement eclaring that "excessive cigarette smoking is one of the auses of lung cancer,”
KENT PROPOSALS--
7, 1957 Wallace Bennett proposes Warning labels INATION OF INFORMATION TO PUBLIC--
MEW YORK TIMES
7,	1957 Senator Wallace Bennett of Utah proposed a smoking arning on cigarettes that would state "Prolonged use of his product may result in cancer in the lung, heart and lirculatory ailments, and in other diseases,"
[KENT INQUIRY-*
ruly 195T	Blatnik Hearings
!3, 1957 Surgeon General Burney testified in the Blatnik [earings that "...the facts have been furnished to the mblic through the press..." "Our position is that we have .nformed the public through the excellent coverage of the )ress, radio, and TV." "...I think we have gone as far as te should go at the present tlrhe." "This information had jeen pretty widely dispersed)!1 )
! AWARENESS--
Gallup Polls JULY 21, 1957
6/27-72/57)(Pre-Blatnik)
Did you happen to hear or read about the recent report of he American Cancer Society reporting the results of a study in the effects of cigaret smoking?"
77%---Yes	23%---No
What is your opinion--do you think cigaret smoking is one >f the causes of cancer of the lung?
50%—Yes	24%—No	26%---Undecided
July 24/ 1957
[6/27-7/2/57)(Pre-Blatnik)
'What is your opinion--do you think cigaret smoking is one >f the causes of heart disease?"
18%---Yes	341---No	28%---Undecided
*
1956
L REPORT--
QKLmwth MEDICINE
mst L. Wynder & Prank R. Lemon presented a study of eventh-Day Adventist in April 1958 to the California edical Association. The article appeared in California edicine in October 1958.
INATION OF INFORMATION TEE PUBLIC--
XXfcffl
1958	Reporting on the Wynder & Lemon study of the eventh-Day Adventists. Wynder and Lemon attempt to prove hat smoking & alcohol were contributing factors in disease, llaiming "that smoking, though not causing atherosclerosis .s such, adds to the already damaging effect of itherosclerosis upon the circulatory system."
READER'S DIGEST
: 1958 "The Ca&e of the Wise Abstainers" An article reporting the Wyncier and Lemon study on the Seventh-Day Ldventist.
NEW YORK TIMES
28, 1958 "Adventists Found To Resist Cancer" Reporting :hat the Seventh-Day Adventists due to religious abstentions >f tobacco and alcohol have "... 90 per cent fewer lung :ancers and 40 per cent fewer heart attacks than other men."
il Report--
>ra Report is presented to the Seventh International Cancer ass in July 1958.
if INATION OF INFORMATION TO THE PUBLIC
NEW YORK TIKES
5,	1958 "Smoking Report Summary" Reports the findings of Harold F. Dorn in a study of veterans. Dorn is said to support earlier findings that claimed "a statistical relationship between death rates and smoking."
yjMS
i,	1958 Reporting on the Seventh International Cancer ongress in London. Gives a brief summary of the Dorn sport. "...Increase in early deaths among heavy cigarette nokers is mainly from heart and artery disease."
, 1958 Reporting on the Dorn Study that examined "220,000 eterans of American wars." Dorn is expected to warn that cigarette smoking is dangerous." (2 articles)
1962
[i REPORTS--
L962 Britain's Royal College of Physicians published a aport on a two year study that stated "cigarette smoking ay be a contributing cause of death from a number of iseases besides lung cancer."
INATION OF INFORMATION TO THE PUBLIC
W YOBS TIMES
8,	1962 Reporting on the Royal College of Physicians' eport. The study states that "cigarette smoking...probably ontributes to the development of coronary heart disease."
13, 1962 Reporting the heavy demand for the publication of mokinq and Health put out by the Royal College of hysicians on their recent study.
KANSAS CITY STAR
7,	1962 Reports on the Royal College of Surgeons ommittee's two year study of case histories. The onclusion of the committee were that "cigarette smoking may e a cause of death...11
12,	1962 "British Fight On Cigarettes" Report of the oyal College of Physicians released last week "stating that igarette-smoking causes lung cancer." The reports also ade the recommendation that the cost of cigarettes be made rohibitively high by taxation,
MENT ANNOUNCEMENT--.962 Surgeon General Luther Terry announces the appointment >f a committee to study the effects of smoking on health. NEW YORK TIMES
1, 1962 "U. S. Health Service To Study Cigarettes" Report >f the Surgeon General Terry appointment of an advisory :ommittee "to study the effect of cigarette smoking on lealth."
KANSAS CITY KANSAN
!r 29, 1962 "Tobacco Study Is Under Way" Reporting that lurgeon General Terry is forming a committee of ten medical ixperts to investigate the "nature and magnitude of the lealth hazard" of tobacco.
1962
JMENT ANNOUNCEMENT--
>er 1962 Anthony Celebrezze the U. S. Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare stated that "I firmly believe that it .s not the proper role of the Federal government to tell :itizens to stop smoking."
HEW YORK TIMES
)er 3, 1962 "Celebrezze Wary On Smoking Issue" Reporting )n the comments of HEW Secretary regarding the recent :ommittee put together to examine the health effects of smoking on health. Celebrezze stated that "the findings should be laid before the public for it to decide what action to take..."
KANSAS CITY KANSAN
aer 3, 1962 "Says Smoking Ban Not Up to U. S." The Secretary of HEW stated that "it was proper for the government to get an expert committee to determine” if 3moking is a health hazard, but the findings should be laid sefore the public to make it's own decision. "You can kill yourself by overeating, overdrinking and other Dverindulgences," Celebrezze said. "Prohibition did not work. And we don't prevent the sale of rat poison although it can kill humans."
EMPORIA GAZETTE
8,	1962* "Smoking is Linked with Deaths from Number of Diseases" Britain's Royal College of Surgeons reported after a two-year study "that cigarette smoking may be a contributing causes of death from a number of diseases besides lung cancer."
TRIAL--
e local level in June and July of 1962 there was extensive coverage of a local trial in the Kansas City Star and the s City Times.
1964
WENT ANNOUNCEMENT--
urgeon General Report released claiming link between Igarette smoking and cancer.
[INATION OF INFORMATION TO TBB PUBLIC
NEW YORK TIMES
y 11, 1964 Front Page of New York Times "Cigarettes Peril [ealth, u. S. Report Concludes, 'Remedial Action' Urged" lurgeon General releases report that "the use of cigarettes :ontributed so substantially to the American death rate that appropriate remedial action was called for1."
NEWSWEEK
y 20, 1964 The Surgeon General released a 387-page report sntitled "Smoking and Health"
ry 17, 1964 The Government report published a 150,000-word report that declared "Cigarette smoking is a health hazard )f sufficient importance in the U. S. to warrant appropriate remedial action."
KANSAS CITY KANSAN
ry 12, 1964 "Cigaret Link to Disease" Surgeon General's appointed committee released a 150,000-word report which expressed judgment the "cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases ind to the overall death rate."
KANSAS CITY TIMES
cy 13, 1964 "Action Planned by FTC" FTC announced that :hey are studying cigarette labeling and advertising and tfill "determine the remedial action which should be taken in public interest."
*	KANSAS CITY STAR
ry 12, 1964 "FTC Will Move On Cigarettes" Effort is being made to determine what ''remedial action" will be taken on "labeling promise."
EMPORIA GAZETTE
y 11, 1964 "Nation Gets New Report On Smoking" "...male :igarette smokers have a higher death rate from heart and >lood vessel disease than non-smoking males, it is not clear is yet that smoking is the cause."
y 11, 1964 "Several Diseases Mentioned in New Report on Smoking" Mentions Buerger's disease and possibility of imputation.
ry 13, 1964 "All Eyes Are on the Smoker This Week" "There *as an association--but not yet a proof of cause--between :igarettes and heart and blood vessel disease;, and peptic llcers.
ry 17, 1964 "Anti-Cigaret Laws Pondered By State, Local governments" A "controversy inspired some state and local jovernmental bodies to consider anti-cigarette action officially," after the recent Surgeon's General Report.
ty 25, 1964 "Conditions Causing Cancer Often Correct rhemselves" "Members of an Emporia panel on smoking agreed...that severe laws are not the way to prevent youngsters from taking up the cigaret habit." "They all felt the answer was education..."
ty 29, 1964 "Cigaret Sales Are Banned in Some Areas: Hospitals Lead" Several states are banning the sale of cigarettes in some government buildings and hospitals. Associated Press survey reports "that the effort by government officials to discourage smoking by educational campaigns are fairly widespread."
debating ensued over the Surgeon General's report;
aper, radio, and television coverage was extensive. This is
a partial sampling*
Case File David Burton
5pened; August 11, 1995 round Information:
L935, apparently at Emporia, Kansas
ied local schools, inc. junior high and high school into the 10th grade, at which point dropped out to work (at about age 15)
?ed athletics, played baseball, ran track
about 1955-'60, lived in Springfield, Missouri about 1961-'67, lived in Emporia, Kansas about 1967-‘79, lived in Los Angeles, California about 1979, lived in overland Park, Kansas, suburb of Kansas City
d 44 years, apparently Camels and others (?), developed peripheral vascular disease, and had legs amputated.
Claims caused by smoking. Case in Federal Court, Kansas City.
ions involved include alleged addiction without knowledge and role played in development circulatory disease.
I. Mark*
Burton Case—Research Items
General background, smoking awareness and heart disease.
A).	Pre-1950, what generally known Kansas and more generally;
B).	1950 forward, state of public general knowledge
Education, instruction, and Textbooks: Means Report on Kansas
Role Models: Coaches and negative commentary effects of tobacco
Local newspapers: PHR, Emporia Gazette, Kansas City paper, African-American papers Kansas City and Los Angeles (?)
National newspapers: New York Times, what reporting
Other outlets, magazines, periodicals: Henry Luce and Time (see Health columns), other weeklies; African-American magazines.
Popular culture items, plus others that might develop.
3L«Oo
ouw^&aSsifc*,	u££!SE5
Ooji.tTtS^SkXSftA. (o«n«w3^v * ^k,cfeJjt<ijk.
CVU* -	0*A-.£, (W,
«u^9l*3j* »* Jj® "OmS. .
»>iA<r^u^>4*K, ^wSL fct*
JlL»a s;
(^. (Umva^avU	t Jtaoosk
tiXL^skXS. ^e^fto^cjjaiAiSSa^
**~i>, o^Au^K^£c»\A^>*dL ^o*<lS6.a *
r» A*^K
o&*^^ canwos^
J^acSrt- S’ -<* -^ovm$^&A^*ANo %
f O^K ^ LA^^>
lfl~ 6^Ap^>h^®£W.» j (^a* ^ 0*HV3>t» ^»fet
wrt|L„ / UdviA*
ryCTV fc» vO*»^.
oXaJESL ( Owp*^ LV&i.	|>.ll**fr^»-
QswiMsJo^K *& («* \££3£? ^o*«AAt -ftw**A: y*«>vfe»x
_r, JUtf**** tr^ ^4^lK ~j>mJ oKajkj^i^. ^SM^-eSV*	.
.ttAi ^>®-- <^«o c
**^si i). ClSD	MXT.SbiS.
JVCuo*** I^O^hSLKS | ife^SiMSiaSk^ ^ vTVrO^O^>* O>#& ^Qjo^c^uaSu^ ^ p®^KfeU*$
--«^c\ J*Q£^t TTv»f<L	,
P(Ar&. o^cr^x^.	f	&*»+***
Ifr&L 2Z	[ a^AVWWV,^
> <3JJ>S£PwL	^c^/w^b^^36ii»^j
SUw^ f	I	jO^»Js
vk6eeK (w-f6u»%
JCcfrfefldk* _^*Jl 35j JWXjt
(j"'*®-i7v C“t£X — o*. CV**w*«t»A- (jWvxv	^
o«p«i&-Co^aA ***A	CJ£ _^^r/|tVtt,Ji
SO-lo 'V****,	**o^. uweuj^Ai
CAJMULKt	<3A*/*»*C
x^^hsTT
.&»&. <i<U*»SS*jl ^ UAftNMtMA lUoWV.Mf*
^•UjftSH- ^ &•*£»•«&. *^.|VCL5
'^a-‘^VWR>'	o*k^
******* * ^	vo*^
te^>Y4kfci4	,
’ ^ \ <A$X —	l oo^cSt**^, fccj
J^SSV
4K»l^ i!^
^ .S^rnin. t CXJS. G*A»8*^ •NiQMs*Mift«a>*MAiii	jh»wjoifcKD%^)wS<
o>UAt	JU»»ic	t
VH^ C^SU. - -	«>©&>**
fi.y^aia.^tv. — jfjsjNr^^AsnA
VK^mOk	— Ca^SL4 "^*»cW£i^bjk^54^
ONOMidUi^
^hxl-C^	Tijtc	«*&>*»4* SLSbk.
-A*no^ Ciff *1	(W«h^
*• W«\*\. TtfeC. Xi^bS^eX a3x ^♦xbws 3^. (WNNJttJl (VW*K.*
i>*^£.CTy ClSI"* ^	ou^cX A* ,h^X fi>fcMbi^.0kSj**re^O3^$l^^ ' ** r<xA»yA
jui^ aI	tk>fewttAX *■- *• - -
****** ^»**Kjgi»Ai*ju .
*'woSP ^>tt^ o^^edS^	«^j
■V*r***m*i, ^XtftixiwA Cm, 4**WL* vrf&oj^ Jl*>^>a^
&^x. AAKm\kj^Tjo«m£l C£+*&ew> Jko^ .i^^/j^
p^F^fcMkSA o$S>MSdiV#s,	d^JbaXtk^
»N^^SLOuiAH>a^*	±X*\&i+Tu ft
^ Oj&stiSta^. V*j^V ^coi ftt**NM>*„&a*34«Sta ^t,^\ | c^td^oSb^, CO
,3X3^. t*X T^jcb ttSfc-ST S^Go oa^Rj^tx^	ok^mS^mS^,
cfi«efek&frUO^ft<^kAKK 4
$ 4
&?j
i Af S * * h 2 <j* j
it j s
M f||. $
r! rr I ft
a
a
c
c
X
>
c
c
c
X
c
c
c
a:
_c
c
"C
©
o
=5
>
co
L_
,-Q
I I
t
<5	a)
o
o
>	6* IV {-IV
1^. fcS**^ (&sr> J FP
oe> J j'»>< 1^ C»t ^ voTta. <fy) >n Orv./s. )
fMSH- 71*^-
^. no -	.»«•»> fcJ«»	*
f.WS, '
m
ielley Bookspan
ivironmental Consultants, Inc. iverpass Road, Suite 220 Barbara, California 93111-2051
October 21, 1995
>r. Bookspan:
My purpose in writing is to let you know that I've received iwspapers (Emporia Gazette, Springfield News - Leader, etc.) .ation to the David Burton case. Two packages have arrived
If more materials are forthcoming, I would appreciate 'ing copies. Meanwhile, take good care, and please accept it regards.
Cordially,
James Kirby Martin
ssor Richard K. Means
leritage Drive
ta, Alabama 3 6801
October 21, 1995
Professor Means:
My purpose in writing is to let you know that "The Kansas arrived at my office yesterday. I've not yet had a s to look at it in detail, but the report appears to be very shensive. I'm sure that it will be helpful.
I	hope that you are now fully recovered from the hurricane, thanks again for sanding me a copy of the report. Take good and with best regards.
Cordially,
James Kirby Martin
►	J
3or Richard K. Means sritage Drive
i,	Alabama 36801
November 4, 1995
Lck:
rhanks very much for sending me a copy of your letter to Purvis. My feeling is that this particular course of study nt helps pull a lot of themes together. Having the whole et may well prove to be very important.
I^gain, many thanks for your assistance. With very best
Cordially,
James Kirby Martin
to: Paul Koethe James Kirby Martin November 21, 1995 ct: Uncle Toby's Anti-Tobacco Advice
At our meeting last week, I mentioned that we were trying to copy of this 1852 volume by the Rev. George Trask, we ly succeeded, thanks to interlibrary loan and the Bowdoin ge Library. I've included two copies in this package, one ou and one for Steve. Also, since the volume just came in rday, I haven't had time to read it yet. A quick scan, er, suggests that the material may be useful (see pp. 16076-77, for example).
Meanwhile, we have a lead on getting a copy of James I's erblaste to Tobacco, but the volume in which it. appears is n our library. As soon as interlibrary loan delivers. I'll opies in the mail to you.
Take good care, and very best to you and Steve.
ml Koethe Day, Reavis & Pogue Point
ikeside Avenue Land, Ohio 44114
December 21, 1995
Paul :
Please substitute the updated draft pages contained herein lose we handed you on the same subject at our November IS ig. I've included two sets, one for you and one for Steve.
If you have questions, let me know. Take good care, and that snowy weather!
Cordially,
James Kirby Martin
m
NOVEMBER 16, 1995 MEETING DRAFT -- SUMMARY AGENDA
:ounterblaste to Tobacco King James I what is dissemination of pamphlet
Scientific Argument ~ when does information become scientific? Get Berkeson with Mayo Clinic- Good Health 1940
fhy was there a ban on cigarettes in Kansas 1909 & why was .t repealed/modified in 1927. Get Kansas history- Context leasons: veterans
'an we get JHK Almanac?
ilthough Lung cancer theme is main issue in the 50s, heart & circulatory disease runs throughout and is always there.
Vyers Guide to Periodicals Tracks regional circulation 'igures
mder/Graham study — > Influences(triggers) Hammond study,
3tC.
Sallup Polls and others. Get off internet University of -onnecticut - Roper(Online)
L955 "See It Now" video
loss Case was filed sometime in the fifties. Covered in rime or Newsweek 1964? Check.
Professor McKeever - Kansas City University Study of 1200 ooys in 1910 in NYT. February 26, 1910
th Day Adventist Clinics, Kansas VA hospital quit giving cigarettes to patients, Overland Park bans vending machines, University of Kansas bans the sale of cigarettes.
Finish Review Emporia Gazette 62, 64
Finish Summary years of 62 & 64
O: JKM KEH
anuary 15 - February 7, 1996 is the proposed deposition ime frame. Look into dates available.
lompensation and hourly fee may need to be included in he report. This will be determined immediately before ubmitting the report.
fhy is Lucy Page Gaston relevant to the Burton Case?
-Anti-Cigarette League stressed education
-goal was to prohibit smoking
-Gaston spent a great deal of time in Kansas
-Prohibition laws affect what the schools are
teaching
-Social Memory
:*wo points on the Dorn Study:
-date (195B/1959)
-number of veterans (290,000)
leart disease all encompassing meaning?
-cardiovascular, circulatory, peripheral vascular, arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis
articles in New York Times and other places report reactions 3f persons on the street re. 1964 SG report. Check?
rhe rapid shift to filter-tip cigarettes. Are you sure of iates of shift? (check Sobel, other sources).
deadline for report likely by the 11th or 12th of January.
&s of now, full source list does not need to be submitted with the.report, but will likely be made available soon. Include copy with final version.
TO: JKM KEH
NOTES DECEMBER 19, 1995 MEETING
Why did you look at medical articles?
Medical articles are in relation to what the press is saying or had to do with heart disease.
Instead oC large source list, should you list only
categories, ie. you have looked at a large number of articles frotr. the 19th Sc 20th Century.
Regarding miscellaneous news clippings, do they seem to be consistent with ycur findings re. other papers?
Remember to add Life Magazine to report, since you read articles on mice and tumors.
what about newspapers? You should probably list specific years.
Government documents - Kansas banned cigarettes & advertising. The first in 1909, later in 1927. There were modifications in 1915 & 1917. Were there other changes.
High School education - define Jr. High as through 9th	j
grade. Need to add that health education requirements continued through high school.
Check to see whether wynder & Graham funded by the ACS in the early 1950s?
Did Charles T. Ross file law suit in 1954 or was it later?
What wa&the circulation of Life and other magazines?
(Ayers)
Reader's Digest, did it run extensive articles before 1950?
Consumption figures for 1950s? Dduble check where you got them.
How were articles of 1920s to early 1950s disseminated to the public?
ium»f
*--1 t •' r-P Pi the
■ \U\mh
f k ] h V ^
s ii ^ y \ s
^ m s ~► p HFtPHt
frisk
i*drf)r*
w f
V*
If
•	I
f, 11
'* 1 1 1 1 t re
iff f
i-1 mt\ if
\i h
f ? L I
I fP Hi'	tt
1 r- *
m
L9ZZ 9003g
fotwSL(Aj»S8C9L — (— £f • *<c> Pk.*+*.
4L "—^
ia>#v.j^l>Aoo^ , <> (pi^ftiSEte^
£-->
1 ^a«5c3^-^£4-WsA
■1-Jfoo^^Sbofrnv fii n m	oAr Qs
te>i	>^$V.
JEOno^ fLSOj>ds	.
teyj%o^>M3Hi^£2fc ^3S»jfc^, i**+s*5hj+ h (>i <kx«.
T ^	Q88A - CXQQl»0^*W i QoJfejk
0«00-0>0a^ ^
ecc.-'gen-(«>Tc.
-— -- 1
«>3c	- °c;oo
Cli ^OM^jAjiSk ofN
©(OaKjig^
ql.o*>CAa-	t«><kkjir
^	hM»2R>L»Qk	1
/ .Vo^oLa-skX J&C&L «&»>*>& c a>«oa4»S4
L <j^*»oAr ^ <t >\>o^ «>t..^b<aft' VcL>>fc^
* ^ 4
Vjkfc..k<kft4^ t
(QiGuSc^<^#JQ^dx
P^t^t c>|>jo#Ju>sLi £»>&. o£t^& Sj^mb.A *jv* //v^4 kft^UxCflSdttAj fiLN<=X
oS«^	—^ckrAii^ ♦
„0	b**^h	ijte*wwt	>4^<K^
^ ^ ^o-b <fcfc»0<c>a» j&t
* /^^V i^.Al» JVAkK
*^h»- J)>anXv»j
o James Martin Fite:
Re: Burton
Fe only have exhibits 1-5 from Dr. Martin’s deposition, Greg Leyh made copies of rining exhibits (6-116), but Sydney did not want copies since Dr. Martin has the
Dawn M. Weed (214) 969-5220 5-5220
5,	1996
>an Radigan if
DEPOSITION EXHIBIT NOT RECEIVED
3NENT:	'Sqm kiftfy if[altiin.....
E NAME: Skid mJ Qg/hftueh_
IBIT NO:	^ (fl “ 11 __