UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT	]/
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
BLUE CROSS AND BLUB SHIELD	t
OF NEW JERSEY, et al.,	;
Plaintiffs,	t
VS.	I 98 Civ. 3287 (JBW)
PHILIP MORRIS, INCORPORATED,	!
et al.,	:
Defendants.	:
THE NATIONAL ASBESTOS	:
WORKERS MEDICAL FUND, et al., 3 Plaintiffs, :
VS.	i 99 Civ. 1492 (JBW)
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., :
Defendants. t
Washington, D.c.
Wednesday, August 23, 2000 Videotaped deposition of PETER CALVIN ENGLISH, M.D., PH.D., a witness herein, called for examination by counsel for Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey in the above-entitled matter, pursuant to notice, the witness being duly sworn by KAREN YOUNG, a Notary Public in and for the District of Columbia, taken at the offices of Dewey Ballantine, LLP, 1775 Pennsylvania Avenue, Northwest, Washington, D.C., at 9>51 a.m. on Wednesday, August 23, 2000, and the proceedings being taken down by Stenotype by KAREN YOUNG, and transcribed under her direction.
APPEARANCES:
On Behalf of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey?
HEATHER K. MCDBVITT, ESQ.
VINCBNT FITZPATRICK, ESQ.
Dewey Ballantine LLP
■	1301 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10019-6092 (212) 259-7567
On Behalf of the Plaintiffs in the National i	Asbestos Workers caset
'	JOSHUA J. KASSNER, ESQ.
Law Offices of Peter 0. Angelos i	One CharleB Center
100 N. Charles Street .	Baltimore, MD 21201
(410) 649-2086
On Behalf of Brown & Williamson in the National i	Asbestos Workers oasei
i	TODD A. GALE, ESQ.
Kirkland 6 Ellis
>	200 East Randolph Drive
Chicago, Illinois 60601
i	(312) 861-2200
r
On Behalf of Brown & Williamson:
JAMBS T. CONLON, ESQ.
1	Sedgwick, Detert, Moran & Arnold
125 Broad Street, Thirty-Ninth Floor
>	New York, New York 10004-2400 (212) 422-0202
t	On Behalf of Philip Morris Inc.:
I	MURRAY R. GARNICK, ESQ.
JAMES M, ROSENTHAL, ESQ. i	Arnold & Porter
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
i	Washington, D.C. 20004-1206
(202) 942-5491
On Behalf of Lorillard:
LORI CONNORS MCGRODER, ESQ.
Shook, Hardy & Bacon, LLP One Kansas City Place 1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105-2118 (816) 474-6550
On Behalf of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company: THOMAS W. MITCHELL, ESQ.
JOHN B. WILLIAMS, ESQ.
•	Collier Shannon Scott
3050 K Street, NW, Suite 400 Washington, D.C. 20007-5108 (202) 342-8522
ALSO PRESENT:
Dennis Albaneze, Videographer
CONTENTS THE WITNESSi	EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL
PETER CALVIN ENGLISH, M.D., PH.D. FOR THE PLAINTIFFS
By Mr. Fitzpatrick ................... 6
4
EXHIBITS ENGLISH EXHIBIT NO.	PAGE NO.
1	Dr. English's expert report .................. 8
2	Curriculum vitae ............................. 8
3	"Smoking and Lung Cancer" by Cornfield ..... 52
et al.
4	"Primary Carcinoma of the Lung” by ......... 56
Churchill
5	"Tobacco Smoking as an Etiologic Factor .... 73
>	in Disease"	.
6	Article by Evarts Ambrose Graham, May ......75
:	1951
7	Report on Visit to U.S.A. and Canada ........ 92
. 8 Tobacco Institute report, February 1971 .... 116 ; 9 statement of Edward A. Horrigan, Jr........ 126
>	- - -
PROCEEDINGS
THE VIDEOGRAPHBR: We're on the record August 23rd, 2000. The time is 9i51 in the morning. | He're in Washington, D.C. for this deposition. He're in the U.S. District Court, Eastern District of New York. We're in the matter of Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey et al. versus Philip Morris Inc., et al., case number 98-CV-3287; and in the matter of the National Asbestos Workers Medical Fund et al. versus Philip Morris, Incorporated et al., case number 99-CV-1492. My name is Dennis Albaneze. I'm with Spherion Reporting Group. At this time 1 would ask the attorneys present to voice identify themselves for the record.
MR. FITZPATRICK: Vincent Fitzpatrick, Dewey Ballantine, for the plaintiffs Blue Cross Blue Shield.
MS. MCDEVlTTs Heather McDevitt, Dewey Ballantine, for the plaintiffs Blue Cross Blue Shield.
MR. KASSNERi Joshua Kassner of the law firm of Peter Angelos for the plaintiffs in National Asbestos Workers.
MR. CONLONs Jim Conlon from Sedgwick, representing Brown & Williamson.
MR. MITCHELLi Tom Mitchell from collier Shannon Scott representing R.J. Reynolds.
MR. GALBt Todd Gale from Kirkland & Ellis.
I represent Brown 6 Williamson in the National Asbestos Workers case.
MS. MCGRODBR: Lori McGroder, Shook, Hardy & Bacon. 1 represent Lorillard Tobacco Company.
MR. ROSENTHALt James Rosenthal of Arnold & Porter on behalf of Philip Morris.
MR. GARNICK: Murray Garnick, Arnold &
Porter for Philip Morris.
THE VIDEOGRAPHERi Karen Young also with Bpherion Reporting Group is present and will now swear in the witness.
Whereupon,
PETER ENGLISH,
>	residing at 910 Tarik Road, Durham, North ! Carolina, called for examination by
f	counsel for Blue Cross Blue Shield of New
i	Jersey and having been duly
>	sworn by the Notary Public, was examined ) and testified as followst
L	EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR
!	BLUE CROSS AND BLUB SHIELD OF NEW JERSEY
l	MR. KASSNERs Just a brief statement for the
1 record. I've spoken with Mr. Garnick before the S deposition began and I think we've agreed to a
stimulation that the deposition testimony given by Dr. English today is equally applicable to the opinions he'B prepared to testify to at trial in the National Asbestos Workers case.
MR. GARNICK* That's correct.
MR. KASSNER: That's all.
BY MR. FITZPATRICKj
Q. Good morning, Dr, English.
A, Good morning, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Q. I understand you're going to offer some expert testimony at the upcoming trial of the Blue CroBS Blue Shield case versus the various tobacco companies, and I'm going to ask you some questions about those opinions. Okay?
A. Yes.
Q. I'd like to ask the reporter to mark for the record as exhibit -- I guess this is 1. I'm sorry.
He're going to mark as Exhibit l a copy of the expert report Mr. Rosenthal transmitted to us dated April -by cover letter dated April 3rd, 2000, I'm going to ask you to identify, sir, is that your expert report in this case?
(English Exhibit No. 1 was marked for
>	identification.)
THE WITNESSi It is.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK*
Q. And I also have -- I'm going to have -- I'd like to nark it as Exhibit 2, a copy, and I don't have extra copies at this point, but what I think was your preliminary disclosure statement in this case with your c.v, attached.
A. I have an updated C.V. i	MR. FITZPATRICKi Fine. Let's withdraw that
i and we'll mark instead as Exhibit 2 the new C.V.
,	{English Exhibit No. 2
i	was marked for
i	identification.)
i	BY MR. FITZPATRICK*
i	Q. What we've marked as English Exhibit 2 is
; your c.v., sir, your current C.V,? t	A. Yes, it is.
>	Q. Let's just pay attention to that then for a
) minute. Your degrees are in -- you have a Ph.D. in ) history and an M.D.; is that right?
L	A. Yes, sir.
i	Q. And your specialty, your M.D. specialty iB
3	pediatrics?
J	A. That's correct.
5	Q. Do you have any training in the field of
epidemiology?
A, Yob, I do have training in epidemiology. In medical school I took courses in epidemiology. In addition, as a historian, I have published in the area of historical epidemiology.
0. There is a well defined discipline of people who call themselves epidemiologists and spend most of their career dealing with the field of epidemiology. Would you agree with me?
A. . Yes, there is.
«
Q. And would you consider yourself part of that field?
A. 1 have expertise in epidemiology and I've had training in it, but I'm not in that group of people who spend their entire life doing epidemiology.
Q. Do you consider that you have sufficient expertise to interpret and draw conclusions from epidemiological studies?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And would that include the expertise to determine whether the evidence presented in such a study was sufficient to establish a causal i relationship between -- strike that. Those studies, i epidemiological studies, are sometimes conducted to i determine whether there is a causal relationship
between a substance or behavior and disease; is that correct?
HR. GARNICKt I object to form.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q, oo ahead. Hell, let's not be so abstract. We're talking-here, there are a number of epidemiological studies that have been performed in order -- studying the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung disease, cancer of the lung; is that right?	.
A. That is correct.
Q. And epidemiologists interpret those studies to try to reach certain conclusions about the association of cigarette smoking and cancer of the lung; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And my question is is your expertise sufficient that you think that you can render an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to what any one of those epidemiology studies shows about the association between smoking and cancer of the lung?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And that's based upon the courses that i you've taken and your experience with epidemiology
over the years in your practice or as a professor of medicine?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you an expert in experimental biology?
A. Certainly in my training I have been exposed to quite a bit of experimental biology. I have conducted some research and 1 read a lot in experimental biology. In the field of history, much of what I do is read and interpret documents in
experimental biology, placing them within a historical.
i *
context, so that's a long way around of saying yes.
Q. Maybe we ought to define -- we're both using shorthand- sometimes that's dangerous. What is experimental biology?
A. Experimental biology are laboratory studies UBing living tissues or animals to explicate or understand a particular problem that one iB looking at.
Q. Have you ever performed such studies yourself?
A. I have. In my training, I've done some experimental biology.
Q. Could you describe that for ub?
A. When I was still in undergraduate school, I worked with the isolation of some chemicals in growing
plants, and I spent a summer in a National Science Foundation sponsored project. In medical school, part of our assignments in various courses, especially physiology, wae conducting physiological demonstrations and experiments. I've done some, yes,
Q. Have you done any in your professional career since leaving med school?
A. No.
Q. What about pathology? Are you a pathologist?
A. I have expertise in pathology. That's a major part of my medical school training, so I've had a lot of pathological -- pathology training. I have --of course in my regular reading, to be a pediatrician, I continue to read in pathology, and as a historian of medicine, pathology is one of the fields that figures significantly in the history of medicine, so I have read and worked in the field of historical pathology.
Q. Have you ever practiced as a pathologist?
A. No.
Q, Do you have any training in behavioral sciences?
A. As a physician, especially as a pediatrician, there's a lot in the behavioral sciences
that I have had both as a medical student, as a trainee in pediatrics, certainly continuing in primary care l do a lot oC behavioral sciences. I've also in the history of medicine spent considerable time on the history of psychiatry and how it relates to medicine.
Q. But you're not a psychiatrist?
A. I'm not a psychiatrist.
Q. You're not a psychologist?
A. I am not a psychologist.
Q. What about let's turn to the area of surveys and polls. Have you had any training in the methodology, appropriate methodology of conducting surveys or polls?
A. In my training as a historian, we did study about pollb, especially in the interpretation of : polls. I have on various committees on the faculty at 1 Duke participated in conducting some polls as a member i of a committee, but as -- and as a historian, I have
>	used polls as one measure of trying to assess data.
>	Q. But again, you would recognize that there's . a whole field, whole group of people that are
! specifically involved with that field that involves \ the proper methodology in conducting polls and the i appropriate method of interpreting the results of the
>	polls. Is that fair to say?
HR. GARNICK: I object to form.
A. I think that there are -- certainly I would agree with you that there are people who have special training in the conducting of polls. On the interpretation of polls, I feel comfortable in interpreting them.
Q. Have you ever written on the subject of epidemiology?
A. I have written of things --of works on the history of epidemiology. I've written on the history of pneumonia. I've written on the hiBtory of diphtheria, on the history of rheumatic fever, history of lead poisoning, so I've done historical epidemiology.
Q. I think I'm directing my question to something slightly different. I'm talking about the science of epidemiology, the discipline of epidemiology itself. Have you ever written and published a peer-review article on the subject of epidemiology?
MR, GARNICK: I'll object to form. If I can clarify, you mean original research in epidemiology?
Q. Well, let's -- yes, let's start first with that, okay? Have you ever done -- have you ever yourself done an epidemiology -- have you ever done a
survey or -- strike that. Have you ever yourself performed an epidemiological study?
A. Well, I consider historical epidemiology as being part of that, and yes, 1 have done historical epidemiology. If per se have I done an epidemiological study on a contemporary topic, the answer would be no.
Q. And other than writing historically about epidemiology, my question is have you written about the standards and methodologies to be employed in epidemiological studies?
A. Have I written on the standards, no, I have not written on the standards. I think 3 understand the standards, but I haven't written, p	q. on experimental biology, have you ever
; written and published a peer-reviewed article on ' experimental biology?
I	MR. GARNICKi I'm going to object to form,
i	A. Well, I've certainly written peer-review
>	articles on the history of experimental biology. Have L I conducted an experiment and published on that, I
! believe my work on the plants that I was mentioning
>	earlier was published, but I can't actually recall
i what the citation is on that, but as a general rule, I 5 write on the history of experimental biology as
opposed to performing an experiment.
Q. Have you written a peer*reviewed article on the subject of the proper conduct or interpretation of polls?
A. No, z have not.
Q, how did you come about to be a witness in this case?
A. I was contacted by Murray Garnick.
0. Approximately when?
A. About 15 months ago, 16 months ago.
Q. And prior to that time, had you performed any consulting services for any of the defendants in this case or any member of the tobacco industry?
A. yee, I conducted some research about 12 --*
10 to 12 years ago.
0. Can you explain that research and for whom you did it?
A, I did it for Arnold & Porter, and I was	!
particularly looking at the state of the art prior to 1964, the Surgeon General's first report.
Q. Was that involved in a particular litigation? Were you involved in a particular case at that point?
A. I believe l was named as an expert in a case called Haines.
Q. Were you named, you know, bb an expert in Cipolone?
A. NO.
Q. You didn't actually testify in the Haines case; is that correct?
A. No. I wasn't deposed either.
Q. And you weren't deposed. And can you tell me what your work consisted of in connection with your | retention in the Haines case?
A. It had to do with research in the state of the art of medical, scientific and public health knowledge of cigarettes and *- cigarette smoking and disease prior to the Surgeon General report, so it consisted of reviewing the published scientific literature from roughly 1900 up to 1964.
0. And did you understand for which defendants you were going to testify in the Haines case, had you testified?
A. 1 don't recall who the -- the specifies of that case, so I'm afraid I can't help you with that.
Q. From that time, late '80b until your retention on this case about a year and a half ago, did you do any work for any of the --or consult with i any of the members of the tobacco industry? i	A, NO.
Q. And so from that point until Murray Garnick approached you on behalf of defendants in this case, or on behalf of Arnold & Porter and Philip Morris in 1998 -A. Yes.
Q. Or thereabouts?
A. Thereabouts.
Q, You didn't really have anything to do with the litigation in which the tobacco industry was involved?
A, That's correct.
Q. And during that time, did you write anything on the tobacco industry?	I
A. No, I haven't. Of course, smoking health is one of the major public health stories of the 20th century, so as a historian of medicine, 1 teach in this field, in fact, I teach it in every course that I teach in 20th century medicine.
Q. Have you ever written on the subject of tobacco and health?
A. No.
Q. What is it that you teach in your course about the history of tobacco and health in the United States? 1 realize that's a broad question. Just give
■	me a general overview.
A. That's a very broad question. I talk about the history of carcinogenesis. I talk about the rise in cigarette smoking after 1950, I talk about the scientific and medical proposals that there was a relationship between smoking and lung cancer. 1 talk a bit about the public health response to that. I think it's important that it -- because my students are all sitting on the other side of 50 years of a very successful public education, public health education campaign and one of the things I do like as the historian is try to get them back to a period where the assumptions that they bring into the room were different.
0. Would you agree with me that those assumptions were different for the average smoker as well as for the student of medicine in earlier years?
MR. GARNICKj Objection to form.
A. I think we'd probably have to at this point talk about which assumptions --
Q. Pair enough, but the point you're trying to make 1b that you have to view -- one has to have historical perspective in determining what was known at any given time about a subject that concerns medicine and health?
A. Yes. 1 think it’s very important to put it
in context. That's one of the things that historians do, is to recreate the context.
Q. And you've spent a lot of time in trying to recreate the context what scientists and doctors believed about smoking and health within the temporal framework in which they were working?
A. Yes, X have.
Q. And what I'm asking you is would you agree with me that it is equally important in trying to determine.what was the general belief of smokers about the risks associated with smoking one has to deal with -- one has to put that in the context of time and understand what were the beliefs and understandings at the time one's trying to determine what smokers knew?
A. Yes, and that's one of the functions of looking at surveys and polls, is to get a notion of what smokers were thinking about.
Q. But it'b also fair to say, isn't it, that general awareness among the general public today about smoking and disease is far different from the awareness that existed in let's say 1965?
A. Well, certainly public -- there were public awareness polls about smoking and health that go back into the early '50s and would show us a steady rise in the appreciation of health risks associated with that.
And that number reached by 1965 a fairly high percentage of people, at least were aware of or held those views. There certainly was an increase between •65 and 2000, but there waB, even in '65 there was a fairly substantial public understanding of smoking and health, especially smoking and lung cancer.
Q. I take it that during the time that -strike that. In preparing for your testimony today, you reviewed some documents that were internal documents of the tobacco industry-; is that correct?
*
A. I reviewed some having to do with three points of issue of materials that are findings that were thought to have been withheld from the public. Those are the documents, and a few additional documents that I requested to help me in that, but as a general rule, I have stayed with the published literature.
Q. Did you consider it relevant to your inquiry to determine what the tobacco companies knew about smoking and health during the 1950s and 1960s and . thereafter, for that matter? i	A. Ho, I didn't. My assignment was the
medical, scientific and public health communities, and : I don't consider tobacco companies part of the public [ health community.
Q, Well, for example, you're testifying that there was a controversy about, or lack of a consensus y about whether smoking caused lung cancer up until at I least 1964, the Surgeon General report? Is that fair? B
A, Yee,
Q. Would it be of -- is it not of relevance to you in considering that to determine whether the tobacco industry itself had concluded that smoking did cause lung cancer prior to 1964?
A. For the reason I stated, no, l don't think so. I don't consider the tobacco companies part of the medical or scientific or public health communities. The controversy I'm talking about is within the medical, scientific and public health communities.
Q. Do you know what relevance it has to this case, for example, as to whether there was such a controversy, if in fact the tobacco industry knew that smoking caused lung cancer in the 1950b and 1960s?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form,
A. I don't understand — I don't really know the legal questions involved, no.
Q. Did you review or undertake to review public statements by the tobacco industry relating to tobacco and health during the 1950s and 1960s and thereafter,
for that matter?
A. Not in any systematic fashion. In looking over -- what I did was went through the Reader's Guide To Periodic Literature and also went through the New York Times, and in those stories, there would often be a paragraph or some quotation from a tobacco company spokesman, so I'm generally aware, but that has not been a part of my systematic research in the sense that I understand when a newspaper quotes, you know, a half a sentence, that there was probably a full sentence and I would expect that there might even have been a full statement, but I have not actually reviewed them, but I'm generally aware.
Q. Have you given any consideration as to what role, if any, the tobacco industry played in contributing to the controversy over whether smoking caused disease?
A. Can you be more specific on what you're asking?
Q. Let me ask you to assume that the tobacco industry conducted research and published the results of such research that they thought would contradict the hypothesis that smoking causes disease and failed to publish research that indicated that smoking did cause disease. Were that to occur, that would, would
it not, help to create the impression of a controversy?
MR. GARKlCKs objection to form.
A. Well, you know, for me to even enter into | that discussion, I would have to -- I mean, I have dealt with the published literature, and so I can analyze what was in the published literature. What was not in the published literature is not something that I've looked at in a systematic fashion other than in the three instances that you said, so I don't think I can help you with that because I haven't done that kind of research.
Q. Well, maybe that answers my question, My question was had you done the research to satisfy yourself that at least in part, the controversy was not created by the tobacco industry and statements by the tobacco industry.
A. That is correct. I'm talking about a controversy within the published scientific literature.
Q, And what role if any did the tobacco	I
industry play in affecting the information available in the public literature is not something you investigated?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
A. I'm not sure what you mean by affecting. [ They sponsored research as part of the Tobacco	]
Industry Research Council. Is that what you mean | by --	I
Q. Did you look into the research that they sponsored for the CTR? '<.
A. I have read the annual reports of that organisation and have -- so I have some feel for the kinds of research that they were supporting.
Q. Did you investigate whether the tobacco industry used the CTR as a mechanism to create controversy?
A. No.
Q. If I could ask you to look at your report, which we've marked as Exhibit 1. I'm not sure I asked
-—■ - - „
this when I introduced it. That is your expert report in this case?
A * Yes *
Q. I want to call your attention to the third paragraph, specifically the sentence that says, "I will underscore the necessity of being comprehensive of interpreting scientific statements, studies and documents in the context of the times and of avoiding hindsight when conducting historical research." Can
«*
you just briefly summarize for me what you intend to
testify as to those subjects?
A. This is -- the history of smoking and the relationship to disease is a massive area. The	n
history of that would include the scientific, medical, I public health communities, public perception, many Q other things. Just in the scientific literature alone 1 there are between fifty and sixty thousand articles, I We know that because we can use various data means to | calculate that. So for a historian to approach that and to be helpful requires a degree of comprehensiveness and to set the train of events within the context of the time.
That requires a background in the history of medicine in the 20th century. That requires knowledge of how the fields of epidemiology and pathology were evolving. It requires the ability to analyze the various documents that come about. It requires knowing how to begin research. It requires how to seek out the various components of the story and know the degree of certainty that I've reached them.
0. And the context of the times -- we've talked about this a little bit earlier, but what do you anticipate your testimony will be about the need to place the knowledge or interpreting statements and studies in the context of the times?
.	A. By that X mean that it's Important to take a
: study let's say that waB published in 1955 and to place it within the context of what was known in 1955,
: who was influenced by it, who was not, if it did
>	generate a stir at the moment, who was stirred, who
; was not. But it's not just a single context, because ' context constantly changes. That doesn't mean that i there aren't moments when you can sort of say, you
>	know, I think the Surgeon General's report in 1964 is i a moment where things changed, but the context is a
. continuing change, evolving background, and it's : important to have that background.
Q. Well, let's go to the Surgeon General report in '64. How did things change? i	A. I think a couple -- many things changed,
: because obviously it's a long and detailed report. r There had been 14 years -- actually, 12 years of i controversy before the Surgeon General's committee,
>	advisory committee waB formed, and perhaps that's even
i	a reason why it was formed, that there was
. controversy.
:	So one of the things that the Surgeon
General'b report did was try to achieve a degree of ; consensus on many of the issues, and we could go
>	through on specific issues. JuBt the formation of the
committee being prompted by leaders from the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association, the National Tuberculosis Association, which became the American Lung Association, the American Public Health Association and others shows that there was a widespread need for a broad-ranging consensus.
So -- and this committee did a major job in reviewing the 7,000 or so publications that were in the literature then and achieving a consensus on some of those issues.
Perhaps I think more important is that smoking and health had forced an evolution in epidemiology, especially in the area of chronic disease epidemiology. In 1950, there really weren't standards for trying to say that there was a causal relationship between an agent in a chronic disease that would occur years later. There were of course in proving that let's say a virus cauBes a particular illness in an acute infectious disease, but in chronic epidemiology there wasn't.
And one of the major controversies between 1950 and 1964 was whether the associations of various epidemiologists had shown between smoking and lung cancer, whether they constituted a causal relationship, and this was a slow evolution.
Epidemiologists had to revise their methods, they had to improve their methods, they had to develop mathematical tools in order to evaluate them.
But one of the things I think that the Surgeon General's committee did was come up with a series of criteria for establishing a causal relationship for chronic disease epidemiology, and in particular, using cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
And I think that establishing those set of criteria are --is probably as important as the specific findings such as the causal relationship between smoking and lung cancer in men, for example.
Q. Those criteria became then the accepted criteria in the scientific and medical community for I determining whether an agent cauBed the disease in the 1 chronic disease context?
A. Yes. Now, there were other -- I mean,
Bradford Hill. The next year came up with another set of criteria, and actually, he built on the Surgeon General's committee's report; where they had five categories, he added a few more, but generally speaking, I think that is one of the -- the Surgeon General's committee report is one of the landmarks in | that field.
Q. And would you agree that any mainstream 1
epidemiologists or person dealing in epidemiology today would agree that those are basically the
;	appropriate criteria?
:	A. I think they would agree to that, yes,
i	certainly in the history of epidemiology and chronic
;	disease epidemiology, that is a landmark, yes. f Q. Now, if you look at your report page 6,
I	staying with this subject, I'm going to call your
>	attention to the paragraph second from the bottom, the )	one that begins "What might seem obvious.” Do you see L	that paragraph?
I	A, Okay. It's actually --my page 6, okay,
>	good. All right.
l	Q. Referring to the second sentence of that
'?	paragraph where you state, and I'll quote it, "I will
»	describe the significance described to these many
7	studies by physicians and scientists as well as by
i	scientific and public health organizations and the
9	controversy about the relationship between smoking and
D	lung cancer that continued at least until 1964.” Do
1	you see that statement?
2	A. Yes.
3	Q. Could you tell me what you mean in that
4	context by the word "controversy"? Excuse me. I'd
5	like to approach it two -- just generically what are
you talking about whan you talk about a controversy, and then we'll get to the particular controversy you're talking about here, but when you use the word "controversy” in the field of science and health, what do you mean?
A. i mean a disagreement, and more 1 think than a disagreement of opinion, are people who actually have studied the field, performed investigations based on their professional expertise. In other words, someone who really is not familiar and says I'm for it or against it, I would not necessarily use that as evidence as a controversy. It's more that particular scientists have performed studies that seem to reach kind of different conclusions.
Q, And now, in that context, it's fair to say that there would on almost any given point at some times or almost at all times there's some disagreement by somebody, some individual. Is that fair to say? There's a matter of degree involved.
A. Yes, there is a matter of -- a matter of degree. I mean, a consensus does not mean that everybody agrees.
Q. Go when you use the word there's a controversy, are you saying that the opinion in the area had not coalesced sufficiently to conclude that
there was a consensus?
A. Yes.
Q. At some point you would agree that there would not any longer be a bona fide controversy as you use the term even though there might be some people who would disagree with it?
A» I think at that point I think we'd have to look at particulars to see. I think there's some areas that might -- that even though a consensus was reached, there might be more controversy than others, but yeah, I think -- I mean, you know, 1 think that there's probably a point that, you know, that we could establish a consensus.
Q. Can we establish a consensus that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in men as having been established by 1964?
A. In the Surgeon General's report.
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, Z think that's a consensus.
Q. Is it your testimony that after 1964, there was no longer a controversy in the sense that you have used it as to whether smoking caused lung cancer in men?
A. No, not in the scientific and public health and medical communities, no. That doesn't mean that
there weren't some people who would have held out for more proof. My pathology professor in 1969 in medical j school was not convinced of the pathological material J and told u& that in our lab, but we had all heard the | surgeon General's report a few years earlier.
Q. And you believed that smoking caused lung cancer in men at that point? is that fair?
MR. GARNICKi objection to the form. What
point?
Q. 1969 I think is the date he used.
A. ’69, in men, yes.
Q. And did you come to that -- did there come to be a consensus that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer in women as well?
A. Yes.
Q. Approximately when?
A. That would have -- I think that was '67 or '66, right around in there.
Q. Again, one of the Surgeon General reports that came out around that time?
a. uh-huh.
Q. So again, as to the subject of lung cancer in general then in men and women, is it fair to say that there was a consensus in the scientific and medical community at least by 1966 that smoking caused
lung cancer?
A. Yes.
Q. And again, to use your terras, after 1968, there was not a bona fide controversy within the medical or scientific community as to whether smoking caused lung cancer?
A. That is correct.
Q. Did you in undertaking this work, have you looked at other diseases, or are you prepared to testify, contemplating testifying about the link between smoking and diseases other than lung cancer?
A. I have focused mostly on diseases of the lung and heart disease. I'm familiar but in less detail with some of the other issues.
Q. Okay, bet's just talk about heart disease then. Has a consensus reached that smoking is a causal factor in heart disease?
A. Yes.
Q. And correct me if I'm wrong on the statistics/ but approximately one-third of heart disease is caused by smoking?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
A. At what point and who's saying it? I'm not sure.
Q. I haven't given a time yet. Let's talk
about today. Is there a consensus today that	1
approximately one-third of heart disease is	|
attributable to smoking?	I
A. I think that's right. I'm not sure of what | percent. 1 mean, it has to do with using the	I
attributable risk formula, so I'm not sure what	|
percentage would be in there. Heart disease is a much more complicated issue with many factors and requires a lot of statistical and mathematical manipulation to evaluate because there are six, seven, eight different causes.
Q. Yes, I understand,
A. So that's -- and so I think I'm aware that those numbers are bantered about, but -0. You know that there is some number that came to be viewed in these various disciplines as the number attributable to heart disease, but sitting here today, you can't be sure of what that is. Is that a fair way to put it?
NR. GARNICK; objection to form.
A. I think that's fair.
Q. Can you tell me when there became a consensus that smoking causes heart disease?
A. It's -- it occurred somewhere between 1976 and 1980. The American Heart Association had a
statement in 1976 which made the claim that cigarette smoking was causally related to -- an independent factor. In 1979, a year later, the Surgeon General’s report, which had been pointing in that direction for a number of years, cited the 1978 American Heart Association statement. A year later, in I960, the American Heart Association came out with another statement, similar statement, but then they cited the 1979 Surgeon General's report, so -- but I would say by the late 1970s a consensus was reached in that.
Q. And would you agree with me that thereafter, there was not a bona fide controversy in the medical and scientific community as to whether smoking caused heart disease?
A. It's more complicated, because of all these other factors of lipids in the blood and lipids in the heart, diet and high blood pressure and sedentary lifestyle. There*b always -- always more complexity there about, you know, assuredness, and some people thought that one or more of those factors were more important or less important, but I think as a way of saying that certainly after 1980, there was not -people -- cigarette smoking was in the mix in a causal way,
Q. Of heart disease?
A. Of heart disease, right.
Q. And it wasn't at that point a legitimate controversy as to whether it was in the mix of the causal way?
A. No.
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
Q. If you look at your report from pages 7 through 9, that indicates that you intend to testify about efforts of the public health community and governments and others to publicize the --to evidence linking of Bmoking and disease; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. What does -- what relevance to your overall n opinions does that effort that you describe here have? U NR. GARNICK: objection to form.
A. I'm not sure I understand your question.
Q. Well, do you draw -- you're going to testify that these efforts were made to convey information to the public.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Do you intend to draw any conclusion based Upon your description of these efforts and to render an opinion thereon?
MR. GARNICKf Objection to form.
A. Conclusion as to --	|
Q. As to anything. Are you just going to describe what was done or are you going to give us an opinion as to what that -- effects that it had when it was done?
NR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. There are many aspects of this. First of all, there's an evolution in the types of educational attempts, bo that's certainly one, you know, one aspect to that, which I don't know really what you're looking for, but certainly after a number of years, there were attempts in the public health community to assess whether the message was being heard, and I think the message was -- public health message was loud and clear and unambiguous and I think the American public heard that message.
Q. I think you answered this, but during the period covered by this part of your testimony, that is -- strike that. You did not do a parallel study covering this same period to determine what the tobacco industry was telling the American -A. No, other than, as I mentioned earlier, in looking through articles in the New York Times and elicited the Reader's Guide To Periodic Literature, I would come across an occasional comment, but I was not doing an analysis of statements.
Q. If you turn to page 10 of your report, directing your attention to the -- let's Bay the second paragraph. "In 1966, the public health community seized on promising insights from research and experimental biology which indicated that cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine were less prone to cause cancer." Do you see that? Do you intend to testify about efforts to develop a lower tar and nicotine cigarette?
A. Yes.
Q. What if any expertise do you have in the design of cigarettes?
A. I have some expertise in knowing some of the components of cigarette smoking, but in the actual design of a cigarette I don't have expertise,
Q. Hell, you as a medical historian, I think you've described your expertise to interpret the medical and scientific literature and studies that have to do with smoking and disease. How would you relate your expertise to an ability to testify about what the tobacco companies were doing in terms of changing the composition of their cigarettes?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. Well, as part of the -- studying the history of experimental biology, I became aware that there was
a growing interest in the area of experimental	fl
carcinogenesis of identifying materials, and from I almost the Bame historical moment that carcinogens were being identified, at least carcinogens for rodents, that there was also promising research that some modification of filtration might help in reducing the disease-producing components of cigarette smoking, 80 I look at, I mean, the low-yield cigarette story as a major component of both --of experimental biology and the public health programs. In evaluating those materials I feel quite comfortable in doing.
Q, Did you undertake any studies to determine what the actual delivered dose of tar and nicotine to the smoker was in respect of the filtered cigarettes as opposed to unfiltered cigarettes?
MR. GARKlCKt Objection to form.
BY HR. FITZPATRICK!
Q. Strike it. Are you familiar with the term "delivered dose"?
A. Can you define it for me?
Q. Okay. I'm talking about -- strike that.
You realize that there are measurements of tar and nicotine produced by cigarettes that are done by machine.
A. Yes.
Q. And the machines calculates in a lab, experimental setting, how much tar and nicotine has come through the filter into that cigarette.
A. Right.
Q. That's different from, you would agree, would you not, how much tar and nicotine actually getB into the lungs of the smoker when a smoker smokes that same cigarette?
MR. GARNICK*. I'm going to object to form,
time.
A. Right. I was going to say, this is a very complicated story. Beginning in the 1950s, scientists and public health officials became aware that the disease -- what was causing disease was probably in cigarette tar. The question was how to measure that, and especially as cigarettes were being modified, how to rate them in relative composition.
And so as early as, you know, the late 2950s, there were discussions about things such as what the weight of tar was, how long a cigarette needed to be, how great in circumference it had to do, what constituted a puff, what constituted the number of puffs per cigarette, what constituted the length of a butt. These are very complicated issues, but the public health view was that it was important to have a
measure that could be compared and could help to educate the public as to *■ in their selection, the smoking public in the selection of their cigarettes.
So that's part of the public health story too, especially as 1 believe that for the part of the public health message was if you choose to continue smoking, smoke a lower yield cigarette, so that type of information was important.
Q, What I'm trying to address is a little more abstract. I don't think the time objection is an appropriate one because I'm not asking about what people understood at the time, I'm simply asking you today what you understand today, and you would agree with me that we know today that measurements we get out of a machine are not the same -- delivered dose we get out of a machine is not in fact the dose that reaches the lung of the smoker smoking the low-tar or low-nicotine cigarette.
A, Of course, people have known that for decades. That was an acknowledgment when the Federal Trade Commission set up, I mean, they had stated that no two smokers smoke the same. They smoke differently. I mean, the whole Isbub of that was well known that machines only -- only was an approximation of the way humans smoke.
Q. In fact, there are Btudies, aren't there, that show that most smokers in fact receive far more tar and nicotine than the dosage that the machine test reflects?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
A. Could you give me some specific on that?
Q. Well, no.
A. I think you're getting at the issue of compensation and what the public health community knew about compensation, and certainly there was an iseue that was interesting I think that in Ernst Wynder's first study on what he thought was going to be a major public health advance, and that waB the 40 percent reduction of tar, in hie hands, you know, failed to produce skin tumors on rats. And his hope and one that was picked up by many people was that, you know, that was a way around this whole problem of smoking and health.
But in that same article he mentioned, you know, well, if someone smokes more cigarettes, that that's going to be -- would be an issue. So compensation people knew that there was — about the issue, and it's tied up with the machines too because trying to come up with an idealized smoker for these studies was fraught with problems just because
of the great individuality problems.
Q. When you use the term "compensation," what do you mean?
A. What I mean by compensation is that a smoker | would change her smoking behavior in response to a | modification in cigarettes.
q. And that smoking behavior would be designed to take in more smoke?
A. Yes, or more frequent puffs or deeper puffs or something that would compensate for the change.
Q, And the end result of that would be that they would receive more tar and nicotine than the	I
machine test at least would indicate?
A. Yes.
0. And the benefits of the -A. Or less, depending on how the person -- I mean, that's --
Q, Fair enough. The benefits of a low tar and nicotine cigarette are dependent upon smoking habits of the smoker?
HR. GARNICKI objection to form.
A. You know, I think we need to know which --Q. Well, the Bmoker by virtue of compensation can affect or diminish the benefits that would be obtained from the low tar and nicotine cigarette. Is
that true?
A. Yes, and that was certainly an issue that the public health community addressed from time to time, whether --to what degree that might be the case.
Q, Do you know whether the tobacco industry ever addressed that issue?
A. I'm not Bure.
Q. Do you know whether the tobacco industry ever informed smokers that that was the case?
A. I'm not certain.
Q. I want to go back and look at the report earlier.
MR. GARNICK: Would this be a good time for
a break?
MR. FITZPATRICKI Yes.
THE VIDEOGRAPHERs Off the record at 11s03.
(Recessed at 11;03 a.m.)
(Reconvened at 11:23 a.m.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record at 1:23. I'm sorry. It's got to be 11:24.
BY MR. FITZPATRICKt
Q. Dr. English, would you please look at Exhibit 1 again, your report, on the first page. Looking at the fourth paragraph, and specifically the
1	sentence that Bays "I will testify that prior to the
2	early 1950s, there was no evidence regarding as
3	reliable or credible by the scientific or medical
4	communities that cigarette smoking poBed a Berious
5	threat to the public health." Would it be more apt tc
6	say that there was no evidence that was considered
7	conclusive or definitive as opposed to credible or
8	reliable?
9	MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
.0	A. I'll stick with my phrasing in that.
.1	Q. What do you mean when you say not credible
.2	or reliable?
.3	A. I mean that a scientific conclusion adopted
.4	by the medical, scientific or public health
5	communities about cigarettes and their relationship tc
.6	disease.
.7	Q. I'm trying to get at it, a distinction that
.8	I think exists between whether something is credible
.9	evidence as opposed to whether it was dispositive
:0	evidence. There waB evidence, was there not, prior tc
!l	1950 that indicated to at least some observers that
\2	smoking caused disease?
13	NR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
!4	A. Can you give me a specific -- what you're --
15	Q. Well, the OchBner and Debakey -- have you
studied the Ochsner and Debakey studies?	|
A. Yes, I have, and I've followed those series | of papers from 193d through the end of the 1940s, and | what - - and as I followed them, at one point they conclude that there --at least in their patients, there was a relationship, and then by the end of the 1940s they said, you know, we once believed that and 1 now we don't. And so -- I mean, I'd look at that as a | series of, you know, occasional comments, and in this | case actually an occasional comment that they refuted.
Q. Just bear with me a second. Well, did you consider -- there were studies that were published in Lancet, the British medical journal, about 1927. Were you aware of those? Did you take those into account?
A. Can you give me a specific?
Q. The basic conclusion in the 1927 Lancet article was that almost all lung cancer patients were smokers.
MR. GARNICK: Excuse me. Do you have a
cite?
BY MR. FITZPATRICKI Q. No, I don't.	I
A. I need to have more --
Q. You don't recollect sitting here today that there was such an article in the 1927 Lancet?
A. There were occasional comments in the periods before 1950 and we could go over thoBe if I could -> I'd have to review the article.
Q. Okay. See if I can give you any more specifics about it. The name Tylecote -- does that ring a bell?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Are you aware of the Tylecote studies, the | work that he did?
A. I'd have to say, I believe it's the letter to the editor, but I'd have to see it and I can discuss it. I don't have it in front of me, so I can't --
Q. He're under time constraints bo I can't do what I would normally do, which is pull out a whole fl bunch of articles and trying to get you «- find out what your general testimony's going to be. You are aware that there were a number of articles and studies published prior to 1950 in which authors at least put forward the hypothesis based on evidence that they had reviewed that smoking caused disease. Is that fair to say?
A. For the most part, there was a comment as opposed to an actual study that focused on that specifically and reached that conclusion, but -- and I
appreciate the time constraint, but for me as a historian to help in this, I would need the document in front of me to be able to place it into context, but I would not consider that as, you know, a reliable or credible -- credible piece of information that was influencing the public health community or medical or scientific community.
Q. Well, I guess my problem is with the word "credible." Was it not -- was it incredible?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK*
Q, The use of the term "credible," at least to lawyers, is a pretty significant use, and it's one thing to eay you wouldn't rely on something. It's another thing to say it's not credible. Now, I've seen there's a number of studies by a number of people who I think were renowned in their field who were presenting evidence that they thought indicated that smoking caused disease, and fair enough that there were such publications and studies in the -- would you agree with me that there were such studies and publications prior to 1950?
A. Most of the studies prior to 1950 were -the relevant portion of the article was what I would call an occasional comment. There were very few, even
the Ochsner Debakey ones, these were surgical papers. They weren't epidemiological studies. They weren't experimental biology studies. They were recollections of their particular patients as a surgical study. I mean/ they were respected surgeons.
0. But was not the information conveyed in the Ochsner and Debakey study and in some of these others such that an objective observer who wanted to know the truth about whether smoking causes cancer would pay some attention to these studies, that would be at the very least to say hey, maybe there’s something here we ought to look into. Isn't that true?
A. Hell, the question hadn't perhaps been imposed as boldly aB you just phrased it. In 1927, for example, the question hadn't been posed, so -- but what I mean by credible, I guess my use of that word would have to -- persuasive would be a component of it.
Q. In the next paragraph, that is, the one that says, "In the 1930s and 1940s, physicians and public health officials noted a substantial rise in the	|
frequency of diagnosis of lung cancer. Prom the start 1 of these observations, physicians questioned whether this increase represented a surge in the incidence of lung cancer or simply improving sophistication in
diagnostic tools, such as the X ray. This puzzle persisted well into the 1950s." Now, for support for that statement you refer to the quotation there from the Cornfield et al. article that you've indicated in footnote 1, right?
A. Yes.
Q. I'd like you to take a look at that article.
(English Exhibit No. 3 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. I ask the reporter to mark this as English Exhibit 3. in fact, the conclusion of this article is that the increase is indeed a fact and is not caused R by the result of any other factors. Isn't that right?
A. Actually, my quote has a running page 176 and my copy here doesn't have page 176.
MR. FITZPATRICKi Let's go off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record at 11:35.
(Discussion off the record)
THE VIDEOGRAPHERt Back on the record,
11:39.
BY MR, FITZPATRICK:
Q. I'm sorry for that. What we've had to do is give you my version, which is marked -- we'll replace
it with a clean copy. Before going to the quote on 176 though, my question is isn't the basic conclusion of this article is that the increase in lung cancer in the 20th century was a real phenomenon not attributable to other circumstances? I'll call your attention to page 175, and you'll see the heading in the middle of that page "Mortality and Population Data."
A. Uh-huh,	|
Q. And I want to call to your attention the following statement, first paragraph of that statement that, "Rising death rate from lung cancer in all countries that have sufficiently detailed mortality statistics is the most striking neoplastic phenomenon of this century; that this increase is a fact, not a spurious result of statistical classification, is now commonly accepted." Do you see that?
A. Yes, and the quotation I was getting from the end of the conclusion there was because of uncertainties associated with changes in diagnostic, no firm conclusions can be reached on the rate, and that'b what I'm talking about.
Q. Yes, but let me take you to the beginning of that sentence, page 176, and you, quoting from the second full paragraph on that page, correct?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And you quote the second sentence, which states that because of the uncertainties associated with changes in diagnostic accuracy, no firm conclusions can be reached on whether the rate, emphasised in the original, increase in lung cancer mortality has in truth accelerated since 1920. Do you see that?
A■ Yes *
Q. What that's talking about is not whether there's been an increase, but whether the actual rate of the Increase had gone up. Is that accurate?
A. That might be accurate, yes.
Q. And that's put into context by the preceding sentence, isn't it, that says, "The vital statistics and the necropsy data that support the presumption of a real increase in lung cancer risk certainly apply after the years 1920," Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do see that.
Q. 80 all they're talking about in this sentence is you can't be sure that the increase that's been going on since the beginning of the century, the rate of that increase, whether it's increased since 1920, correct?
A. Yes, and what I was trying to suggest in my
disclosure was that the issue of the increase in lung cancer was something that people were discussing even as late as 1959.
Q. But at least as of 1959, this article, which you relied on, did confirm that the increase was a real increase?
A. They certainly believed that, although the rate of change they were not certain about.
MR. FITZPATRICK: If we -- excuse me for just one second. Let's go off the record.
THB VIDEOGRAPHER! Off the record at 11:43.
(Discussion off the record)	!
THB VIDEOGRAPHER t Back on the record at
11:43.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q« Dr. English, 1 call your attention to page
2	-- I'm sorry. We really should look at the bottom right after the quote. I call your attention to the statement, "Those who argue that the incidence of lung cancer was indeed rising suggested the vast changes in the 20th century environment, especially the proliferation of inhaled chemicals might be the root cause. Scientists proposed several plausible substances." And then you point to a quote from 1954 from E. Cyler Hammond, a statistician at the American
Cancer Society. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And that's quoted to support the proposition that scientists proposed a number of plausible substances; not just smoking, right? I'm going to call your attention -(English Exhibit No. 4 was marked for identification.}
THB WITNESS; This is the Churchill article; not the Hammond one.
BY MR, FITZPATRICK!
Q. Let's move away from this line of questioning for the time being. He'll come back to it when we get our act together over here. Let's go to page 9 of your report, and if you look at the paragraph -- the last paragraph on that page,
"Americans heard and understood the anti-smoking message" -A. Uh-huh.
Q. Do you see that? Have you reviewed other polls and surveys that are the ones that are mentioned in the report?	|
A. I reviewed the Gallup polls from the late '40s through the time of this quote, and I've also --
from time to tine various Surgeon General's reports talk about issues of public awareness, in particular, the 1989 25-year summary, we looked at that.
Q. Have you reviewed the PTC poll, the PTC study that reports on the conclusions about the beliefs of the American public concerning smoking?
A. Can you give me a date on that?
Q. it's the Federal Trade commission report. I'll show it to you and -- the date on it is Nay 1981, but let me just show you this without marking it and aBk you if you've seen it before.
A. Is that the staff report from 1981?
Q. Yes,
A. Yes, I've seen it.
Q. Did you take that into account in reaching : the opinions that you intend to express at trial?
1	A. Yes.
i	Q. Did you in any of your -- how did you go
i about determining which polls to review, or the
>	results of which polls to review?
.	A. Well, the ones that were mentioned in the
i Surgeon General's report* I turned my attention to
i	there because that's what the Surgeon General was
I	using, and in addition, I asked to see the Gallup
>	polls.
Q. Do you recall looking at any data in any of the polls that indicated the perception of smokers as to the relative risk between a smoker and a nonsmoker for contracting lung cancer?
A. Can you give me a year of when that poll would have been?
Q. Hell, I'm asking generically, have you seen any data any of these polls that deal with -- strike that. It's fair to say that most of these polls purport to give data on how many people think that smoking causes various diseases? Fair enough?
(Whereupon, Mr. williams entered the deposition.)
A. The question is asked in a number of different ways. He can look at the particular wording if you want. Relative risk of course can -- if I'm understanding your question, actually a statistician's tool, epidemiologist's tool, which actually is a fairly complicated way to phrase a polling question I would think.
Q. Right, but have you seen any data that indicates one way or the other what the attitude are of smokers as to how much more likely a smoker is to get, for example, lung cancer than a nonsmoker?
MR. GAKNiCKi Objection to form.
A. You know, I can't remember offhand if I've
seen --do you have something in particular that we can look at together?
Q. No. What I would like to know from you is whether you have any data. Let me go another way,
Have you Been any information on which you could opine that smokers in general know the extent to which it is more likely that they will get lung cancer than it is i that a nonsmoker will get lung cancer?
MR. GARNICKi objection to form. Do you mean by that relative risk?
BY MR. FITZPATRICKi Q, Well, I mean by just what I said.
A. Did you say relative -- I can't remember. q. No, I didn't. I tried to not -A. Well, certainly in most of the Gallup polls, there waB -- the people being asked were broken into category, are you a smoker, are you a nonsmoker, and occasionally are you a former smoker. And then they ask the questions do you think smoking is harmful to health, do you think it's a cause of lung cancer, cause of heart disease, you know, later on pregnancy and some other issues. In those polls, usually the smoker had a high degree of awareness but usually a | few percentage points lower than the nonsmoker,
Q. Again, my question 1b a little different,
1	and I'm not asking you to point to any poll or
2	remember every poll you've ever seen. It's more do
3	you have any intention -- let me put it this way* Do
4	you have any intention of opining that a smoker knows
5	in general how much more likely it is that as a smoke
6	he will get lung cancer as opposed to the likelihood
7	that a nonsmoker will get lung cancer?
8	MR. GARNICK: objection to form.
9	A. I look at those data is that the smoker
10	understands that he's at increased risk, yes. If you LI	question is does an individual smoker being polled
L2	understand the concept of relative risk, that I
L3	think that I think is a much more complicated
14	question.
15	Q. Do you have an estimate or a belief in your L6	own mind as to how much more likely it is that a
.7	smoker, heavy smoker will get lung cancer than a
.8	nonsmoker?
.9	MR. OARNICKi Objection to form.
!0	A. Certainly as a historian I'd have to answer
!1	that question as to a particular time period, but
\2	certainly some of the, you know, longitudinal
!3	prospective studies indicated that it is many times
14	greater.
:5	Q, Nine or ten times greater?
L	A. Right.
I	Q. Have you Been any polling data that
i	indicates that smokers are aware of that fact?
I	A. I think smokers are aware of that fact.
5	0. That they're nine or ten times more likely
5	to get lung cancer than nonsmokers?
7	A. I think there iB a body of scholarly
3	opinion, Viscusi, that says that sometimes smokers
9	even sometimes overestimate that.
0	Q. But that is that they think that their own
1	chances --or that smokers, a certain percent of them
2	will get lung cancer. I'm asking you a different
3	question. I'm asking whether smokers "-do you have
4	any data that indicates that smokers know how much
5	more likely it is that they will get lung cancer than
6	nonsmokers.
7	A. Trying to get at that, I know that some of
8	the Gallup polls said are you aware of the conclusions
9	reached by that Hammond and Horn study, which was
0	reaching that, and a great, high percentage of people
1	said yes. I don't think the question was asked
2	specifically do you know that it's ten times or five
3	times, so that's harder for a historian to get at.
4	Q. You'd agree with me that we all know that
5	almost every endeavor can entail some degree of risk?
Fair enough? crossing the street entails some risk degree of risk, right?
A. Uh-huh,
Q. Drinking that Diet Pepsi might entail some risk, right?
A. Some people would say that, yes.
0, And what's relevant, or at leaBt one of the major issues that's relevant is how much more risky is it than not drinking the Pepsi?
A. Yes.
mr. OARKICK: objection.
BY MR. FlTZPATRZCKl	I
Q. And I want to know, if you have any	S
empirical data that you can point to that indicates that smokers in general are aware of how much more risk they face if they smoke than if they don't?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, form.
A. I'd have to go back to those polls that indicate that smokers know that Bmoking is a cause of lung cancer and heart disease.
Q. Sitting here today, you can’t point to any data, can you, that indicates that smokers are aware of how much greater the risk is that they will Buffer, for example/ lung disease, lung cancer, than nonsmokers?
A. No, I cannot.
Q. One area that I Bkipped over earlier but I want to go back to a little bit is -- or just failed to ask you I guess is you've mentioned you’ve considered lung disease and lung cancer and heart disease in preparation for your expert testimony.
Have you considered chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
A. Only in a general sense of having read the Surgeon General's reports.
Q. Do you have a view as to when a consensus was reached in the medical and scientific community that smoking caused chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
A. I'd have to -- I'm trying to think of the date in the report. I believe it was sometime in the 1980s, but I’d have to review that.
Q. Do you believe that there was a bona fide controversy in the medical and scientific community prior to the late '80s as to whether smoking caused emphysema, for example?
A. I think there was a controversy. The exact date, I'm sorry I can't give you the point, but the Issues involved there had to do with air pollution, respiratory diseases, occupational components to that
disease, and the relative importance for smoking was something that was debated,
Q. I guess that -- I'm not trying to pin you down to a date. 1 understand it's a little hard, but would you agree with me in general that at least after the late '80s, there was no longer a bona fide controversy as to whether smoking caused chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
A, That smoking was a component of it. I mean, it's one of these illnesses that has multiple causes, so — but I haven't had an opportunity to Bpend as much time in detailing chronic obstructive lung disease.
Q, And as you sit here today, you don't really | intend to testify about the state of the knowledge in the scientific and medical community concerning chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Including within that term emphysema?
A. Only as in regard to the Surgeon General's report.
MR. FITZPATRICKj Can I suggest we take an early lunch? And by that time we'll have taken care of our document problems.
MR. GARNICK: Sure.
THE VIDEOGRAPHERi Off the record and end of tape 1 at 12t01.
(Recessed at 12:01 p.m.)
(Reconvened at 1:14 p.m.)
(Mr. Mitchell was absent for the remainder of the deposition.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHERi Back on the record and start of tape 2 at 1:14,
BY MR. FIT2PATRICK:
Q. Good afternoon, Doctor,
A. Good afternoon, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Q. If I could call your attention to the report again at page 3, referring to your expert report;
Exhibit 1, you refer in the first paragraph to	fl
physicians such aB Ernst Wynder, Richard Doll,
Bradford Hill, Cuyler Hammond and Daniel Horn, who employed epidemiological and statistical techniques to propose an association between smoking and lung cancer. Do you see that reference?	H
A. Yes.
Q. And you also say in the third paragraph, "Epidemiological studies gathered through the 1950s and early 1960b pointed toward an association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer." Do you see that also, sir?
A. Yes.
Q. During this period of the '50s and early •SOb, are you aware of any epidemiological studies that did not show an association between smoking and lung cancer?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. As far as you know, every epidemiological study conducted on the subject of smoking and lung cancer indicated an association between smoking and lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form,	I
A. I can't say exactly every. The ones that I | have read all showed an association between --
Q. Okay. And is it fair to say that the --at least by 1958 when the cs-l study was completed -- are you aware of what I'm referring to, the American Cancer Society study?
A. Right.
Q, At least by 1958 when the second set of results from that study were in, that the studies taken as a whole established a strong association between smoking and lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. The studies?
>	Q. Well, there were many studies that you've
read that took place in the 1950s, right?
A. Right, but I'm not -- when you say a Btrong association, it showed an association.
Q. Are you able -- some studies show there are different of degrees of association that are shown by epidemiological studies. Is that fair to say?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And I'm asking you then can you tell me by 1958 how you would characterize the relative strength
, -
of the association that had been shown by the studies that had been done and reported on in 1958?
A. There was a substantial agreement that there was an association.
Q. Would you say that by that time, it would be -- it would have been a reasonable conclusion that it was probable at least -- it had not been established; it was probable that smoking caused lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK; Objection to form.
A. This getB into the issue of causal inferences in chronic disease epidemiology. In 1958, there really wasn't an agreement yet that would constitute a causality, and there were epidemiologists who were -- and statisticians who were critical of the Hammond and Horn studies and some of the others, I
think in particular of Joseph Berkeon, who were raising the issues about causal inferences between these associations. And so I think in 1958, if you didn't -- Hammond believed --he probably thought -he may have thought, I don't know. I think it's fair to say that a causal relationship had not been established.
Q, You're a practicing physician. Now, if you had -- and you're also an expert at placing knowledge in the context of the time period. If you had been a practicing physician in 19BB and you had at your disposal all of the epidemiological studies we're now referring to and the mouse painting studies where tar papered on the back of mice, cigarette tar painted on the back of mice produced tumors, what advice would you have given your patients about smoking and disease?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. Just that literature? No other literature?
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. Take intjo account any and all literature that you have reviewed to date.
A. Hell, of course, I've become a historian. I'm a physician practicing in the year 2000, I'm a historian, and we do have some indications that
physicians in the mid to late 1950s were thinking about this iBBue, and approximately -- according to a Lewis Robbins, who is the head of the U.S. Public Health Service cancer program, his estimate was that probably half or maybe even more than half of physicians had not yet accepted that this was a causal relationship.
Now, that's a different kind of issue than an individual physician counseling an individual patient, where lots of factors into -- are involved as a patient's general well-being, their history of	i
disease in their family, a variety of different things. And so it is perfectly -- I can imagine that many physicians may well have given advice about smoking, probably did give advice about smoking, but I think in 1958, since that was the date you put on the question, in the medical community of practicing physicians, at least from indications that I have, it was an open question, i	Q. Well, looking at all of that data
. accumulated by 1958, either the epidemiological data : or the mouse painting studies, the studies on ' constituents found in smoke, would you not conclude t that that data taken as a whole at least indicated the ! probability -- not a certainty; a probability that
smoking increased one's chance of having lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. With each of thoBe lines of evidence, there were problems that people were raising. I've already mentioned some of the problems with the epidemiological and statistical data. With the mouse-rodent painting data, scientists were well aware that there were tremendous differences between human studies and animal studies, skin painting versus	I
inhalation.
t *
Carcinogens had really just been demonstrated in tobacco smoke for a year or two. Some rodents scientists were successfully producing tumors, some weren't. Some were producing -- and this is where you have to get into the fine print of some of the studies. Some were producing papillomas, which were warts and skin irritations. Some were producing carcinomaB, and there were a number of people that wouldn't produce anything, especially in the British literature.
So as of 1958, I think that there was a lot -- there were a lot of questions that were unanswered, bo the idea that this would be leading toward a probability, I think -- I can't say that now.
Q. By 195B, there existed the epidemiological
studies that I think -- I'm not sure exactly what were the uses other than strong, but a substantial association between smoking and lung cancer, right?
A. Yes, but I think you have to -- association, but the causal inferences for that were --
Q, There was a debate# if I understand it, philosophical debate, bo to speak, as to whether it was permissible to draw a causal inference from association.
HR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. See, there were no causal -- no standards on which to know whether a study or a group of studies had met that, eo the development of the issue of causality was still under debate. That's why I think the Surgeon General's report spends bo much time on it. I mean, the reason they spend time on it is because people hadn't reached a set of conclusions j yet.
Q. As to when if ever you could draw a causal connection between statistical association and cause, between -- when if ever you could draw -A. In chronic diseases.
Q. Okay. Nevertheless, while there was a debate going on as to whether it was permissible to draw a causal inference from associations, there was
substantial association between smoking and lung cancer, and that had been determined by 1958, correct?
A, Yes.
0. And it had been determined by 1958 that if you painted cigarette tar on the back of animals, mice, you would produce cancer in that animal.
A. As I mentioned, there is a broad spectrum.
It depended on the species of the mouse and whether 1 they are truly invasive cancer, that was debated, but you would certainly get an irritation, a wart.
There's a spectrum there.
Q. But you would get cancer too?
A, A few people reported cancer, yes.
Q. And there had been identified in the smoke o£ -- cigarette smoke carcinogenic substances.
A. Carcinogen substances for the skins of rodents.
0. Vou would not agree that no human carcinogen has been identified in smoke by 1958?
A. Certainly benzpyrene was identified by then, which was a human carcinogen. I'm not sure it was a human lung carcinogen though.
Q. Are you aware of any effort by the tobacco industry to call that information to the attention of smokers?
MR. GARNICK; Objection to form.
Q. Referring to the information you just established in the laBt question and answer existed in 1958.
A. 1 don't recall whether they called that information to the attention of the public.
Q. Let's go on to page 4, and you refer to -in the first paragraph there to a study by Robert Schrek and others in 1950.
.. A. Oh-huh.
(English Exhibit No. 5 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. This is -- Ms. McDevitt reminds me I didn't mark it. This would be English Exhibit 5. Take your time if you want to read it, but I think I have pretty limited questions.
A. Okay.
Q. You refer to the quote that says, "The correlation is definitely static,* referring to the correlation between smoking and lung cancer. "The correlation is definitely statistically significant, but is it biologically significant." The article concluded, did it not, that the association between
smoking and lung cancer was biologically significant? I'll call your attention to page 57 in the summary and | conclusions section.
A, Uh-huh.
Q. And specifically to the statement that the positive correlation between the incidence of	|
cigarette smoking and the incidence of cancer of the | respiratory tract appear to be both statistically and biologically significant. Do you see that?
A, I see the sentence, yes.	<.
<
Q. So that at least Schrek, among others, had concluded as early as 1950 that the positive correlation between cigarette smoking and cancer was not only statistically significant, but was biologically significant?
MR, GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. You know, the reason I quoted this particular sentence, because in his discussion of his methods, he goes at great length to talk about the I limits of statistical associations. I mean, he goes 1 on in a paragraph after the one I did, which I didn't | -- statistical problems are then only circumstantial evidence that smoking is an etiological agent in cancer. So my point is that the use of statistical associations are not -- it's not considered sufficient
unto itself for causation. I mean, I see the sentence that you're referring to, but my interpretation of this article is that it's a clear representation of the limitations of that approach.
Q. But the limitations of that approach can be expressed in the sentence -- the final sentence of the article, can they not, that there is strong circumstantial evidence that cigarette smoking was an etiologic factor in cancer of the respiratory tract?
MR. GARNICK: .Objection to form.
1 *
A, That's -- I think that's the last sentence, but I think the significance of the article here is pointing out the limitations of statistical method.
Q. But the author of this article taking into account all those limitations nevertheless comes to fl the conclusion of this quote?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: This is my interpretation of the article.
{English Exhibit No. 6 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. We marked this as English Exhibit 6, Let me just refer you to page 267, your quote -- the quote
that's in your report that comes from 267.
A. uh-huh.
Q. And particularly the statement referring to the question of smoking and lung cancer, "The proof is lacking and will remain absent until it becomes poBsible to produce cancer experimentally from some or all of the products contained in cigarette smoke." Do you see that?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Now, in fact, Wynder and Graham in three years -- and you've referred to X think in the next paragraph perhaps to their studies, but within two or three years of this, they did in fact produce cancer experimentally from some of the products contained in smoke?
A. on the skin of rats.
Q. And *- and I know you've qualified your answers with that a number of times, but it is and has been for years a commonly accepted medical experimental technique to test carcinogenic substances on animals, right?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. But always subject to the limitations of an animal model being used.
Q. But it is considered a good model, is it
not?
MR. GARNICK! Is that today?
BY MR. FITZPATRICK!
Q. Well, let'e stay with today. It's considered a good model, right? I mean, the alternative is you test on human beings, bo we don't test on human beings. Fair enough?
A. Well, I think getting to the context here, the issue was smoking is an inhalation dose, and
inhalation -- and cancer involved is one of the lung;
k
and so, you know, one limitation that Wynder very ; clearly understood, and in fact, I quoted that earlier 1 in my disclosure report, is that the inhalation of smoke would be perhaps the best animal model, and of course there would always be the issue of human versus animal.
Q. But -- let's just start with today. It is certainly commonly accepted methodology to test carcinogens or suspected carcinogens by subjecting laboratory animals to exposure to those carcinogens, right?	.
:	A. As in the year 2000, I'm not sure exactly
how that would be done, and the reason I raise that, because there are all sorts of issues of animals and
>	safety, and I'm not certain that the first step
wouldn't be against a cell line or something like that.
Q. Okay.
A. But I can't really -- I'm not a toxicologist currently in 2000.
Q. Certainly but for recent concerns about the ethics of subjecting animals to these tests, it has been for many years practiced to subject animals to testing of carcinogenic materials in order to draw inferences as to whether those materials are carcinogenic in man.
A. Right, and in your choice of the word "inferences" realises that everyone understood there were differences.
Q. Right, It's limited because we can't touch human beings,
A. It's more than that because in animal experimentation, sometimes one strain of mice would be susceptible, another wouldn't. Mice might be different than rats, rabbits different than rats.
It's more complicated than --
Q. I didn't mean to imply it wasn't. It's subject to all levels of complication, but we accepted those levels of complication because the alternative is to test human beings, and that has been a
scientific-medical practice for many decades, right?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
A. Right.
Q. And within the limitations that we recognize that that has, it is standard scientific procedure to extrapolate the results of experiments performed on animals to human beings, true?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. with understandings of limits depending on the particular issue involved.
Q. Well, let me come at it another way, again thinking about 1958. Knowing that -- if you knew now only what was known in 1958 based upon your historical data, would you consider it prudent knowing that to take the risk of smoking heavily?
MR. GARNICK; Objection to form.
A. It's a question historians --
Q. I'm sorry to interrupt, but I'm trying to bring some common Bense to this. There's a lot of evidence here, there's a lot of evidence that you've conceded existed. Now, in the face of that evidence, the industry that produces the product has got one motive, to convince people that that evidence is not convincing. Would you agree with that?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, move to strike.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK!
Q. ‘ It's cross examination. Oo ahead. You can answer.
A. We seem to have jumped tacks here.
Q. Yeah -A. Your original question was what I would have done in --
Q. He'll get there. I mean, you would agree with me, wouldn't you -- you're a historian. You've taken into, account the business climate in which those
*
opinions develop, is that right, the context you look at?
A. The context I was looking at was the scientific, medical and public health context. That's what I did in particular.
Q. Are those fields immune from the influence of major industry in the United States?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
A. It's not something that I looked at.
Q. Whether you looked at it specifically here or not, based on your experience as a medical historian studying public health issues, would you disagree with me that the medical and scientific communities can and are influenced by the position of major industry in the United States?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. I don't consider the industry, tobacco industry as part of the public health community.
Q. That's not my question. My question is can they influence the public health community.
MR. GARNICKt Objection to form.
A. It's not something that X looked at.
Q. Is it something that as -- put aside tobacco, okay? Would that make it a little less controversial? as a historian of the developments of public health views in the medical and scientific community, would you dispute that those views and the formation of those views are often affected by the large industries that would be affected by those views being formed?
■ MR. GARNICKs Objection to form.
A. Well, a couple of things. One is that I think I'd have to know whatever specifics you're talking about and whether I'd be able to render an opinion on that at all. I'm not certain whether those particular views would be important or not.
Q. Do you sitting here today believe that the tobacco industry did not have an influence on the scientific and medical community's debate in consideration of the issue of whether smoking caused
disease?
HR, GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. The debate -- there was debate among scientists who were in public health officials that was totally in the public sphere outside of industry.
Q. That's not really responsive to my question. I'm asking whether that debate nevertheless was influenced -A. I'm not able to conclude that.
Q. To the extent that science that was being considered by the scientific and medical communities was based on studies performed by persons funded by the tobacco industry, would you consider that a relevant consideration as to whether the industry had an influence on the consideration of the issue by the medical and scientific community?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. That's a complicated question, and let me tell you why I think it's complicated. The tobacco industry research committee did fund research. The majority of those studies were also co-funded by other public health groups, and so it’s hard --it would be a little bit hard to tease out that, but my point is that what 1 have done is focused on the literature that was publicly available.
Q. Well -A. And -- I'll leave it at that.
Q. Would you -- let's go hack to the question I was asking a long time ago, and I was aeking you as a medical historian whether you would jUBt simply consider it prudent given everything that you know — was known in 1958, just that knowledge alone, would it be prudent to start smoking?
MR. GARNICKi Objection to form.
.A. Well, again, as a historian, did people in
1958	know about the health concerns raised by smoking? According to the polls, they did, so I think at that point it really becomes a point of, you know, having been, you know, having information given by public health officials that would make that decision. Would I have started smoking in 1958? Probably not.
Q. Had the information -- you've talked about what people were aware of in 1958. Do you believe that their awareness would have been increased had the tobacco industry disclosed the information about epidemiology, carcinogens and the production of cancer in laboratory animals to their cuBtomers?
A. Well, the information that Hammond and Horn and otherB in epidemiological -- Wynder's papers were all widely reported in the popular press and
literature. 1 think people turn to public health officials for health questions and answers, and so I don't think that -- and recognition of health risk was very high even in 1957 and '58. I'm not sure such a statement would have made any difference,
Q, If the manufacturer of the product, rather than arguing that it didn't cause disease or it hadn't been established that it caused disease, had stated to the consuming public that in fact it did cause disease, in your opinion, would that increase the awareness that smokers had at the time of the risk?
MR, GARNICKi Objection to form.
A. Well, let18 go back to this issue of product disease causality here. That had not been established in 1958. There was in some studies, there was an association between those that was widely publicized in the literature, and I think that people in polls and others recognised that that was an association.
Q, Then let me move up to the filing of the '64 --to the publication of the '64 Surgeon General's report and I'm going to ask the same question. If in the years following the Surgeon General report the tobacco industry had not contended that the Surgeon General report was wrong, but instead had stated their agreement with the propositions contained in the
Surgeon General report* do you think that would have had an influence on the awareness of the public of the riske?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
A. The Surgeon General's report, even when circulated in 1964, was probably the most widely circulated public health document of the 20th century. There were hundreds of thousands of copies. It was front page news in cover stories in all of the periodical literature. Polls in 1£64 showed that the American people understood the conclusions of the -or at least had heard of the conclusions of the Surgeon General's report. I don't think that a statement that you suggest from the tobacco industry would have made much difference at all.
Q. Do you think if the manufacturer of the product had come out and said this causes lung disease instead of denying it or saying it was questioned for the next 30 years, that that would not have made any difference in the smoking incidence in this country?
MR. GARNrCK: Objection, asked and answered.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. Uh-uh. Go ahead.
A. You know, as I mentioned earlier, X have not studied in detail the statements of the industry, but
I do know that they were saying things like that. I know that from the snippits. Despite those comments, the indication of the awareness of the American people | was high throughout the country that they understood that smoking was hazardous to health, and then as different parts of diseases came, they understood that too.
Q. So is it your testimony that -- well, strike that. You do know that the tobacco industry maintained for many years, maybe until now, but certainly for 30 plus years after 1964 that there was an open controversy as to whether smoking caused lung cancer? Are you aware of that?
MR. GARNICKt objection to form.
A. The same issues that I mentioned before. I have not studied that in a systematic way. I am aware of usually in articles reporting the health risks of smoking, there would be in it a paragraph saying that -- there would be a comment from, a quotation from a spokesman from the tobacco industry which would indicate that they thought it was not -- whatever study that had just been reported in great detail was in fact, there were problems with it, but I haven't had a chance to -- I mean, I haven't sat down to see what the reasons were for that, so -- but despite
that, the American public accepted what the public health community was telling them about the hazards of smoking.
Q. But the statements by the industry you're generally aware of, and I'll show you some documents, but the statements of the industry after 1964 and in the 1970s and in the 1980s to the effect that it remained an open question or an open controversy as to whether smoking caused lung disease were inaccurate?
MR. GARNICK* Objection to form.
A. They were contrary to what the consensus -I'm talking lung cancer here, but because other diseases --
Q, Yes, I mean lung cancer.
A. Yes, it was not -- it was contrary to what the public health community was saying.
Q. Kell, it's more than what the health community was saying, isn't it? You testified earlier today in fact that by that time, the medical and scientific community had reached the consensus by 1964 that smoking caused lung cancer; is that right? Now, to the extent that the tobacco industry claimed after 1964 that the scientific and medical community had not reached such a consensus, that was simply inaccurate, wasn't it?
MR. GARNICKI objection to form.
A. Hell, maybe we should sit back and think about what a consensus is, at leaBt what X think -- I think we talked about what a controversy is. I'm not sure we talked about what a consensus is.
Q. Let's talk about controversy then. You said there waB not a bona fide controversy.
A. That doesn't mean that people didn't hold different opinions.
’ Q. Fair enough.
A. 1 think you made that point, that there was always someone, but I think after 1964 there was a general consensus on that in the medical, scientific and public health community. Did everyone agree to it? Probably not. And to be fair, you know, especially when getting into the scientific and medical communities, my sort of state-of-the-art research is pre-'64, and then -- and so the detail of the controversy is -- you know, I don't have quite the detail of that that I had up until the 2964 era, but generally -- there was certainly there was a public health consensus to that effect.
Q. I'm sorry. I don't mean to belabor it, but this is one where I have to try to pin you down. What I'm trying to ascertain is you said that there was not
any longer a bona fide controversy in the medical and scientific community that -- as to whether smoking caused lung disease, lung cancer, and that in fact there was a consensus that smoking did cause lung cancer.	|
A. Yes.
Q. Now, would you agree with me that to the extent to which, assuming this is the case, the extent to which the tobacco industry, if it did so, it in substance sought to convey the impression to the public that that consensus did not and that there continued to be a bone fide controversy in the medical and scientific community, that that pledge by the tobacco industry would have been inaccurate?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. I think it would be inaccurate. The point I was trying to make is that I don't think the American people were listening to the tobacco industry for public health information about smoking.
Q. But is the sort of -- the end carry to the logical conclusion of that is that it didn't make any difference the tobacco industry was lying because everyone knew they were lying anyway? ib that really what you're saying?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
A. I have no -- I mean, I think there's a difference between something that was untrue or people would have -- and a lie. I make that distinction. Do you make that?
Q. Kell, yeah, 1 think there's plenty of evidence to indicate that's a lie, but you haven't looked at that. You don't know whether what they were eaying was contrary to what they believed because -►
A. No, I don't know that, right. 60 the question you asked had the.word "lie" in it, so I wanted to just make you realize that I make a distinction here.
Q. Okay. To the extent that the tobacco industry sought to convey the impression to the American public that the controversy was still open and -- strike that. You've already testified that to the extent that they sought to convey the impression to the American public that there was still an open controversy in the medical and health communities and that there was no consensus in the medical and health communities as to whether smoking caused lung cancer, that they were inaccurate?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. FITZPATRICKt Q. And what you're testifying is that -- you're
saying that that wouldn’t have made any difference because smokers believed what they believed anyway?
MR. GARNICKt Objection to form.
A. What I said wae that I think smokers turned to public health organizations and to their physicians about public health questions, and they were listening there.
Q. If one assumes that the tobacco industry
>	knew that the position they were taking was wrong, if i you. just assume with me for a moment, the fact that
they knew there was not a controversy and they knew : the effects of their product, would that change your opinion as to whether the position they were taking had an effect on the awareness of the American people?
;	MR. GARNICKt Objection to form.
I	A. You ask a question does the motivations have
' to do -i	Q. Well, I'm just trying to get at where I was
>	going before.
i	A. I mean, as a historian, you know, before
. reaching any conclusions, I have to see the documents, t and not just a single document, but get a sense, but i my view and what I guess I've said two or three times
i	now is I don't think the American public was tuned in
>	to -- for public --I mean, 80, 90 percent of the
American people say that they knew of the risks. I I think they were hearing the public health message, which was loud, clear and unambiguous, I don't think what the tobacco industry said about public health issues made one iota of difference.
MR. FITZPATRICKi Okay. Take a short break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHERi Off the record at 2<04.
(Recessed at 2:04 p.m.)
(Reconvened at 2:15 p.m.)
(English Exhibit No. 7	I
was marked for identification.)
THE VIDBOGRAPHERi Back on the record at
2:15.
BY MR. FITZPATRICKi	|
Q. Actually, before you look at that, let me ask you one area I didn't cover that I need to. One of the supplemental letters to your report, and I think you indicated in your testimony earlier today, indicated that you may take issue with the poBition of the plaintiffs that certain information, scientific information known to the tobacco industry was not known to the scientific and medical community in general, is that accurate?
A, I've reviewed -- been asked to review those
first three -- I think there was a longer list of points, and I've looked at the first three, yes.
Q, And I'm sorry. The first three -- what are the first three?
A. I don't have the list.
;	Q. I'm just trying to -- these are, meaning the
f first three of the responses, the interrogatory i answers? is that what we're talking about?
>	MR. GARNICKi Yes.
>	BY MR. FITZPATRICK) .
L	Q. so you've looked at statements in
l Interrogatory answers by the plaintiffs in this case I that say to the effect that there was certain l information known to the tobacco industry not known
>	generally to the medical and scientific community?
>	A. Yes.
7	Q. But so far you've only gone to the first
3	three of those?
9	A. That's all I've been asked to look at.
0	Q. Can you recall what those three are?
1	A. The first had to do with 3,4-benzpyrene.
2	One had to do with cholanthrene and one had to do with
3	methylcholanthrene.
i	Q. And have you formed any conclusions yet?
5	A. Uh-huh.
Q. What are those conclusions?
A. On which one?
Q. 3,4-benzpyrene.
A. 3,4-benzopyrene was a well known carcinogen.
X wish we had the actual statement right here in front of us, but as I recall, it was referring to a 1959 memo where the statement by Alan Rodgman was that they in 1956 corroborated the finding that 3,4-benepyrene was in tobacco emoke. I asked to see what the 1956 -because I think we talked about it earlier. 1 have not really looked at internal company documents, but since this had been raised as an issue and this is something I'd been referred to, I asked to see it.
And it appears that it was there and there was a table I in there, I think it'B table 1 that at the point that I Dr. Rodgman found it, I think there were ten other | people who were already reporting it.
Q. And the cholanthrene?
A. Cholanthrene iB a more complicated issue, and complicated only because I think it's largely spurious. Beginning in 1955, there were a number of polycyclic hydrocarbons that were discovered in tobacco tar that when tested on the backs of mice produced Borne of these warts and papillomas that we were talking to later.
The issue here, and this is pertinent to the scope both of ben2pyrene, cholanthrene and methylcholanthrene, is tobacco tar is a mixture of a great many chemicals. In the 1950s, it was thought to be somewhere around 700 different chemicals in tobacco tar. He now know, I don't know, four or five thousand.
I've done a little work in trying to separate out a particular chemical within the mass of plant tar. It's particularly difficult because of the very minute quantities known. In the traditional way a chemist determines whether something is present in the material at hand is to isolate that material in pure form and then to perform various chemical tests on it.
That's very difficult in small quantities when you're dealing with a mixture as large as tobacco tar, so there was a real debate among organic chemists in the late 1950s and 1960s and later of how do you know that a given chemical is actually in this mass of tar, especially since it was -- except for a couple of cases, I think 3,4-benzpyrene may have been the only one, it was impossible to actually isolate it in enough quantity to perform the traditional tests chemists do to know.
So they used a series of indirect methods. They used chromatographies, spectroscopy, a number o£ UV light, and at issue here was a consensus in the late 1950s that you needed to have more than one of these indirect methods before you could actually say that there was a likelihood that a chemical was present.
The criteria of that, by the way, are set up by Johnstone and Plimmer, and actually the Surgeon general's report in 1964 recognized the issue. They stated it as necessary to have two or more criteria, and the Wynder and Hoffmann in their book "Tobacco and Tobacco Smoke" in 1967 reiterated the fact that you needed two or more,
t
Cholanthrene was a chemical that Rodgman in his 1959 report mentioned as one of the ones that he had found that had not reported. Cholanthrene was in
1959	a known carcinogen, not from tobacco smoke, but from other substances, and there was a small literature on cholanthrene, 1 think about a half a dozen papers extending back to the 1930s where people had rodent skin of varying success of producing tumors with cholanthrene.
I asked to see more detail on what Rodgman -- because this 1959 memo that plaintiffs have
is really not a scientific document. It's really a report to I guess a group. I'm not really sure on who the audience actually was for that, but in his paper where he mentioned that, he details what his lab waB doing and also says what the -- what his criteria were for me. So I think he detailed that there were 40, 41 different chemicals that he thought he had found, but only 14 met the criteria of two or more indirect tests, and cholanthrene was in the group that he had only found by ultraviral testing, which in subsequent reports remained in that category.
Now, the issue is, you know, is cholanthrene even in tobacco, In looking at recent -- I'm thinking of Hoffmann and Hoffmann's article in the '90s where they list carcinogens in tobacco smoke as in the mid-'90s, cholanthrene and methylcholanthrene aren't in 1 the list. IR publication in 1986, it's not there. I mean, what I assume is that he thought he saw itf he only had like nine-hundredths of a milligram I think what he Bald, it wasn't enough to perform any teetB.
He probably did think it was there, but he was probably wrong.
Q. Had it been there verified by two tests, would that have been significant?
A. I don't think so. I mean, first -- let me
tell you why. First -- I guesB I should Bay to whom.
Q. Would it have been significant to the scientific and medical community?
A. It was -- certainly the scientific, medical and public health communities knew in 1959 that there were carcinogens. They knew that benzpyrene, 3,4 -there were several different benzpyrene, but 3,4 is the one we're talking about in the late 1950s. They knew that they were the major one. They knew from studies of Wynder and others that benzpyrene accounted for only part of the carcinogenic activity in tar, and they knew that there was a steadily increasing list of other polycyclic hydrocarbons which were carcinogenic to greater or lesser degree.
Would the addition of another one in 1959 made a difference? There may have been -- if it had been corroborated by other people and by two or more methods, there might have been some interest in that, but from the public health point of view, the issue would be is could it have been removed or could any carcinogen have been removed, and that comes to the issue of selective filtration, and in the 1950b, the considered opinion was that selected filtration had not come yet.
Q. It could have been relevant to the overall
consideration as to whether causation had been established?
A. No, I don't think so. I mean, as far as the issue of whether carcinogens to the skin of rats was in -- such a carcinogen was in tobacco smoke had already been accepted at that point.
0. So you're saying it had already been	I
accepted. This just would have added one more, is basically what you're saying.
A. One more.of a very small amount.
Q. And the testimony you've just given me -- is that equally to methylcholanthrene, or is that a different story?
A. Well, it's a similar story in that no -well, it's a little bit different because that comes I think from a 1984 lawyer's notes about what an industry scientist had said and things which I find I have trouble following the trains. I'm reluctant to -- even to comment on that as an actual historical document, but the issue is was -- methylcholanthrene was a known carcinogen. In fact, it was a lot better known in general -- not in tobacco, but in other substances. There was actually fairly substantial literature about the carcinogeneBS of methylcholanthrene.
People actively were looking for methylcholanthrene; Van Duuren and others in 1958, Arthur B. Little in a report which he prepared for the surgeon General's advisory committee in 1963 said they were looking for -- lote of people were looking for, maybe even expecting to find it. No one did. Wynder and Graham when they reviewed this in 1967 in their book "Tobacco and Tobacco Smoke" said that one oerman claimed that it was in tobacco, but they didn't think that it was. And again, in my sort of look at the literature in the '90s -- '80s and '90s, there's a sort of established list of carcinogens. Methylcholanthrene isn't there, so I don't know what to make of it,
I do know, for example, that in the Rodgman : material from the late '50s and early '60s that I saw ’ dealing with cholanthrene, methylcholanthrene is not t there, so thiB lawyer's comment in <84 dealing with
>	the recollection of someone 25 years earlier who i mentioned that word or -- I mean, I don't know where . it comes from, but I think it's spurious.
!	Q. If it had been present, would it have been
I significant? Your testimony basically is you don't 1 think there was methylcholanthrene.
i	A. No, I don't think it's in tobacco smoke then
or now.
Q. Again, before we get to the documents, one other point I meant to ask is page 6 of your report. Pinal paragraph, you state that you will narrate the circumstances surrounding the creation of the Surgeon General's advisory committee and the publication of the first Surgeon General's report in 1964, and I will discuss subsequent Surgeon General reports published
>	almost every year since J.964.
i	Without taking all day on it, I just need to
. explore a little bit about the content of what your ! testimony is likely to be. You'll narrate the i circumstances surrounding the creation of the Surgeon 1 General's advisory committee, Can you summarize for i me what your testimony will be about those i circumstances?
t	A. I think it's a measure of the controversy
I and the need to reach some kind of public health
>	consensus. A group of the voluntary agencies,
) American Cancer Society, American Heart Association,
L National Tuberculosis Association, which was a ! precursor of the American Lung Association, American
>	Public Health Association and a variety of them came I to the Surgeon General and basically petitioned the
5	executive branch of the government to form a committee
similar to the one that had been formed in Great r— Britain in the Royal College of Physicians to	C
basically study the isBue and to make Borne recommendations to the public health community and to the American public. These meetings were held in 1961 and 1962, and that led to the formation of the ' committee,
i	Q. The significance you*re attributing to it is
i the extent that it indicated there was a controversy I and there was a need to resolve that controversy?
« '
.	A. Yes.
!	Q, And what did they do to resolve the
I controversy?
t	MR. GARNICK} Objection to form.
>	A. They say what they did in the preface and
5	also in some of the press conferences around it in l that they studied the -- up to 7,000 publications,
3	They heard from experts in many fields, received ? reports and divided their report into numerous
0	chapters and went through and reached a variety of
1	conclusions depending on the knowledge in each I chapter,
3	Q. They made a very extensive effort to get
4	where they got, right?
5	A. Yee>
Q. And they pulled in top people in the major disciplines that were involved in studying this issue.
a. Yes.
Q. Can you identify to me today anyone, any mainstream highly regarded scientist who disagreed with the Burgeon General report after it was published?
MR, GARNICKt Objection to form.
A. I can't think of anyone who -- I mean, the Surgeon General's report is not just one conclusion.
Q. Let's just deal with the one we've been talking about, the smoking causes lung cancer.
A. All right. Most people in the field I think accepted it. Does that mean everyone did? No. I'm sure that there were people -- as I think I mentioned, my pathology professor thought the pathological data wasn't »- I mean, but I think most people accepted that conclusion.
Q. The subsequent Surgeon General reports -what do you believe your testimony will be with respect to the subsequent Surgeon General reports?
A. Well, I've read them. The conclusions *-some of the ones I've paid particular attention to, but in general, that's the way I've used to measure at least a degree of the public health information that
was available, but it covers a wide variety of -- some of them deal with public awareness. Some of them deal with basic lab science material. I mean, some of them are very explicit. They reach conclusions in the preface and then they talk about the controversy in the text, so it's hard for me to give a specific summary of what it is, but it would be a familiarity of what's in those texts.
Q. From the point of view of what was therefore available to the public or to the public -- to health and scientific -- health and scientific community?
A, I'm not sure I'm following your question.
Q. Yeah, it wasn't artful. I'm really -- do you plan to give opinions as to whether the subsequent Attorney General -- Surgeon General reports established a consensus about the connection between smoking and lung disease?
A. That's part of it, I mean, what I think -what the public health community did and what the federal government did I think -- as a historian, maybe I can add something here. As the Surgeon General's first report indicated, there was a huge amount of scientific information. By the time it was two years later, there was already 2,000 more articles.
The idea of an individual practitioner or individual public health group staying on top of that was just impossible. The initial response of the U.S. Public Health Service and the American Cancer Society, Heart Association, Public Health Association, Lung Association, original approach was to publish a medical bulletin on tobacco, which had about a six-year run even before the Surgeon General's report first came out, but that was — and that went to every i .practicing physician and that had key articles, four
*
. or five or six each issue. There were four issues a ! year, and to bring important -- what they considered i to be important events of scientific information, but
I	I think it was clear that that wasn't going to be
>	enough. I mean, there was just too much, so many
>	fields.
f	And so immediately after, and even before
I	the conclusion of the Surgeon General*b report in
>	1964, the idea of how to keep the public aware of this ) mass -- the scientific community aware of this mass of L information, and the model they took was the clearing
i	house for chronic diseases in the Public Health } Service, and indeed, the name of the national clearing
1	house was Smoking and Health, which had the
5	responsibility initially anyway in the Surgeon
General’s report until 1978, began amassing, keeping a database of information.
And then when the reports started being issued, there was actually a three-year lag between the first and the second, which was actually entitled a supplement. The idea was is that that material had to be collated, it had to be sifted, experts from many fields had to be gathered, but the sense was that -- I think of the Surgeon General's report was an effort to keep the scientific and public health communities abreast of where the field was at a given point.
In addition to that, at certain points, they addressed specific questions, and so the first several ones of these were essentially sort of taking what had been in chapter 1 in the original one, and they were expanding. Later ones actually focused on different topics like heart disease or addiction or -- but so in this sense, you know, 1 view the Surgeon General's reports as an effort to sort of -* sort of to say what the state of the art was at that particular moment, and so that's the kind of information I would be given.
Q. What about addiction? Have you considered the issue of whether -- what the state of medical or ' scientific knowledge was as to whether nicotine is or
was addicting at any point in time?
A. Uh-huh, I have, and the Surgeon General's initial report in 1964 addressed that. I think it's chapter 13. And when you say something's addictive, what most people then do is they say, you know, use some recognised standard. In the Surgeon General's report in 1964, they used the World Health Organisation definition of addiction, and -- which was a standard view. And as I'm sure you know, after considering that, this committee said that they did not consider it an addiction, They considered it an habituation.
The Surgeon General returned to that subject | in 1979. A lot had happened between then, and in the chapters on -- dealing with addiction, at that point they said that the scientific community, there was a split in that there were some people who looked at cigarette smoking as a complex Bocial habit. There were some people who looked at it as addiction, and there waB a group that fell somewhere in the middle of that.
In the '80s, a number of things happened.
The American Psychiatric Association, which was another group that dealt with addiction, in its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual III, when talking
L	about nicotine, talked ftbout a withdrawal syndrome,
i	And one of the things the Surgeon General's report in
I	164 had said, that the reason that they hadn't
1	included tobacco as an addictive substance was they
j	did not think they had a recognized withdrawal. The
S	American Psychiatric Association in 1980 said that the
7	edginess -- they characterized the edginess that
i	smokers have when giving up smoking as a withdrawal.
9	A relatively new agency in the federal
0	government, the National Institute for Drug Abuse,
1	also issued a report in 1982 or '83 where they talked
2	about nicotine, you know, as being one of the most
3	widespread dependent drugs in American society, so
4	that was something else that was new. And the
5	American College of Physicians in 1987 added a comment
6	that they thought that nicotine was an addicting
7	substance. And then there was a whole mass of
8	scientific information. So the Surgeon General
9	reviewed the whole issue in 1988 and reached a D	conclusion that they thought that nicotine was
1	addicting.
2	Q. Was there -- as of 1988, there was a
3	consensus in the scientific and medical community that
14	nicotine is addictive?
!5	A. Well, I think addiction is one of those
areas where I think that there's actually more	|
controversy beneath the veneer of the report than in some other ones. I think the scientific community understood that the background -> the groundswell had changed. In other words, the edginess that smokers feel when they stop Bmoking was clearly present in 1964, and people who looked at addictions in 1964	|
didn't think that that counted for it, and so some 1 people then in 1966 would say, you know, there's nothing new, why should we be changing the . classification of this particular substance.
On the other hand, there were other people in the public health community that was saying that it's just the same as heroin, it's just the same as crack, and it needs to be addressed in a similar vein. And yet --so the Surgeon General's report sort of comes in the middle there saying that it is an addicting substance.
I think in the '90s, some people began to say some of the public health hyperbole of equating cigarette smoking with smoking crack cocaine was probably an overstatement of what people common sensically know would be the case. So -- that's a long way to answer your question, but there's a complexity to the addiction issue I think is a little
different.
Q. But at least the mainstream position of the public health and medical community now is that it's addictive; is that right?
A. Well, when you get into the American Psychiatric Association, they've gone -- they're now up to DSM-XV, and one of the problems they have is -*■ in fact, they even have them in asterisks on their table, tobacco cigarette smoking does not quite fit
■	the standard definitions of addiction. So it's one of these things, but I think it's fair to say -- I mean, given that I think there's still a lot of people who feel uncomfortable putting it in the same pot as other substances, other opiads, or other opiads -- not other opiade. Given that, I think it's fair to say I think the public community thinks it's an addicting subBtance.
0. Let's go to the document, the document you've got entitled "Report on Visit To U.S.A. and Canada." I just want to make sure we're on the same document.
A. I'm sorry?
Q. I just want to make sure, "Report on Visit To U.S.A. and Canada"?
A. Yes«
Q, I'll represent to you this is one of the internal tobacco industry documents that we were speaking about earlier, and this is a BATCO document, and if I cou)d -- have you ever seen it before?
A. No.
Q. Let me call your attention to -- this document is dated April 17th to Kay 12th, 1958. It's a report on a visit to the United States and Canada during that time period. And if I call your attention to page 2, you see the heading "Causation of Lung Cancer" in the middle of the page? I call your attention to the statement with one exception -that's H.S.N. Greene, "The individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer, if by causation we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking aB an indispensable link. In the U.S.A, only Berkson apparently is now prepared to doubt the statistical evidence, and his reasoning is nowhere thought to be sound." Do you see that? Were you aware that BATCO had reached this conclusion in 1958.
MR. GALE: I object to the form of the
question.
A. First of all, I haven't reviewed internal documents. I have no idea, but I suspect that there
are millions of internal documents. There's no way as a historian I can make any comment because what I need to be able to do -- z mean, looking at this by these three people, I don't know who these people are. I don't know what the purpose of the visit was.
The way most documents of people are kept, that there's a folder. 1 don't know what's preceding it, what comes after it. I haven't even read this document itself. I had you read a sentence, two sentences to me. There’s no way I can comment on this document.
Q. Let's just assume -- assume with me for the moment that that is the position -- that was the position of batco in 1958. If that were true, would that have significance for your opinion?
MR. GARNICK: Objection.
MR. GALB: objection to the form of the
question.
A. I can't comment on the document. I mean, I just don't have enough as a historian,
Q. I'm really not asking you to comment on it. I'm just asking you if it were true. I realize you can't look at all these documents and I realize that tobacco companies didn't show you these documents, but my question is if one were to assume that this
position Btated in a BATCO document in fact was the position of BATCO in 1958 were true, would that -A. Who'B BATCO?
Q. BATCO is -- it's a long story. Let's just say it's a defendant in the case. BATCO Company is a defendant in the,case and affiliated with BAT and Brown & Williamson, other defendantB in the case. So let's just put it this way, that if you knew that one of the members of the tobacco industry had reached this conclusion after visiting, for example, Philip Morris and Liggett & Myers, would that affect the opinions that you intend to give in this case?
MR. OALBt I object to the form of the question and the various characterizations in the preamble.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q. Go ahead. You can answer.
A. Well, you mean -** I don't know what -- if this paragraph represents what a corporation said. I mean, it has -- but anyway, you're putting me in the spot of not doing what I do as a historian, and that is trying to put things into context and analyze documents. I mean, you're asking me to analyze a document which I haven't even read.
But my opinion is that I'm asked -- was
asked to make comments about the public health, scientific and medical communities. I don't think it makes a difference what the companies thought, but I don't want you to think that I’m agreeing with this because I don't know enough to agree and I don't have the time or the wherewithal to do the kind of work necessary to do to know whether this is a representative statement.
Q. Well, what I'm trying to get at is something i slightly different because I know you can't do.thkt. I'm trying to find out whether if -- this is a hypothetical. You're not accepting it as true, but the hypothetical is if the -- if not only BATCO, but other defendants had concluded prior to 1964 that
>	smoking causes lung cancer, would that affect the ; opinions you plan to give in this case?
1	A. As I said, I don't think so. First of all,
I that conclusion would not be consistent with where the
i	public health community was. The public health
i	community was still debating with the issue of disease . causation, but my view is that the public and the ! public health community turned to its own resources
■	for public health information.
i	Q, Is the natural -- the natural conclusion of
>	that is that it doesn't make any difference that the
L	tobacco companies knew that smoking caused cancer and
2	claimed through the years that it didn't or it was an
3	open question or that it hadn't been resolved, that
4	that's irrelevant?
5	MR. GARNICK; objection to form.
6	A. My opinion on this is that the American
7	people heard and understood the Surgeon General's
B	report in 1964, they were aware of the controversy
9	before then, and 1 don't think it’s what the tobacco
0	industry knew or didn't know is relevant, no.
X	Q. Well, consumption of tobacco by the American
2	people has declined over the years. Is that true?
3	A. That's another issue, it goes up and it
4	goes down and we can -5 Q. From 1964 to date, there has in general been
6	a steady decline in the consumption of tobacco, has
7	there not?
8	A. Yeah, there's been a decline in the number
9	of smokers, yes.
0	Q. And decline in the number of smokers can be
1	associated with the degree to which information about
2	the smoke the risks of smoking, the ill effects of
3	smoking haB become known to the public; is that true?
4	MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
5	A. There's a lot of things that go into a
l	decision, but --
2	Q. That's one factor, iBn't it?
3	A. That's a factor.
4	Q. And if one of the factors that became known
5	to the public was the tobacco companies indicating
6	that they believed as early as the 1950s and certainl;
7	the 1960s, that they knew and they told the American
8	public that smoking causes lung cancer, do you think
9	that would not have affected the amount of
L0	consumption, the number of people who smoked in the
Ll	United States?
L2	HR, GARNlGKi Objection to form.
l3	THE WITNESS> X don't think bo, but
L4	that's -- those are complex issues. I mean, I think
l5	the American people knew about theBe -- some of the
L6	health risks at a very high percentage. i7 MR. FITZPATRICK! Okay. The next document
L8	I'd like you to look at, Exhibit 8, l9 (English Exhibit No. 8 !0 was marked for !1 identification.)
!2	BY MR. FITZPATRICK!
S3	Q, You see this bears the letterhead of The
!4	Tobacco Institute. Do you know what The Tobacco
!5	Institute is or was?
A. Only in a general way. X know more about the research committee, especially the scientific advisory committee. I don't know much about The Tobacco Institute, no, except in my general awareness of reading published newspaper and periodical notes.
Q. You haven't made a particular study of The Tobacco Institute?
A. No.
Q. Or the statements that it made over time to the public concerning -A. No, I have not.
Q. So you have not taken into account in trying to determine what the public's awareness is what The Tobacco Institute was telling them?
A. Well, I know what the public awareness was.
Q. You've interpreted certain polls, right?
1	A. Yes.
i	Q. Is that the sole source of your knowledge as
►	to what the public awareness was?
►	A. Well, I've also reviewed what was in
. newspapers, in periodical literature and what the
; Surgeon General was saying about public awareness at
l various points between 1964 and more recently.
I	Q. And have you likewise tried to review what
►	the tobacco industry was telling people?
A. No.
Q. Have you reviewed the effect of advertising by the tobacco industry on the perception of smoking?
A. Only in the way that advertising has been dealt with in the Surgeon General's report reports,
: plural.
1	Q. You haven't made any study yourself of the
i types of ads and the types of effects that those ads i could be expected to have on people? i	A. Only in respect of people discOssing those.
. The tobacco advertising was something widely discussed ! in the public health community, it was reflected in i the Surgeon General's reports, New York Times and i other literature. Have I sat and watched every ad i from 1950 on, no,
i	Q. You do agree with me that there is a body of
t scientific knowledge founded in the behavioral t sciences that deal with the effects of advertising on
>	viewers of advertising?
)	A, Yes, there is a group of individual -- yes,
L a body.
i	Q. Right, and are you an expert in that field?
)	A. Only in the sense of I know what members of
i the community were saying about it.
5	Q. You're not an expert on what inferences
about tobacco smoking, cigarette smoking on a 15-year-old boy might draw when he sees a beautiful, healthy girl smoking a cigarette?
MR. QARNICK: Objection to form.
'	A, What I would say is that I do know what
: 15-year-olds think about the dangers of smoking. Are ' they aware of them, yes. Do they know that it causes t lung cancer, yes, heart disease. So in a sense -- I
>	mean, how does a 15-year-old reach an opinion?
) There's a whole host of factors that they reach L opinions, but -- and advertising I assume would be a ! component of that* Motion pictures might be a t component of it, whether their parents or friends -- X 1 mean, there are all sorts of things that go in the j mix, but despite that, teen-agers know the risks of
5	smoking. They have the information.
7	Just to give you a contemporary example, I
9	ask all five-year-olds, four and a half year olds,
>	five-year-olds that come into my practice, one of my
0	standard questions has been for years is what can you
1	tell me about cigarettes. That's all I say. You
i know, I ask them what their telephone number is and
3	address and if you need a policeman in a hurry, what
4	do you do. And virtually without exception, they say
5	bad, and by second grade, third grade, they begin to
expound on that. Teen-agers all know that cigarettes are unhealthy. I haven't come across one. They know the information.
Q. Even if they smoke.
A. Some do, yeah.
Q. And do you think that the fact that tobacco industry -- do you think that the tobacco industry advertising has nothing to do with the fact that teen-agers
A. I think the area of smoking initiation as opposed to smoking product selection is an area where there's a lot of controversy that's reported -- and it's apparently very difficult research to do. The Surgeon General's report in '79 and again in *89 said that they were unable to conclude that advertising influenced initiation as opposed to brand switching, which is a different issue. So what I take that is that the public health community is keenly aware, I mean, tobacco is among the moBt widely advertised products, that it's in the mix of there, but I think it's not a resolved issue about that,	,
0. Well, as a pediatrician, aren't you concerned that your patients as they become teen-agers may take up smoking and one of the reasons is the influence of cigarette advertising?
A. Hell, I as a pediatrician in the year 2000,
I just -- I start tobacco education at a much younger age. The smokers in my practice, when I ask them, they almost -- they all say they're smoking because their friends are smoking. I've never had since you asked me, I realize that I'm the one, you know, one person, and we've been talking about general studies. X have never had an adolescent tell me that she or he took up smoking because of an advertisement.
Q, People'don't usually say they do something because of advertising, do they?
A. Well, I don't know. Your question --	1
Q. My question was more direct X think. X don't think you answered it. My question is -A. Am X concerned about people taking up smoking, and then you also coupled that with cigarette advertising.
Q. All right. I've personalized it some more. I'm the father of a 15-year-old boy. I've taught him everything I can not to smoke. I am concerned that what he sees in cigarette advertising may lead him to smoke nevertheless. Do you not have that same type of concern for your patients?
A. I think you have every right as a father of a 15-year-old to talk to him about what he should be
seeing and not seeing and how to interpret things, but this is a very open society and there are lots of pieces of information that are floating around. And one of the things I try to teach -- X mention to the parents, who can then teach their children, is how to evaluate and how to assess because cigarettes are not the only health risk that a 15-year-old has. I mean, driving in a car with someone who's drinking or
Q. Tell me about it.
A. There's countless other ones, and what I try to get the notion across is that teen-agers, even people before teen-agers have to be able to assess those -- that information.
>	Q' Well, I would agree with all that, but it's : not responsive I don't think to my question, which is r it is a matter of concern for you, is it not, that
i taking all that into account, that the advertising may ' affect the decision of young people as to whether to i smoke or not.
.	A. I'm not convinced that advertising -- how
! that fits into the mix, I mean, most of the studies I that deal with smoking initiation don't talk about I advertising at all. I mean, it's like one percent in
>	35 or 50 percent say they do it because they want to
be acting nature or they do it because their parents smoke or because their friends smoke, So I don't know how to evaluate whether advertising what role	|
advertising plays in initiation.
Q. You're not convinced that it plays no role?
NR. GARNICKi objection to form.
A. I don't know what role it plays. I mean, but I am sure that there is -- I haven't seen any evidence that would achieve anywhere near a consensus that advertising plays a role in initiation.
Q. Let's look at the Exhibit 8, English Exhibit
8,	and I call your attention to the first page and first paragraph. "On December 1, 1970, The Tobacco Institute published an advertisement in the New York Daily News, the New York Times and The Washington Post entitled '‘The Question About Smoking and Health Is Still a Question.1* And if you look two pages later,
I think you can see that. Mow, this is one of the -- I types of one of the documents we were discussing earlier, and 1 think you told me that you have not reviewed this type of document?
A. Uh-huh,
MR. GARNICK; I'm going to object to form.
BY MR, FITZPATRICK!
Q. I guess I'll limit my question to this. Was
it in your mind accurate to state in 1971 that the question about smoking and health is still a question?
A. Well, you mean -- I don't know what they meant by health, and again, 1 feel I'm at somewhat a disadvantage, you know, because I haven't done this and I haven't even read this document. I'm looking at a headline here, but it's hard to put that into any for me to put it into any kind of context, which I would like to do, but there was certainly health issues in smoking that were still a question in 1971.
Q. About some of the issues?
A, Yeah. That's what it says, a question about smoking is still -- I mean, I don't know what it means. Obviously to me it's a rhetorical statement. And the other --go ahead. Sorry.
Q. Well, look at the second paragraph.
A, Of what?
Q, Of the third page, "The Question About Smoking and Health is still a Question,* the advertisement itself.
MR, GARNICKt Counsel, may Dr. English read this entire page if he feels the need to do so?
MR. FITZPATRICK: Of course.
THB WITNESS s I need to do more than read --I mean, who wrote it?
BY MR. FITZPATRICKI
Q. The Tobacco Institute.
A. But -- and again, my role is in the history of the public health community. The Tobacco Institute is not part of the public health community.
Q. No, I understand. What I'm trying to ascertain is whether the statements -- you're testifying here on behalf of the tobacco industry. I don't know exactly what your intention is, but one of the defendants in this case is The Tobacco Institute, and I'm asking you whether the statements by The Tobacco Institute are consistent with your own conclusions about the status of the medical and scientific community's knowledge about these Issues?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to that. He's testifying as an expert in a lawsuit, called by the defendants.
MR. FITZPATRICK» Pair enough.
THE WITNESS; Again, it's difficult for me I have not Bpent any time looking at what The Tobacco Institute has been saying. I don't even know if this is consistent with what they had said the day before, the day after, and so, you know, it's -- but the bottom line is do I think this influenced public health opinion is that I don't think that the American
public health community looked to The Tobacco Institute or the American public looked to The Tobacco institute for public health information.
MR. FITZPATRICK: One more. English Exhibit
9.
(English Exhibit No. 9 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. FITZPATRICKS Q. . You see that Exhibit 9 purports to be a ^ *
statement of Edward A, Horrigan, chairman and chief executive officer of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, given before the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources on March 16th, 1982. Do you see that?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Z would simply call your attention -- let me take a minute if I have to take a minute, but perhapB it will give you a chance to look it over if you'd like. I'm going to ask you a question about the paragraph that's the second from the bottom on page 5.
THE VIDEO0RAPHER: Off the record at 3:13. (Recessed at 3tl3 p.m.)
(Reconvened at 3:29 p.m.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record, the start of tape 3, at 3:29.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK*
Q. You have in front of you English Exhibit 9?
A. Yes.
Q. So have you had a chance to look it over?
A, I have,
Q. I call your attention to page 5, specifically the following statement: "After three decades of investigation and millions of dollars invested by the government, the tobacco industry and other private organizations, the smoking and health controversy remains unresolved. The net result of all this effort has been that no causal link between smoking and disease has been established." In your opinion, was it an accurate -- was that an accurate statement in 1982?
A, Which part? I mean, the smoking and health controversy remains unresolved, I mean, I can see -because that's so vague. The net --
Q. The net result of all this effort has been that no causal link between smoking and disease has been established. Is that an accurate statement?
A. Certainly the public health community had established by 1982 that there was a causal link. Of course, he also mentions in other places -- I mean, he talks about awareness too in this document too, so --
0, Which might be affected by statements like no causal link has been established, don't you think?
A. No. I think the reasons I mentioned before.
Q. Are you aware that depositions of individual smokers are being taken in this case?
A, I've heard something about that, I haven't read any of them.
Q. My only question 1b whether you're going to in any way in rendering your opinions take into account what is or may be said in those individual smokers' depositions.
MR. GARNICKs I can answer that.
MR. FITZPATRICK] Yeah, that's okay.
MR. GARNICK! That might be -- it is possible that we will ask Dr. English to read some of those and render an opinion, If we do that, then we will file another report at the appropriate time and do whatever is agreed to between the parties with respect to a number of witnesses, and I think both parties will be showing those depositions to, and you can ask him, but he has not read any of the depositions yet.
BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
Q, That's fine. That's all I need. This is maybe -- thiB 1b maybe a difficult question, but I
have to try to ask it. Other than what's set forth in your report and the issues we discussed today, have I missed anything? Is there something that you intend to opine upon that is not Bet forth in this report or we have not discussed today?
A. The general topics are all there. On individual points there are -- I might have selected different examples.
Q. But there's no general topic that we haven't discussed that you intend to opine on?
A. I don't think so.
MR. GARNICK: Let me make a point for the record. Mr. RoBenthal sent plaintiffs a letter on August 2, 2000 that listed two additional areas. One
I	believe you touched upon, which is the allegations by plaintiffs in Blue Cross that defendants suppressed scientific information aB reflected in interrogatories
1	through 9, the defendants' fifth joint written discovery request, subject area 5. And I believe you did touch upon that, but the first additional item, just to make sure everything is clear on the record, was the scientific and public health communities' awareness of the presence of arsenic in tobacco smoke.
MR. FITZPATRICK) Okay.
MR. GARNICKt And I want to make sure that
that is also on the table.
:	BY MR. FITZPATRICK:
.	Q. What do you anticipate testifying about the
i	scientific and public health communities' awareness
i	about the presence of arsenic in cigarette smoke? i A. Hell, arsenic is a component of the soil,
t	it's a component of sea water, and it was the leading
1	form of insecticide up through roughly the 1950s. As
>	such, arsenic was a component of every plant. I mean,
)	tobacco's not unusual in that regard. It's in all
L	fishes and shellfish, and in fact, I think it's in
2	higher qualities -- higher quantities in marine life i	than it is in plants.	.
1	Arsenic was a well known component of
5	tobacco, as it was a well known component of other
6	plants. Because arsenic in huge quantities had caused
7	some skin cancers, people did raise the issue of
6	whether -- might it be the carcinogen that people were
9	anticipating that they were going to find in tobacco,
0	and certainly there were reports in the literature
1	about that.
2	The Surgeon General's *64 report addressed
3	that issue straight out and acknowledged that yes,
4	there was a small amount of arsenic in tobacco smoke.
5	They made a quantification that it was roughly a two
and a half pack a day smoker ingested less tobacco by only one-tenth -- one-tenth the amount of arsenic as someone who breathed the air of New York City, and then concluded that they doubted that it had any effect in the doses that were in tobacco on the issue in front of them, which was lung cancer.
There are other reasons why they thought it was an insignificant problem. Really, there had been attempts to produce skin tumors and things like that, which would have been difficult to do, but basically,
4 *
I	mean, it was clear and everyone knew it. Arthur B. Little reported to the Surgeon General's committee in 1963, which was an R.J. Reynolds-sponsored research, listed arsenic. Everyone knew it was there, but not in quantities that caused a disease.
Q. Do you believe it's there in quantities that cause a disease now?
A. Well, actually, by the time of the Surgeon General's reports, there were lots of studies to say that as lead arsenic, which was the insecticide, had declined in the use --in use, that the amount of arsenic in tobacco had also declined, as it had done in other foodstuffs.
Q. Do you consider it today to be an ingredient of cigarette smoke that poses a risk, a health risk?
A. No, X don't think it poses a health risk.
I'm trying to remember offhand. I believe it's still listed aB a component of tobacco in the 1990b and 1980s.
MR. FITZPATRICK) Thank you very much for your time and your patience. That's all we have.
MR. KASSNBRi I have no questions.
MR. QARNICK; I have no questions, so we're
done.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record and end of deposition at 3:38.
(Whereupon, at 3>38 p.m., the taking of the instant deposition ceased.)
-
Signature of the Witness
SUBSCRIBED and sworn TO before me this _
day of_, 200_.
NOTARY PUBLIC My Commission Expires _.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA )
B8:
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA	)
I, KAREN C. YOUNG, a Notary Public within and for the District of Columbia, do hereby certify that the witness whgpe deposition^is hereinbefore set forth was duly sworn and that the within transcript is a true record of the testimony given by such witness.
I further certify that I am not related to any of the parties to this action by blood or marriage and that I am in no way interested in the outcome of this matter.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this _day of-.,:	, 20QQ_*
i
...jy/i_________
My Commission Expires:
July 31, 2004
27:1640:20	MiunoMizziM	*4:25 121:14
67:4 81:1982:9	129:20	agree»32:22	an*wer*25:13 76:18 84:2
1122:13	addre** 43:9119:23	ahead 11:5 80:2 85:23 93:8,12
entitled 1:16	*<Mre»ed 46:3,7 106:13	113:17124:15	anticipate 27:23 130:3
1106:11	107:3 109:15 130:22	air 63:24 131:3	anticipating 130:19
65:5 76:5	adolescent 121:8	al 1:4,6,8.95:66:7,8,9,10	anti-imoklng 56:18
411:543:10	adopted 47:13	52:4	anyone 103:4,9
108:10	ad* 118:8,8	Alan 94:7	anything 19:8,12 39; I
ated54;7	tdv*nce44:13	Albanew 3:12 6:11	70:19129:3
sd 30:13 53:17	advertised 120:19	allegation* 129:15	anyway 89:23 91:2
76:1977:1878:23	adveiHiement 121:9	almoit 32:16,1741:3 105:25113:20
99:6,8 103:14,17	123:14124:20	48:1761:25101:9	anywhere 123:9
ng 114:12	adverfldng 118:2,4,11,18	121:4	apparently 111:18
lng69:2W:I2	118:19119:11120:8,15	alone27:683:7	120:13
148:1457:15	120:25121:11,17^1	already 70:4 90:1694:17	appear74:8
75:1580:10	122:18,21,24 123:3,4	99:6,7 104:24	APPEARANCES 2:1
2122:18128:10	,2J:IC>	alternative 77:6 78:24	appear* 94:14
ted 98:10	advice 68:15 69:14,15	although 55.7	applfeable 8:2
dated 69:21	advltory 28:19100:4	alwayi 37:18,18 76:23	apply 54:17
cy54:4	101:6,14117:3	77:1588:12	appreciate 50:1
le 54:12,13 92:24	effect 45:24 113:11	amittlng 106:1	appreciation 21:25
127:14,14,21	114:15 122:19	Ambro»e5:ll	approach 27:9 31:25
i28:23123:9	affected 81:13,14116:9	AMERICA 133:1	75:4,5 105:6
ng 29:9	128:1	American 29:1,2,4,4	approached 19:2
rledged 130:23	effecting 25:2226:1	36:25 37:5,7 39:15,20	appropriate 14:12,24
riedgment 43:20	*fnilated 113:6	55:2557:666:1685:11 31:343:11 128:17
>9:24 120:2	afraid 18:20	86:387:1 89:1790:15	approximately 17:9
2	after 20:3 33:20 35:3	90:1891:14,2492:1 34:1635:20 36:2 69:2
IS	37:2239:1054:18	101:20,20,22,22102:5	approximation 43:24
123:1	55:1864:5 74:21 86:11	105:4 107:23 108:6,13	April 8:19,20111:7 fl
133:10	87:6,2288:12 103:6	108:15110:5 115:6,11	ap!47:5
f 100:1	105:17107:9112:8	116:7,15125:25126:2	area 10:414:1027:3
'98:11	113:10125:23 127:7	American* 56:18	29:1332:2541:1 63:2
10:1441:1349:24	afternoon 65:10,11	Amerlcai2:5	92:17 120:10,11 129:19
94:599:19	again 14:20 34:19,22	among 21:19 74:11 82:3	areal 33:9 109:1 129:14
f 16:2318:424:12	35:346:24 59:25 65:13	95:18120:19	argue 55:19
30:1931:12 32:7	79:11 83:10100:10	amount 99:10104:23	argu1ngB4:7
18:10 52:16 58:16	101:2 120:14 124:4	116:9 130:24 131:2,21	Arnold 2:19,24 7:6,8
92:1695:20,23	125:3,19	analyili 39:25	17:1819:3
»97:3 99:23 106:4	*8*ln*t 32:11 78:1	analy» 25:7 27:16	around 12:1134:18,20
,16109:1131:18	121:5	113:22,23	44:1795:5 102:16
J:19	agendet 101:19	Angeloi 2:9 6:20	122:3
14	agency 108:9	animal 70:9 72:6 76:24	arvenlc 129:23 130:5.6,9
1:21	agent 29:16 30;I5 74:23	77:14,16 78:17	130:14,16,24 131:2,14
10:2199:8108:15	*6° 17:10,10,1518:22	animal* 12:16 72:5 76:21 131:20,22
»g 107:1 108:16	85:4	77:20,2478:7,879:7	art 17:1918:11106:20
1109:18110:16	agree 10:915:3 20:14	83:22	artful 104:13
hi 106:17,23	21:830:2531:2,4 33:3	annnal 26:7	Arthur 100:3131:11
,11,15.19.24	37:1142:5 43:13 50:21	another 30:18 37:7 50:15	article 5:1115:1916:16
5109:25 110:10	61:24 64:5 72:1879:24	59:478:1979:1198:15 17:244:1948:17,25
>n» 109:7	80:888:14 89:7 114:5	107:24 115:13 128:17 49:350:24 52:4,7,13
tt 107:4108:4,24	118:16122:15	antwer 16:7 60:20 73:3 53:355:456:1073:24
agreed 7:25 128:18	80:3 109:24 113:17 75:3,7,12,14,19 97:14
110:4 57:24	agreeing 114:4	128:12	article* 16:20 27:7 39:22
'•««	»uoienwy/:j	Deauniumy;z	lw:4107:14117:23
to* 1;7 2:8,13 6:0,21	August 1:12^1 6:3	became 29:3 30:13 36:22	127:12.20128:18
M	129:14	40:2542:13116:4	biologically 73:24 74:1,9
(tin 88:25 125:7	author 75:14	become68:23 115:23	74:15
81:8	author* 49:19	120:23	biology 12:4,6,8,10,14,15
126:15 57:24 5$: 13	available 25:22 82:25	become* 76:5 83:13	12:22 16:15,17,20,25
1661:21 85:21	104:1,10	before 7:24 28:18 49:2	40:5,2541:9 51:3
10	92:25 93:19 94:9	Avenue 1:202:5	53:157:11 86:1591:19	bit 12:6 20:6 27:2263:3
13	96:24 113:25	«verage20:15	91:2092:16 96:5 101:2	82:23 99:15101:11
1.1121:6	avoiding 26:23	105:8,17111:4 115:9	Wood 37:16,17 133:10
£21:8 24:1943:11	aware 22:2 24:7,13 36:13	122:13 125:23126:13	blue 1:3,3,15,15 2:2,2 6:6
1258:760:161:12	40:2542:1348:1449:8	128:3 132:18	6:6,16,16,18,167:17,17
1367:882:783:4,4	49:1861:3,4,1862:15	began 7:25106:1 109:19	7:22,228:11,12 129:16
1:21,22113:23	62:22 66:3,16 70:7	begin 27:18 119:25	body 61:7118:16,21
'<11	72:23 83:18 86:13,16	beginning 42:12 53:23	boldly 51:14
*39:9	87:5105:19,20111:20	54:2294:21	bona 33:4 35:4 37:12
*■39:6	115:8119:7120:18	beglni31:10	63:1864:688:7 89:1
114:1939:12 122:6	128:4	behalf 2:2,7,12,17,22 3:1	bone89:12
!‘13	awareneti 21:19,21,23	3:67:719:2,3 125:8	book 96:12 100:8
intent 22:22	57:2 59:23 83:19 84:11	behavior 11:145:5,7	both 12:12 14:141:9 74:8
«roent*13:3	85:286:391:14104:2	behavioral 13:22,2514:3	95:2128:19
lated 21:11,25	117:4,13,15,19,22	118:17	bottom 31:9 55:17125:24
2054:3 115:21	127:25129:23 130:4	being 1:17,2216:426:21	126:20
latlon 11:14,2] 29:2	away56:13	29:139:1241:442:16	boy 119:2 121:19
3,4,5 36:25 37:6,7	a.jn 1:2146:18,19	56:1459:1660:1]	Bradford 30:18 65:16
18,23	66:4,9,13,21	--76:2481:15 82:10	branch 101:25
3,3,5,10,1371:3,4,9	-B__106:3 108:12 128:5	brand 120:16
20	72:173:25 84:16	B3:7 5:1 100:3 131:11	btlngi 77:6,7 78:16,25	break46:1592:6
18	101:20,21,22,23	back20:1121:2346:12	79:7	breathed 131:3
1:5,5,6 107:23 108:6	46:2052:21 55:13	belabor 88:23	brief 7:23
i:6	56:14 62:18 63:3 65:7	belief 21:10 60:15	briefly 26:25
lationt 29:22 68:3	68:14,1572:583:3	b*Mi2l:1357:6	brlng20:12 79:19105:12
15 74:20,25	84:1388:2 92:13 96:21	believe 16:22 17:24 43:5	Britain 102:2
ie24:2091:l0	126:24	49:1063:16,1881:22	British 48:13 70:19
18112:12,12,25	background 27:13 28:11	83:18103:20129:15,19 broad 2:19 19:24 20:1
W	28:12109:4	131:16132:2	72:7
***91:8	back* 94:23	believed 21:5 34:6 48:7	broad-ranging 29:6
*lng 89:8	Bacon 3:2 7:5	55:768:4 90:891:2,2	broken 59:16
Ipfloni20;12,15,19	bad 119:25	111:14116:6	Brown2:12,17 6:23 7:2
ednni 37:19	Ballantine 1:19 2:4 6:16	bell 49:6	113:7
l*k* 110:8	6:18	beneath 109:2	built 30:19
tad 9:7	Baltimore 2:11	benenMSitS.lB^	bulletin 105:7
ipt*39;B, 11131:9	bantered 36:14	baupyrene 72:20 95:2	bunch 49:16
tton 9:18 26:19 31:9	bated 11:2432:838:21	98:6,7,10	butlneti 80:10
251:1053:6,10	49:2079:13 80:21	Berkton 68:1111:17	butt 42:24
16,1856:657:22	82:12	belt 77:14	_
1272:2473:674:2	bailc48:16 53:2 104:3	better 99:21	C_
:23111:6,9,12	batlcally31:2 99:9	between 10:2311:1,8,21	C4:l 6:1133:4
:12126:16127:6	100:23101:24102:3	20:522:3 27:7 29:16,21	calculate 27:9
**58:21	131:10	29:2330:1131:19	calculate* 42:1
ney 104:15	BAT 113:6	35:11 36:2447:18 58:3	call 10:7 26:19 31:8 50:25
iey*6:I3	BATCO 111:3,20112:14	65:18,2366:4,9,13,22	53:5,1055:16,18 56:6
litable 36:3,6,17	113:1,2,3,4,5 114:13	68:270:871:3,20,21	65:1272:2474:2 111:6
5	bear 48:11	72:1 73:22,2574:6,13	111:9,11 123:12 126:16
:5125:16	causal 10:22,2529:15,24	55:891:12	citation 16:24
.VIN 1:134:3	30:6,1135:17 37:23	changed 28:10,15109:5	cltc 48:20
f 30:16 34:2036:15	38:4 67:20 68:2,6 69:6	changes 28:7 53:20 54:4	cited 37:5,6
:7 86:6 101:23 105:9	71:5,8,11,19,25 127:12	55:20	City 3:3,4131:3
pilgn 20:10	127:20,23 128:2	changing 40:22 109:10	Civ 1:5,9
•da 5:13110:20,24	carnality 67:23 71:14	chapter 102:22 106:15	claim 37; 1
1*	84:14	107:4	claimed 87:22 100:9
«r 5:511:9,14,21	causally 17:2	chapter* 102:20 107:15	115:2
:5 22:6 23:3,9,19	ca tuition 75:1 99:1	characterization* 113:14	clarify 15:22
*2,24 30:8,12 31:20	111:10,15 114:21	characterize 67:9	classification 53; 16
: 15,22 34:7,14,22	canse 23:9 24:25 40:7	characterized 108:7	109:11
:1,6,l 140:7 48:17	55:23 59:20,2162:19	Charles 2:10,10	cle«n53:l
:9,22,25 53:3,12 54:6	71:2084:7,989:4	chemical95:9,14,20 96:6	clear 39:14 75:3 92:3
:17 55:2,20 56:1 58:4	131:17	96:15	105:14 129:21 131:11
:23 59:7,8,20 60:6,7	earned 23:3,19 24:17	chemical! 12:25 55:22	clearing 105:21,23
:17 61:6,12,15 62:20	30:1533:2234:6,13,25	95:4,597:7	dearfy 77:12109:6
:24 63:5 65:19,24	35:6,21 37:1347:22	chemist 95:12	climate 80:10
:5,9,10,17,22 67:18	49:21 50:19 52:14	chemlsts95:18,25	coalesced 32:25
:4 70:171:3 72:2,6,9	63:13,2064:767:17	Chicago 2:15	cocaine 109:21
112,1373:2274:1,7	81:25 84:886:1287:9	chief 126:11	coUatedl06:7
:13,24 75:9 76:4,6,13	87:21 89;3 90:21 115:1	children 122:5	College 102:2 108:15
:10 832l 86:13	130:16131:15	cbolct78:12	CoUler3:86:24
.12,14,2189:3,5	camet24:23 29:18 33:15	cholanthrene93:22	Columbia 1:18133:3,5
:21101:20103:12	36:11,2351:958:11	94:18,1995:296:15,17	come 17:6 27:17 30:5
5:4111:11,14,16	64:11 85:17 103:12	96:20,2397:9,12,16	34:12,1239:2442:3
4:15115:1 116:8	111:14114:15 116:8	100:17	44:24 56:14 79:11
9:8131:6	119:7	chooie43:6	85:17 98:24 119:19
eri 130:17	canting 42:14	chromatographic* 96:2	120:2
[22:8	ceased 132:13	chronic 29:13,16,19 30:7	come* 75:15 76:198:21
[nogen 72:16,18,21	cell 78:1	30:16 31:5 63:7,13 64:7	99:15 100:21 109:17
:22 94:4 96:18 98:21	Center 2:10	64:13,1867:21 71:22	112:8
:5,21130:18	century 19:16,18 27:14	105:22	comfortable 15:5 41:11
biogenesis 20:2 41:2	53:4,1554:2255:21	Churchill 5:8 56:10	comment 39:24 48:10
Inogenets 99:24	85:7	cigarette 11:8,14 18:12	49:2350:25 86:19
Inogenlc 72:15 76:20	certain 11:1346:11 55:8	20:3 30:B 33:14 34:13	99:19100:18108:15
:9,1198:11,13	61:11 77:25 81:20	37:1,2340:9,14,1541:7	112:2,10,19,21
laogens 41:3*4 70.11	92:21 93:13 106:12	41:842:3,8,15,20,23	comment! 48:9 49:1 86:2
:19,19,20 83:21	117:16	43:7,1845:19,2547:4	114:1
:15 98:6 99:4100:12	certainly 12:5 14:2 15:2	65:24 68:14 72:5,15	Commission 43:21 57:8
ilnoma5:7	16:1921:2222:331:5	74:7,13 75:876:7	132:23 133:19
Inomu 70:18	37:2239:8,1044:10	107:18109:21 110:9	committee 14:18 28:18
14:3 64:23	46:2 54:17 55:7 59:15	119:1,3 120:25 121:16	28:19 29:1,7 30:5,23
er 10:813:7	60:20,2272:10,20	121:21 130:5131:25	82:20100:4101:6,14
7:16	77:18 78:6 86:1188:21	cigarette! 18:12 40:6,12	101:25102:7107:10
^9:20	98:4116:6124:9	40:2241:14,15,23	117:2,3126:13131:12
2:8,136:8,107:38:4	127:22 130:20	42:1643:344:2045:6	committees 14:16
2,229:617:7,13,22	certainty 11:1927:20	47:15 119:21 120:1	committee's 30:20
;2418:5,9,17,20,22	69:25	122:6	common 79:19109:22
:2 23:17 26:17 46:5	certify 133:5,9	Cipolonc 18:2	commonly 53:17 76:19
:I0 48:10 89:8 93:12	chain 111:15	circulated 85:6,7	77:18
>:23113:5,6,7,12	chairman 126:11	circumference 42:21	communities 22:23 23:13
1:16125:10128:5	chance70:1 86:24126:1B	circumstances 53:5 101:5	23:1527:533:2547:4
'95:22	127:4	101:13.16	47:15 80:24 82:11
I jwii.iw nt.t	wnciuuon»:u,z:>	consulting ir.vi	vouncllZtt?
130:4	47:1348:1649:2$	consuming 84:9	counsel 1:15 4:2 7:
immunity 22:2530:14	52:13 53:2,1967:15	consumption 115:11,16	124:21
34:2535:537:1338:9	75:16 89:21 103:10,18	116:10	counseling 69:9
39:1140:444:9 46:3	105:18108:20111:21	contacted 17:6	counted 109:8
50:6,763:12,1964:17	113:10114:18,24	contained 76:7,14 84:25	countless 122:11
69:17 81:3,5,12 82:16	conclusions 10:1711:13	contemplating 35:10	countries 53:13
87:2,16,18,20,23 88:14	32:14 53:21 54:5 57:5	contemporary 16:6	country 85:20 86:4
89:2,13 92:2393:15	61:18 71:17 74:3 BS:11	119:17	couple 28:15 81:17
98:3 102:4 104:11,19	85:1291:21 93:24 94:1	contended 84:23	coupled 121:16
105:20 107:16108:23	102:21 103:22 104:4	content 101:11	courie 13:1419:14,
109:3,13110:3,16	125:13	context 12.1121:1,2,4,12	29:17 43:1958:1!
114:19,20,22118:12,24	conclusive47:7	26:2327:12,21,2528:3	68:2377:15 124:1
120:18125:4,5 126:1	conduct 17:3	28:6,7,1030:1631:24	127:24
!27;22	conducted 10:24 12:7	32:1550:354:1468:10	course* 10:311:24
community’* 81:24	16:21 17:1424:2166:8	77:8 80:11,13,14	court 1:16:5
125:14	conducting 13:4 14:12,17	113:22 124:8	cover 8:20 85:9 92:
companies 8:13 22:19,24	14:2315:426:24	continue 13:1543:6	covered 39:17
23:1140:21 112:24	conference* 102:16	continued 31:20 89:12	coverlng39;19
114:3115:1116:5	conflrm55:5	continuing 14:228:11	cover* 104:1
company 3:6 7:5 24:6	conlon 2:18 6:22,22	contracting 58:4	co-funded 82:21
94:11 113:5 126:12	connection 18:8 71:20	contradict 24:22	crick 109:15,21
compared 43:1	104:16	contrary 87:11,15 90:8	create 25:126:11
compensate45:10	CONNORS 3:2	contributing 24:16	created 25:16
compensation 44:9,10,22	consensu* 23:2 28:24	controversial 81:10	creation 101:5,13
45:2,4,23	29:6,9 32:2133:1,9,13	controversy* 29:21	credible 47:3,7,11,1
completed 66:1S	33:14,1934:13,24	controversy 23:2,13,18	50:5,5,9,12,1551:
complex 107:18 116:14	35:1636:1,2337:10	24:1625:2,15,1926:12	criteria 30:6,9,13,1'
complexity 37:18 109:25	63:11 87:11,20,24 88:3	28:18,21 31:19,2432:1	31:3 96:8,1197:5,
complicated 36:8 37:15	88:5,13,2289:4,11	32:2,4,12,24 33:4,10,2]	critical 67:24
42:12,2458:1860:13	90:2096:3101:19	35:437:12 38:3 63:19	cron 1:3,152:26:6.
78:2182:18,1994:19	104:16108:23 123:9	63:2264:786:1287:8	7:17,228:1280:2
94:20	consider 10:11,1616:3	88:4,6,7,19 89:1,12	129:16
complication 78:23,24	22:18,2423:1148:12	90:15,19 91:11 101:17	Crosslng62:l
component 41:9 51:17	50:4 79:1481:282:13	102:9,10,13104:5	CS-166:15
64:10119:12,13 130:6	83:6 107:11 131:24	109:2115:8120:12	CTR26:6,11
130:7,9,14,15132:3	considerable 14:4	127:11,17	current 9:16
components27:19 40:14	consideration24:14	convey38:18 89:10 90:14	currently78:5
41:763:25	81:2582:14,15 99:1	90:17	Curriculum 5:4
composition 40:22 42:17	considered 47:6 63:5,7	conveyed 51:6	customers 63:22
comprehensive 26:21	74:2576:2577:582:11	convince 79:23	Cuyler 65:16
comprehensiveness 27: II	98:23 105:12 106:23	convinced 34:3 122:21	Cyler 55:25
conceded 79:21	107:11	123:5	0^9:7,8,10,16,16
conccpt 60:12	considering 23:7107:10	convincing 79:24	_
concern 121:23122:17	consisted 18:8,14	copies 9:5 85:8	_P
concerned 120:23 121:15	consistent 114:18 125:12	copy8:189:4 52:1753:1	D6:l
121:20	125:22	Cornfield 5:5 52:4	Dally 123:15
concerning 57:6 64:17	constantly 28:7	corporation 113:19	dangerous 12:13
117:10	constituents 69:23	correct 8:5 9:24 11:2,11	dangers 119:6
concents 20:23 78:6	constitute 67:23	11:15,1618:519:11	Dintel65:16
83:11	constituted 29:24 42:22	22:1025:1835:7,19	data 14:19 27:8 53:«
conclude 32:25 48:5	42:22,23	53:2554:2472:2	54:1658:1,8,10,21
69:23 82:9120:15	constraint 50:1	correlation 73:21,22,23	60:9 61:2,14 62:14
MnclnrfHl 2);li 71-H	JO-14	n	to-in n
iw	Dun	Disciplines Jttio iwa	ooneiz:zi 13;p,0 15:13 II
1:10 57:7,963; 16	depositions 128:4,11,20	disclosed 83:20	15:24,25,25 16:4,5 I
3	64:4 68:22 69:16	128:22	disclosure 9:6 55:1 77:13	25:11,14 39:2,441:23
IS	describe 12:23 31:16	discovered 94:22	67:11 77:2380:7 82:24
J:19,20111:7	38:1439:2	discovery 129:19	95:8 124:5 131:22
1:10125:22,23	described 31:1640:17	dlscuis49;12101:8	132:9
1	132:19 133:14	description 38:22	discussed 118:11129:2,5	dotage 44:3
1:1158:8103:11	design 40:12,15	129:10	doie 41:13,19 43:15,16
i,2 118:18 122:23	de«lgned4S:7	discussing 55:2118:10	77:9
J 10:8 31:195:17	despite 86:2,25119:15	123:19	dotes 131:5
17,18107:15	deUll 35:14 85:25 86:22	discussion 25:5 52:20	doubt 111:18
5:6107:24 118:5	88:18,2096:24	55:1274:18	doubted 131:4
53: li	detailed 28:16 53:13 97:6	discussions 42:19	down 1:22 64:4 86:24
ey 47:2$ 48:1 51:1	detailing 64:13	disease 5:1011:1,9 18:13	88:24 115:14
details 97:4	21:20 24:17,23,25 27:3	down 96:21
71:6,7,14,24	determine 10:21,25 21:10	29:14,16,1930:7,15,16	Dr 5:3 8:2,8 46:23 55:16
< 82:3,3,795:18	21:1422:1923:7 39:19	31:635:13,15,17,21	94:16124:21 128:15 fl
d 64:2 72:9	41:12117:13	36:2,7,17,23 37:14,25	drew 10:17 38:17,2171:8
itgI14:20	determined 72:2,4	38:1,1140:1942:14,14	71:19,21,2578:9119:2
*	43:20 79:1 127:8	determines95:12	47:16,2249:21 50:19	drinking62:4,9 122:8
ber 123:13	determining 20:22 30:15	59:21 62:20,24 63:5,6,8	Drive 2:15
n83:l5 116:1	57:19	63:14 64:1,8,14,18	drlvtng122:8
19	Defer! 2:19	67:21 68:17 69:12 82:1	Drug 108:10
! 115:16,18,20	develop 30:2 40:8 80:11	84:7,8,10,14 85:1787:9	drugs 108:13
sd 115:12131:21	development 71:13	89:3104:17106:17	D5M-IV 110:7
22	developments 81:10	114:20119:8127:13,20	Duke 14:17
*5:9	Dewey 1:19 2:4 6:15,17	131:15,17	duly 1:177:18133:7
ant 113:5,6	dlignotls 51:22	dilutes 35:9,11,12 58:11	Durham 7:15
ants 1:6,I017:12	diagnostic 52:1 53:20	63:25 71:22 86:6 87:13	during 19:12 22:7,20
S	19:2 113:7	54:4 107:25	105:22	23:2539:1666:2 111:9
14125:10,17	dlet37:1762:4	dlsease-prodncIng41:7	Duurcn 100:2
16,18	difference 84:5 85:15JO	disposal 68:12	D.C 1:11,202:25 3:9 6:4 D
12:1241:20	89:2290:2 91:192:5	dispositive 47:19	_D
>10:6	98:16114:3,25	dispute 81:12	_E_|
cly73:21,23	differences70:8 78:14	distinction47:17 90:3,12	£4:15:16:1,155:25 fl
Ion 107:8	different 15:16 20:13,15	district 1:1,2,186:5,5	eact) 70:3 102:21 105:11 II
tons 110:10	21:2032:14 36:10 42:5	133:3,5	earlier 16:23 20:16 27:22
Ive47:7	58:1459:2561:1267:5	divided 102:19	34:5 39:2146:1363:2
11:1927:10,20	69:8,1278:20,2086:6	Doctor 65:10	77:12 85:24 87: IB
132:19,2146:4	88:995:597:798:7	doctors 21:4	92:19 94:10 100:19
161:2562:2 98:14	99:13,15106:16110:1	document 50:2 64:24	111:3 123:20
15115:21	114:10 120:17 129:8	85:791:22 97:199:20	early 21:24 42:18 47:2
s 9:19 67:5	differently 43:23	110:18,18,21 111:3,7	64:2365:23 66:274:12
ed41:13,1943:15	difficult95:10,16120:13	112:9,11,19113:1,24	100:16116:6
strated 70:12	125:19128:25 131:10	116:17123:21 124:6	East2:15
((rations 13:5	diminlili 45:24	127:25	eastern 1:26:5
3:126:11	diphtheria 15:12	documents 12:9 22:9,10	edgjnew 108:7,7 109:5
g 85:18	direct 121:13	22.14,1526:2327:17	editor 49:11
led72:8	directing 15:15 40:2	87:591:2194:11 101:2	educate43:2
Ient45:19 108:13	direction 1:2337:4	111:2,25 112:1,6,23,24	education 20:9,10121:2
ling 45:16 79:9	dlttdvanf age 124:5	113:23 123:19	educational 39:7
!1	disagree 33:6 80:23	doing 10:15 39:2540:21	Edward 5:15126:11
d 18:6,7	disagreed 103:5	41:11 97:5113:21	effect 87:7 88:22 91:14
Ion 1;13 6:4 7:25	disagreement 32:6,7,17	Doll 65:15	93:13 118:2 131:5
cipwiiiiy	h:j3	7!lO|2i go:2	89:8,8 90;]3.17 102:9
38:14 72:23 102:23	22;6 29:13 42:1643:5	examined 7:19	extra 9:5
9,19127:12,19	55:2170:19 88:16	example 23:1.17 30:12	extrapolate 79:6
138:9,18,2240:8	95:21 117:2	51:1558:2362:24	_
16:10	ESQ 2:3,4,9,14,18,23,23	63:21 100:15113:10	_E_
18:6 69:21	3:2,7,7	119:17	face 62:1679:21
J 39:23	essentially 106:14	examples 129:8	fact 19:17 23:18 43:16
:147:1	establish 10:22 33:13,14	except 95:21 117:4	44:1,252:13,1453:15
nl«d54:6	established 33:16 66:21	exception 111:12 119:24	61:3,4 76:10,13 77:12
rsema 63:21 64:19	67:17 68:773:384:8,14	excuse 31:24 48:1955:9	84:986:23 87:1989:3
leal 62:14	99:2 100:12 104:16	executive 101:25126:12	91.1096:13 99:21
yed 16:1065:17	127:13,21,23128:2	exhibit 5:2 8:17,18,23 9:4	110:8113; 1120:6,8
:1148:3,6 53:19	establishing 30:6,9	9:10,11,1526:1546:24	130:11
89:20132:10	estimate 60:15 69:4	52:8,1356:765:14	factor 5:9 35:17 37:3
nr 613$	et 1:4,6,8,95:6 6:7,7,9,10	73:11,16 75:20,24	75:9116:2,3
il:144:35:27:!4	52:4	92:10116:18,19 123:11	factors 36:8 37:16,20
5,239:11,1546:23	ethics 78:7	123:11 126:4,6,10	52:1569:10116:4
,12 55:16 56:7	ctiologlc 5:9 75:9	127:2	119:10
1,1675:20.24	etiological 74:23	existed 21:2170:2573:3	faculty 14:16
0116:19123:11	evaluate 30:3 36:10	79:21	failed 24:23 44:14 63:3
21	126:4,6127:2	122:6123:3	exists 47:18	fair 14:2520:2021:18
15	evaluating 41:10	expanding 106:16	23:432:15,1834:7,23 h*s5:3	Evarts5:Il	expect 24:11	36:19,2145:18 49:21 h 20:20 45:18	even 22:4 24:1125:4	expected 118:9	50:1958:9,1162:1
9	58:1162:177:7	28:19 33:5,9 50:25 55:2	expecting 100:6	66:14 67:6 68:5 77:7
0	95:24 97:20	61:9 69:5 84:4 85:5	experience 11:25 80:21	88:10,15110:11,15
15112:20114:5	97:1399:19100:6	experiment 16:2117:1	125:18
18	105:8,17110:8112:8	experimental 12:4,6,8,10	falrfy22:l,5 58:18 99:23
61:25 62:4	113:24 120:4 122:12	12:14,15,22 16:15,17	familiar 32:10 35:13
62:1	124:6 125:21	16:20,2540:5,2541:1,9	41:18
*5*	events 27:11 105:13	42:251:376:20	familiarity 104:7
^ 58:12	111:15	experimentally 76:6,14	family 69:12
10:15124:22	ever 12:1913:2015:7,18	experimentation 78:18	far21:2044:2 66:7 93:17
d 106:5110:19	15:24,24,2516:1,15	experiments 13:5 79:6	99:3
16	19:1946:7,1060:2	expert5:3 8:11,18,21	fashion 24:2 25:9 nment 55:21	71:19,21111:4	12^ 17:24 18:1 26:16	father 121:19,24 ilologlcal 10:18,24	every 19:1760:261:25	63:665:1368:9118:22	Febrnary5:14 16:2,6,1151:2	66:7,12101:9105:9	118:25125:16	federal 43:20 57:8 104:20
7,22	66:3,7 67:6	11B:14 121:24 130:9	expertise 10:13,17,20	108:9
2	69:21 70:6,25	everybody 32:22	11:1713:1132:940:11	feel 15:5 26:8 41:11 109:6
4	everyone 78:13 88:14	40:13,15,17,20	110:13 124:4 ■lologlsts 10:7	89:23 103:14 131:1),14	experts 102:18 106:7	feels 124:22 229:2330:1 31:1	everything 83:6121:20	Expires 132:23 133:19	fell 107:20
3	129:21	explain 17:16	fever 15:12 ilologlst'a 58:17	evidence 10:2132:12	explicate 12:16	few22:14 30:21 34:5 liology 10:1,2,3,5	38:1047:2,6,19,20,20	explicit 104:4	50:25 59:24 72:13 ,13,1511:20*25	49:2050:1870:374:23	explore 101:11	flde 33:4 35:4 37:12 ,10.14.17,18,20,22	75:8 79:20,20,21,21	exposed 12:5	63:18 64:6 8B:7 89:1,12
5	1 6:3,5,9 27:15	90:6111:19 123:9	exposure 77:20	field 9:2510:8,1212:8
3,14,20	30:731:1,5	evolution 29:12,25 39:7	expound 120:1	13:18 14:21,22 19:17 67:2183:21	evolving 27:16 28:11	express 57:16	30:2432:4,850.17
r 8:2 21:9 99:12	exsicl 63:22	expressed 75:6	103:13106:11 118:22
ng 109:20	exactly 66:12 71:1 77:22	extending 96:21	fields 13:1727:15 80:16
20	125:9	extensive 102:23	102:18 105:16106:8 R
■t	iw.iriy.iu iy.s,is	tuU24:iu, iz 53:25	103:10104:22105:8,18
13:17	34:8 35:22 36,20 38:6	function! 21:15	106:1,9,18 107:2,6
:17	38:15,24 39:5 40:23	fund 1:86:982:20	108:2109:16115:7
4:19	41:1642:944:545:21	funded 82:12	118:5,13 120:14 130:22
W	47:9,23 50:1058:24	further 133#	131:12,19	fl
141:14	59:9 60:8,19 62:17 64:9	__generate 28:5	fi
»n41:698:22,23	66:11,23 67:1968:18 _Q.__generkally 31:25 58:7
i:6101:4	70:271:1073:174:16	G2:96:t	German 100:8
111:16	75:10,17 76:22 79:2,8	gik 2:14 7:1,1 111:22	gett 42:6 67:20
:16 99:17 100:6	79:16 80:18 81:1,6,16	112:17113:13	getttng44:8 53:18 77:8
11	130:19	82:2,17 83:9 84:12 85:4	G«Unp 56:24 57:24 59:15	88:16
;W:8	86:1487:1088:1 89:15	61:18	girl 119:3
•	22:12 30:11	89:2590:2391:3,15	garnfck2:237:8,8,24 8:5	give 19:2439:244:6 >70:15128:24	95:14101:25 102:14	11:315:1,21 16:1817:8	47:24 48:1549:452:25
19	53:2154:4	103:8111:22112:17	19:120:1723:2025:3	57:758:5,1063:23 :2317:2039:6	113:13115:5,24 116:12	25:2534:835:2236:20	69:15104:6,14)13:12 146:24 53:11	119:4 123:6,23130:8	38:6,15,2439:540:23	114:16119:17126:18
173:8 77:25 93:1,2 formation 28:25 81:13	41:16 42:9 44:5 45:21	given 8:1 20:23 24:14
4,7,17*21 97:25	102:6	46:14 47:9,2348:19	32:1635:25 68:16
101:7104:22	formed 28:19,20 81:15	50:1058:2459:960:8	69:14 83:6,14 95:20
►	106:5,13111:24	93:24 102:1	60:19 62:11,17 64:9,25	99:11 106:11,22110:121
17123:12,13	former59:l8	66:11,2367:1968:18	110:15126:13133:8
10	formula 36:6	70:271:1073:174:16	giving 106:8
30:11	forth 129:1,4 133:7	75:10,1776:2277:2	go 11:521:23 28:13,24
9	forward 49:20	79:2,8,16,2580:1881:1	46:1249:252:1855:10
:22	found 69:23 94:16 96:17	81:6,1682:2,1783:9	56:1557:1859:462:18
rick 2:4 4:5 6:15	97:7,10	84:12 85:4,21 86:14	63:3 73:7 80:2 83:3
B:7,9 9:2,9,14 11:4	Foundation 13:2	87:1088:1 89:15,25	84:1385:23 110:18
' 46:16,22 48:21	founded II»:I7	90:2391:3,1593:9	113:17 115:25119:14
52:11,18,23 55:9	four95:6105:10,11	102:14 103:8 112:16	124:15
>56:1259:11	119:18	115:5,24 116:12119:4	goei74:l9,20115:13,14
164:2265:9,11	fo«rth46:25	123:6,23124:21 125:15	SoIng8:10,13,18,209:3
173:1475:2377:3	framework2l:6	128:12,14 129:12,25	16:18 18:1731:8 38:17
85:2290:2492:6	fraught 44:25	132:8	39:1,242:9,1144:12,21
i 93:10113:16	frequency 51:22	gathered 65:22 106:8	49:17 53:1 54:22 56:5
7,22	123:24	frequent45:9	general 16:24 18:13	71:24 84:2191:19
13	125:1,18 126:4	Mend* 119:13 121:5	19:25 21:10,19,19	105:14 123:23 125:15 1127:1 128:13,23	123:2	22:1623:4 28:13 34:19	126:19 128:8 130:19
14	130:2 132:5	from 6:22,24 7:1 10:17	34:2349:1757:2359:6	gone 54:12 93:17 110:6 2061:2295:6	18:15.21 19:1 21:20	60:562:1563:964:5	good 8:8,9 31:13 46:14
1	22:13 24:629:131:9	69:11 84:22,24 85:1	65:10,1176:2577:5 ir-oldil 19:18,19	38:740:4 41:242:5	88:1392:2499:22	government 101:25 II ! 122:3	45:2546:348:351:22	101:8,24 103:6,19,21	104:20 108:10 127:9
:1»	52:3 53:12,18,24 55:24	103:24 104:15,15	government 38:10
135:12 49:24	55:2556:13,24 57:1,12	107:13 108:18 115:15	grade 119:25,25
106:16	59:3 66:2069:1871:8	117:1,4,22121:7129:6	Graham5:1176:10
12:7	71:2576:1,6,1480:16	129:9	100:7
d 48:2,4	85:1486:2,19,20,20	generally 24:7,13 30:21	greaf42:2l 45:1 61:20
*8 53:1184:22	96:18,19 98:9,19 99:16	87:5 88:2193:15	74:19 86:22 95:4102:1
104:12 127:7	100:16,21 102:18 104:9	General'* 17:2028:9,18	greater 60:24,25 62:23
7:20	106:7115:15 118:15	28:23 30:5,20,2333:17	98:14
ffi 131:23	126:20	34:537:3,957:1.22	Greene 111:13
*	52:5	front 49:12 50:3 85:9	63:1064:2071:15	groundtwell 109:4 $:12	94:5 127:2 131:6	64:20 85:5,13 96:10	group 6:12 7:11 10:14
ivi,w,vt	htivuuiv	jo.y ij.jj	inajciTioniDo:/? oy.te
20	heroin 109:14	92:12116:21 >26:8	Indirect 96:1,597:8
i	$2:22 •	hey 51:11	Identified 41:4 72:14,19	Indlspenuble 111:17
1812:2541:1	high 22:1 37:17 59:23	72:20	individual 32:18 60:11
R:17 50:8 51:16	61:2084:4 86:4)16:16	Identify 6:13 8:21 103:4	69:9,9105:1,2 IIS :20
64:391:2397:2	higher 130:12,12	identifying 41:2	128:4,10129:7
123:25	highly 103:5	111107:25	Individuality 45:1
24:339:23	Hill 30:18 65:16	111115:22	Individuals 111:13 |
--hint 121:19,21,25 128:21	Mlnols2:15	Industries 81:14 I
-H--hindsight 26:24	illness 29:19	Industry 17:1318:24 H
hiitorlan 10:413:16	tllnesses 64:11	19:9,1322:1023:8,18 fl
>07:18	14:14,1819:1620:11	In»glne69:13	23:24 24:15,2125:16 |
45:19	27:940:1650:260:20	Immediately 105:17	25:17,2226:3,11 39:20
lation 107:12	61:2368:23,2580:9,22	Immune 80:16	46:6,9 72:24 79:22
117:25 18:4,9,17	81:10 83:5,1091:20	lmply78:22	80:17,2581:2,3,23 82:5
}:22 24:10 69:5,5	104:20112:2,20113:21	importance 64:1	82:13,(4,2083:20
0119:18131:1	Hstorl*nt2l:l 79:17	Important 20:7,25 21:9	84:23 85:14,2586:9,20
iondJ5:25 56:11	historical 10:512:10	28:1,1229:1130:10	67:4,6,22 89:9,14,18*22
9	65:16 67:25 68:4	13:19 15:13 16:3,4	37:21,2142:25 43:8	90:14 91:8 92:4,22
3	20:22 26:24 41:3 79:13	81:21 105:12,13	93:1499:17111:2
>5:13 109:12	99:19	Jmpoied5l:14	113:9115:10117:25
14	hlilorlcally 16:8	impossible 95:23 105:3	118:3 120:7,7125:8
44:14	hls(ory9:2012:813:17	Imprettion 25:1 89:10	127:9
ned 107:14,22	14:4,515:10,10,11,12	90:14,17	Infectious 29:19
4:4 82:22,23 104:6	15:12 16:20,25 19:23	improve 30:2	Inference 71:8,25
7	20:227:2,4,1331:5	improving 51:25	inference! 67:21 68:2
r61;23	40:2469:11 125:3	inaccurate 87:9,24 89:14	71:5 78:10,13 118:25
'3:27:4	Hoffmann 96:12 97:14	89:1690:22	Influence 80:16 81:5,23
ul 59:19	noffmann'i97:l4	Inc 1:92:226:7	82:15 85:2 120:25
[7:1822:1133:15	bold 8B:8	Incidence 51:24 55:19	influenced 28:4 80:24
70:1 83:13,14	bope44:tS	74:6,7 85:20	82:8 120:16 125:24
)out86:5	Horn 61:19 65:16 67:25	include 10:2027:4	influencing 50:6
1*87:2	83:23	Included 108:4	Information 25:22 38:18
9*	Horrlgan 5:15126:11	including 64:18	43:8 50:551:659:5
ij 53:6111:10	host 119:10	Incorporated 1:5 6:10	72:24 73:2,6 83:14,17
ne 124:7	house 105:22,24	Increase 22:3 51:24 52:14	83:20,23 89:1992:2]
yll9:3	huge 104:22 130:16	53:3,1554:6,11,12,17	92:22 93:14 103:25
34:439:12,15	human 70:8 72:18,21,22	54:21,2355:1,5,684:10	104:23105:13,21 106:2
885:12102:18	77:6,7,1578:16,2579:7	increased 5433 60:10	106:21 108:18114:23
7	128:6	126:13	70:183:19	115:21 119:16120:3
g92:2	humans 43:25	Increasing 98:12	122:3,14 126:3 129:17
19:2 35:13,15,17,20	hundreds 85:8	Incredible 50:9	informed 46:10
,7,17,23,25 37:5,7	burry 119:23	Indeed 52:14 55:20	Ingested 131:1
4,17,25	38:1 59:21	hydrocarbons 94:22	105:23	Ingredient 131:24
063:5 101:20	98:13	independent 373	Inhalation 70:10 77:9,10
5106:17119:8	hyperbole 109:20	Indicate 45:13 62; 15>	77:13
ir 2:3 6:17	hypothesis 24:23 49:20	86:2190:6	inhaled 55:22
>>79:15	hypothetic*! 114:12.13	indicated 24:24 40:5	initial 105:3107:3
60:17	H.S.N 111:13	47:2150:1852:4 58:2	Initially 105:25
*:2 34:1 102:5	--60:23 66:9 69:24 92:19	initiation 120:10,16
!:20 22:15 25:1,11	-1__92:20102:9 104:22	122:23 123:4,10
43:150:2	Idea 70:23105:1,19106:6	indicate* 38:8 58:21 61:3	inquiry 22:18
l27:W	111:25	61:14 62:14,22	insecticide 130:8131:20 D
'3 45:5	Idealized 44:24	Indicating 116:5	int)ehti40:4	II
*	132:13	Issued 106:4108:11	Kirkland 2:14 7:1	103:25 110:2
d 9:10 84:24 85:18	Issnet 28:24,25 29:10	knew2l:1422:19 23:18	leave 83:2
ite 5:14 108:10	35:1442:2457:259:22	44:9,22 79:12 89:23	leavla£ 13:7
:24*25 117:4*7,14	62:8 63:24 68:277:24	91:9,11,1192:198:5,6	led 102:6
:14I25:2,4,I0,12	80:2286:1592:5	98:9,9,12113:8115:1	legal23:22
■21 126:2,3	105:11 116:14 >14:10	115:10116:7,15131:11	lefiltlmate 3B:2
126:2538:8,2140:7	124:11 125:14 129:2	131:14	length 42:23 74:19
6	64:16113:12	Item 129:20	Iciiowliig27:l840:13	leu 35:13 37:2140:6
MO	- 79:12,14	45:16110131:1
ton 60:3,4125:9	-1--knowledge 18:1227:14	letter 98:14
rt41:l 98:18	J 2:9 3:6	27:2464:1668:983:7	let 24:20 53:23 57:10
rted 133:11	Jamet 2:18.23 7:6	102:21 106:25117:18	59:4 60:375:24 79:11
itlng 44:11	JBW 1:5,9	118:17 125:14	82:18 84:19 92:16
■122:994:11 111:2	Jersey 1:4J 6 2:2 6:7 7:18	known 20:22 28:3 43:19	97:25 111:6126:16
24	112:1	7:22	43:24 79:1383:792:22	129:12
ret 10:1711:12	Jlm6:22	92:2393:14,14 94:4	letter 8:20 49:10129:13
40:17 122:1	Job 29;7	95:1196:1899:21,22	letterhead 116:23
rotation 14:15 15:5	JOHN 3:7	115:23 116:4 130:14,15	letter* 92:18	|
75:2,18	Johnstone 96:9	knows60:4	let'* 9:9,1811:514:10
reted 117:16	joint 129:18	__15:23*2321:2128:2,13
retlng 14:24 15:6	Joseph 68:1	_L__29:1835:15,2540:2
227:24	Joshua 2:9 6:19	lab 34:4 42:1 97:4 104:3	52:18 55:1056:13,15
)gatorlei 129:17	Jo«rn«l48:13	Labor 126:13	73:777:4,1783:3 84:13
>gatory 93:7,12	Jr5:15	laboratory 12:1577:20	88:6103:11 110:18
ipt 79:18	July 133:20	83:22	112:12 113:4,8 123:11
need 26:16	jumped 80:4	lack 23:2	level* 78:23,24
re 72:9	Juit7:23 9:1819:24	lacking 76:S	LewU69:3
sd 127:9	26:2527:628:6,25	lag 106:4	lle90:3.6.10
gate 26:10	31:25 35:1539:1 44:25	L*n«t4S:13,16,25	life 10:15130:12
gated 25:24	48:1151:14 55:10 S6:5	landmark 31:6	lifestyle 37:18
gallon 127:8	57:1059:1263:368:18	landmark* 30:23	Liggett 113:11
gat!oni32:8	70:11 73:2 75:25 77:17	large8!;14 95:17	Ught96:3
n) 14:2217:21,22	83:5,786:2290:11	largely 94:20	like 8:16 9:4 20:10 31:25
023:22 32:19	91:10.18.2293:699:8	tail 56:17 73:3 75:11	52:7 59:378:186:1
(69:1077:10	99:11 101:10103:10,11	late 18:2137:1042:18	97:19106:17116:18
1103:2	105:3,15 109:14,14	55:3 56:24 63:20 64:6	122:24 124:9 126:19
t* 14:22111:16	110:20,23 112:12,20,22	69:195:19 96:4 98:8	128:1 131:9
:5	113:4,8119:17121:2	100:16	likelihood 60:6 96:6
17	129:21	later 29:17 37:3,6 59:21	likely 58:22 59:7 60:5,16
ant 115:4	--94:2595:19104:24	61:5,15 101:12
on 72:10 -K--106:16123:17	Uktwl*eI17:24
on* 70:17	K 2:3 3:8	law2:96:19	limit 123:25
95:13,23	Kants* 3:3,4	lawsuit 125:16	limitation 77:11
m 12:25	karen 1:17,22 7:10133:4	lawyer* 50:13	limitation* 75:4,5,13,15
2:1236:843:23	kassner 2:9 6:19,19 7:23	lawyer's 99:16100:18	76:23 79:4
10,21,23	46:2,7	8:6 132:7	lead 15:13121:21131:20	limited 73:18 78:15
67:2069:2,871:13	keenly 120:18	leaders29:1	limits74:2079:9
15	79:1081:25	keep 105:19 106:10	leading 70:23 130:7	line 56:13 78:1 125:24
184:13 92:20	keeplngl06:l	leads 111:15	lines 70:3
!,1995:1 96:3,10	kept 112:6	least 22:2 23:4 25:15	Ilnk35;!0111:17 127:12
198:19,2299:4,20	key 105:10	31:2034:2541:4 45:13	127:20,23 128:2
1103:2105:11	kind 25:12 32:14 69:8	47:2148:549:1950:12	linking 38:11
!4 108:19109:25	101:18 106:21 114:6	51:1155:462:764:5	Holds 37:16.16
129:14131:14	lung 5:5,7 ] 1:9,9.15,22	March 126:14	meaiurementt 41:22
:3	20:5 22:623:3,9,19	marine 130:12	43:14
[ng89:tB9J;6	29:4^3 30:8,12 31:20	mirk 8:16,18 9:4,10	mtchanbm 26:11
tare 18:15 22:17	33:15,2234:6,13,22	52:1273:16	mod 13:7
125:6,7,8,20,23	35:1,6,11,13 43:17	marked 8:24 9:12,15	medical 1:8 6:910:3
>29:9 39:23 40:18	48:17 51:22,25 53:3,12	26:15 52:9,2556:8	11:19 13:2,12 14:1
9,19,2170:20	54:6,1755:1,1958:4,23	73:12 75:21,24 92:11	18:11 20:422:2323:12
1484:1,1785:10	59:7,8,20 60:6,7,17	116:20126:7	23:14 27:4 30:1433:25
1099:24 100:11	61:6,12,1562:20,24,24	marklng57:10	34:2,2535:537:12
;21118:14 130:20	63:5,5 64:13 65:18,24	marriage 133:10	40:16,1847:3,1448:13
Ion 17:22 19:9	66:5,8,10,22 67:17 70:1	man 95,-9,20105:20,20	50:6 63:12,19 64:17
17:2243:959:25	71:372:1,2273:2274:1	108:17	69:1776:1980:14,21
164:481:9 82:23	76:4 77:10 85:17 86:12	m»ilve27:3	80:2381:11,2482:11
199:15 100:3	87:9,12,14,2] 89:3,3,4	material 34:3 95:13,13	82:1683:5 87:19,23
:11 109:25 131:12	90:21 101:22 103:12	100:16 104:3 106:6	88:13,17 89:1,12 90:19
12:16	104:17 105:5 111:10,14	material*22:1241:2,11	90:2092:23 93:15 98:3
:192:43:2	111:16114:15 116:8	78:9,10	98:4 105:7 106:24
>89:21	119:8131:6	mathematical 30:3 36:9	108:23 110:3114:2
2:1128:1642:20	lungi42:7	matter 1:16 6:6,8 22:21	125:13
109:24113:4	lying 89:22,23	24:1 32:19,20,20	medicine 12:213:16,18
'33:4,2164:689:1	--122:17133:12	14:4,519:16,IB 20:16
-M--mature 123:1	20:24 27:14
adlnal 60:22	M 2:21	miy5:U 57:9 68:5 69:14	meeting* 102:5
6:5,14 31:733:8	machine 41:24 43:15,16	92:2095:2298:16	member 14:1717:13
41:846:12,23 48:8	44:345:13	111:7 120:24 121:21	member* 18:24 113:9
2	52:755:1756:16	machine! 42:143:24	122:18 124:21 128:10	118:23
4	59:260:980:11	44:23	maybe 12:12 25:13 51:11	memo 94:7 96:25
6	93:19 100:10	made37:l 38:18 84:5	69:5 86:1088:2 100:6	men 30:12 33:15,23 34:7
23 116:18 123:11	85:15,1988:11 91:1	104:21 128:25,25	34:11,23
17 124:16126:18	92:598:16102:23	mcdevltt 2:3 6:17,17	mention 122:4
4	117:6,9118:7 130:25	73:15	mentioned 39:2144:19 125:935:957:3	Matn3:3	mcgroder 3:2 7:4,4	56:2257:2163:4 70:5
9,20	81:7 90:7 93:2	mainstream30:25 103:5	MD2:1I	72:785:24 86:1596:16
1	94:11 107:17,19	110:2	mm 15:2225:526:13	97:4100:20 103:15 7126:1,2	maintained 86:10	28:1,730:1731:2332:5	128:3
E 12:1717:19	mujor 13:12 19:1529:7	32:6,21,2133:11,25	mentioning 16:22
6	24:2 39:10,22	29:2141;9 44:12 62:8	36:541:843:21,2345:3	mention* 127:24
5	58:1 69:20 80:13	80:17,25 98:9 103:1	45:4,17 47:11,1348:8	mettage 39:12,13,13,15
i	100:1,5,5112:3	majority 82:21	51:5,1659:10,1264:10	43:656:1992:2 5125:20	make 20:21 81:983:15	71:1674:2075:177:5	mtt71:1397:8 111:13 >7:4	89:17,21 90:3,4,11,11	78:2280:886:24 87:14	method 14:24 75:13
rd 3:1 7:5	100:14 102:3 110:20,23	88:8,2390:1 91:20,25	methodologies 16:10 R
f 13:13,2514:3	112:2 114:1,25 129:12	97:18,25 99:3 100:20	methodology 14:12,12,23 U
36:970:22,22	129:21,25	103:9,14,17104.3,18	77:18 I
>,2099:21 107:14	make*ll4:3	105:15110:11111:15	method* 30:1,2 74:19 I
12115:25 120:12	man 78:11	112:3,19 113:18,20,23	96:1,5 98:18	I
JO 100:5 122:2	manipulation36:9	116:14 119:9,14120:19	methylcholanthrene |
19	Manual 107:25	122:8,22,24 123:7	93:2395:397:1699:12 U
>:1492:3	manufacturer 84:6 85:16	124:3,13,25 127:16,17	99:20,25 100:2,13,17
IB,2 5	many 27:5 28:15,24	127:24130:9131:11	100:24
10:6,843:7 59:24	31:16 36:8 39:6 44:16	meaning 93:6	mice 68:14,15 72:6 78:1$
fOtlne43:18	58:1060:2366:25	mean* 27:8 124:14	78:19 94:23
'43:17	69:14 78:879:1 86:10	meant 101:3124:4	mid 69:197:15
J 24:1131:1033:5,9	62:8,15,23 64:13 71:15	normally 49:15	49:15025
1041:6 46:4 54:13	85:15 105:15 117:3	Norlh 7:15	occailonally59:18
2262:4 78:1998:18	121:2 132:5	Northweit 1:20	occupational 63:25
>:2,12128:1,14	multiple 64:11	notary 1:18 7:19132:21	occur 24:25 29; 17
>:7130:18	rtiurray2:237:8 17;8	133:4	occurred 36:24
Sr*m97:19	19:1	noted 51:21	Ochwer47:25 48:151:1
mi 112:1127:8	Myen 113:11	notet 99:16117:5	51:7
60:16124:1	M.D 1:14 4:3 9:20,22	nothing 109:10120:8	off46:17 52:18.19,20
Ie9:19 95:11 126:17	--notfce 1:17	55:10,11,12 65:192:7
>:l7	-H--notlon21:16122:12	126:21 132:10
id 129:3	N 2:104:1,16:1	nowhere 111:19	olfcrBilO
iurl3:4	name 6:1149:5105:23	number 6:8,1011:6 22:1	offhand 58:25132:2
tell 3:7 6:24,24 65;5	named 17:24 18:1	36:15,1737:539:10	officer 126:12
7:2338:3 119:15	narrate 101:4,12	42:2249:1850:16,16	office* 1:192:9
1:20122:22	national 1:7 2:7,12 6:9,20	56:458:1370:18 76:18	oflflcit1i42:13 51:21 82:4
ire 95:3,17	7:28:413:1 29:3	94:2196:2107:22	83:1584:2
176:24,25 77:5,14	101:21 105:23 108:10	115:18*20116:10	often 24:S 81:13
1:21	natural 114:24,24	119:22 128:19	okay 8:14 15:2431:12,12
flcatlon 41:6 45:6	near 123:9	numberi 36:14	35:1541:2149:4 66:14
fled42:16	necessarily 32:11	numerous 102:19	71:23 73:1978:3 81:9
tnt 28:5,10 41:3	necessary 96:11114:7	NW3:8	90:13 92:6116:17
10106:20112:13	necessity 26:21	N.W2:24	128:13 129:24
uiti2B:8	necropsy54:16	__oldi 119:18
hi 17:10,10	need 27:23 29:6 45:22 _Q__on* 48:7
“fc*®	48:2350:292:17	04:16:1	one2;103:311:2012:17
24:1829:1] 30:21	101:10,18 102:10112:2	object 11:315:1,2116:18	13:1614:1919:1s
6,1233:1034:236:8	119:23 124:22,24	42:9111:22113:13	20:10,21 21:1,11,12,15 I
15,18,20,2043:9	128:24	123:23 125:15	28:22 29:21 30:4,22,23 I
2,2045:8,9,12 47:S	needed 42:2196:4,14	objection 20:17 23:20	31:10 34:19 37:20 39:8
23	49:4 58:22 59:7	needs 109:15	25:3,2534:835:22	39:843:1144:1548:4
1,5,13,1661:5,15	neoplastic 53:14	36:20 38:6,15,24 39:5	50:1351:1955:10
8,1569:578:17,21	net 127:11,18,19	40:2341:1643:1044:5	56:1158:2162:763:2
17	94:19 96:4,11,14	neverl2|;5,8	45:2147:9,2350:10	64:1174:21 77:10,11
14 97:898:1799:8	nevertheless 71:23 75:15	58:24 59:960:8,19	78:1879:22 81:17
10104:24109:1	82:7121:22	62:11,1764:966:11,23	88:2491:892:5,17,17
:1,23121:13.18	new 1:2,4,162:2,5,5,20	67:1968:1870:271:10	93:22,2294:295:23
=24126:4	2:206:5,77:17,22 9,10	73:174:1675:10,17	96:4,16 98:8,9,15 99:8
Ing 6:3 8:8,9	24:439:22108:9,14	76:2279:2,8,16,25	99:10100:6,8101:2
li	1:5,9 2:22 6:7,10	109:10118:13 123:14	80:1881:1,6,16 82:2,17	102:1 103:10,11 106:15
,919:3113:11	123:15131:3	83:984:1285:4,21	108:2,12,25110:7,10
My 53:7,13 54:7	newt 85:9123:15	86:14 87:1088.1 89.15	111:1,12112:25 113:8
10:744:249:23	newspaper 24:9117:5	89:2590:2391:3,15	116:2,4119:19120:2
1353:14 58:9 59:15	newipapen 117:21	102:14 103:8 112:16,17	120:24 121:6,7 122:4
5103:13,17107:5	neit 30:18 51:19 76:11	115:5,24 116:12 119:4	122:24 123:18,19125:9
:12112:6 120:19	85:19116:17	123:6	126:4 129:14	|
32	nicotine 40:6,9 41:13,23	objective 51:$	one* 51:1 56:2257:21 I
V 35:12	42:2,644:345:12,19,25	observation* 51:23	66:12 96:16103:23 U
«119:12	106:25 108:1,12,16,20	ob*erver5l:8	106:14,16109:3 122:11 D
it1oni91:)6	108:24	observen47:21	one'* 21:14 70:1	n
*79:23	nlne60:2561:5	obstructive 63:7,13 64:8	one-tenth 131:2*2
f 68:13 69:22 70:6	nine-hundredth 97:19	64:13,18	one-third 35:20 36:2
!	nontmoker 58:3,23 59:8	obtained 45:25	only 43:24,24 63:9 64:20
56:1379:2584:19	59:17,2460:7.18	obvioas 31:10	74:14.2279:1393:17
1118:4,10,23	overestimate 61:9	103:16	periods 49:2
7128:8131:2	overstatement 109:22	pathologist 13:10,20	permissible 71:8,24
(9:1986:1287:8,8	overview 19:25	pathology 13:9,11,13,15	persisted 52:2
3,18115:3122:2	own 60:16 61:10114:22	13:16,1927:1534:2	person 31:145:16121:7
1110:14,14,15	125:12	103:16	personalized 121:18
59:5129:4,10	--patience 132:6	persons 82:12
i|60:4	-E--patient 69:10	perspective 20:22
n 11:1932:7,24	P6:l	patients 48:5,17 51:4	persuasive 51:17
3	39:361:881:20	packl31:l	68:16 120:23 121:23	pertinent 95:1 091:1398:23	page 5:2 31:7,1240:1	patient’* 69:11	peter 1:13 2:9 4:3 6:20 15113:25 115:6	46:2452:16,1753:6,7	pay 9:18 51:9	7:14
9125:25 127:14	53:24,2555:1656:16	pediatrician 13:15,25	petitioned 101:24
16	56:1765:1373:774:2	120:22121:1	phenomenon 53:4,14
nt 8:3,14 38:14	75:2585:9101:3	pediatrics 9:2314:2	phlllp 1:5,9 2:22 6:7,10
6	80:11 88:9	111:10,11 123:12	peer.itv)ew 15:1916:19	7:7,919:3113:10
14	113:12114:16	124:18,22126:20127:6	peer-reviewed 16:1617:2	philosophical 71:7
11128:9	pages 38:7 123:17	Pennsylvania 1:20	phrase58:18
(unity 64:12	paid 103:23	people 10:6,1$ 14:2115:3	phrased 51:14
td 17:1 41:15 47:7	painted 68:14 72:5	22:232:733:534:1	phrasing 47:10
949:2460:6	painting 68:13 69:22	37:19,2343:12,19	physician 13:24 68:8,11
11,16	70:7,9	44:16,2250:1655:2	68:24 69:9105:10
11:830:3 78:9	p»per97:3	58:1059:1(61:20 62:6	physicians31:1751:20
l*M:18	papered 68:14	70:4,1871:17 72:13	51:2365:1569:1,6,14
liatlon 26:8107:8	papers 48:3 51:1 83:24	79:23 83:10,IB 84:1,17	69:1891:5 102:2
Izatloni 31:18 91:5	96:21	85:11 86:3 88:8 89:18	108:15
10	papillomas 70:16 94:24	90:291:1492:194:17	physiological 13:4 al 15:22 54:6 80:6	paragraph 24:6 26:20	96:2198:17100:1,5	physiology 13:4
6	106:15	31:9,11,1540:346:25	103:1,13,15,17 107:5	ph.d 1:14 4:3 9:19 16:820:8 25:9 27:6	51:1953:11,2556:17	107:17,19109:7,9,12	plcked44:16
7	32:9 35:9,11,14	56:1765:14*2173:8	109:19,22110:12112:4	pictures 119:12 639:21 52:1553:5	74:21 76:1286:18	112:4,6115:7,12	plec*50:5
15821 59:22	101:4113:19123:13	116:10,15 117:25118:9	pieces 122:3
971282:2] 87:12	124:16126:20	118:10121:10,15	pin 64:3 88:24
696:1998:13,17	parallel39:18	122:13,19 130:17,18	place3:327:2428:3 50:3 I
1101:3109:3,5,12	parents 119:13122:5	Pepsl62:4,9	67:1
12110:13,14,14,14	123:1	per 16:542:23	placet 127:24
7114:14118:14	part 10:1113:2,1216:4	percent 36:5 44:13 61:11	placing 12:10 68:9
11	124:15127:10	22:2423:1124:825:15	91:25122:24,25	plaintiffs 1:4,8 2:7 4:3
24	129:1 130:15	26:239:1740:2443:4,5	percentage 22:2 36:7	6:16,18,2092:2193:12 VJ	49:2381:3 98:11	59:2461:20116:16	96:25 129:13,16 I 29:533:1038:10	104:18 125:5 127:16	percepdon 27:5 58:2	plan 104:14114:16 { 67:25 73:9 74:11	participated 14:17	118:3	plant 95:10130:9
4	84:18 98:10	particular 12:17 17:21	perfectly 69:13	plants 13:1 16:22 130:13
2	17:2229:1830:832:2	perform 95:14,24 97:20	130:16 12:1251:12	32:1251:457:258:14	performed 11:712:19	plausible 55:23 56:4
:I9 34:1,20 37:7	59:160:21 68:1 74:18	16:2 17:11 32:8,13 79:6	play25:22
5,1649:15,16	79:1080:1581:21 95:9	82:12	p|*yeil24:15
382:23 85:17 95:9	103:23 106:20 109:11	performing 17:1	plays 123:4,5,7,10
9114:11 130:23	117:6	perhaps 28:19 29:11	please 46:23	I
ne 133:11	particularly 17:1976:3	51:1376:1277:14	pledge 89:13	]
e 82:5	95:10	126:17	plenty 90:5 I
1:1 24:3,1649:2	particulars33:8	period 20:11 39:17,19	Pllmmer96:9	|
563:2 115:12	parties 128:18,20133:10	60:2166:268:10 111:9	Dlural 118:6	1
19:517:2319:1	prepared 8:3 35:9 100:3	proper 14:2317:3	16:919:24 20:125:13
18,2032:1(33:3,7 111:18	proposals20:4	25:14 38:1642:15
1234:7,9 35:23 38:2 preparing 22:8	propose 65:18	51:13,15 53:258:13,16 !
:4 55:24 60:162:14	pretence 129:23 130:5	proposed 55:23 56:4	58:1859:2560:11,14
21	63:2374:24	present 3:116:137:11	proposition 56:3	60:21 61:13,21 69:17
2383:13,1388:11 95:1296:7 100:22	proposition! 84:25	69:1973:3 76:4 79:17
1694:1598:19 99:6 109:6	protective 60:23	80:681:4,4 82:6,18
1:3104:9106:11	presented 10:21	proving 29:18	83:3 84:21 87:890:10
7:1,15129:12	presenting 50:18	prudent 79:14 83:6,8	91:16104:12109:24
led 65:23	press 83:25 102:16	Psychiatric 107:23 108:6	111:23112:18,25
ting 37:4 75:13	pressure37:17	110:6	113:14115:3121:12,13
*22:12 59:24 93:2	presumption 54:16	psychiatrist 14:6,7	121:14122:16123:16
5:12 117:23 129:7	pretty 50:13 73:17	paychlatry 14:5	123:17,25 124:2,2,10
nlng 15:13	primary 5:714:2	psychologist 14:8,9	124:12,18,19126:19
eman 119:23	print 70: IS	publication 84:2097:17	128:8,25
>7:458:560:1,2	prior 17:11,19 18:1323:9	101:6	questioned 51:23 85:18
A 60:11 47:1,2049:1950:22,23	publications 29:8 50:20	questioning 56:14
ig 58:18 61:2 63:20 114:14	50:22 102:17	questions 8:13 23:22
14:11,13,15,16,17	private 127:10	publicise 38:10	59:1970:2273:1884:2
19,23,2515:4,5 17:4	probability 69:25,25	publicized 84:16	91:6106:13119:20
16,23	56:22,24 70:24	publicly 82:25	132:7,8
19,20,25	58:2,8,9	probable 67:16,17	public's 117:13	quite 12:641:11 88:19
15,22	61:1862:18	probably 20:18 24:10	publish 24:24 105:6	110:9
12	84:17 85:10 30:1033:1242:14 68:4	published 10:415:19	quotation 24:6 52:3
M6 69:5,15 83:16 85:6	16:16,21,23 18:14	53:18 86:19
0on63:24 88:1597:21,22109:22	22:1624:21 25:6,7,8,19	quote31:1552:1653:1
ydlc94:22 98:13	problem 12:17 44:17	28:248:1249:19 101:8	54:255:18,2456:25
lar 83:25 50:8131:8	103:7117:5 123:14	73:2075:16,25,25
latlon 53:7	problems 44:25 45:1	puff42:22	quoted 56:374:1777:12
r 2:24 7:7,9 17:18 64:24 70:4,574:22	pufTs 42:23 45:9,9	quotes24:9
3	86:23 110:7	puU49:15	quoting 53:24	■
»n 50:24	procedure 79:5	putted 103:1	_
147:451:15	proceedings 1:22	pulmonary 63:7,13 64:8 _B_
131:25 132:1	produce44:15 70:19 72:6	64:18	R 2:23 3:6 6:1
on 80:24 91:9,13 76:6,13 131:9	pure 95:14	rabbits 78:20
20110:2112:13,14	produced 41:23 68:15	purport 58:10	raise 77:23 130:17 I
>:1.2 94:24	purports 126:10	raised 83:11 94:12
ve 74:6,12	produce! 79:22	purpose 112:5	raising 68:2 70:4
)lt 76:6128:15	producing 70:13,14,16	pursuant 1:16	Randolph 2:15
123:15 70:1796:22	put20:25 21:12 36:19	rate 42:17 53:12,21 54:5
10:13	product 79:22 84:6,13	49:1954:1460:369:16	54:11,2355:8
Ice 12:1 79:1 119:19 85:1791:12 120:11	81:8 113:8,22124:7,8	rather84:6
:3	production 83:21	putting 110:13113:20	r*ts 44:15 76:16 78:20,20
Iced 13:2078:8	products 76:7,14 120:20	putde52:l	99:4
Iclug 68:8,11,24	professional 13:6 32$	p,m 65:3,4 92:8,9 126:22	ray 52:1
17105:10	professor 12:1 34:2	126:23 132:12	reach 11:13 32:13101:18
Itloner 105:1 103:16	__104:4119:9.10
1:18	program 69:4 _Q__reached 22:1 27:2033:10
able 113:15	programi41:10	qualified 76:17	35:1637:1049:25
ding 54:14112:7	project 13:2	qualities 130:12	53:2154:5 61:19 63:12
rsor 101:22	proliferation 55:22	quantification 130:25	71:1787:20,24 102:20
ce 102:15104:5	promising 40:4 41:5	quantities95:11,16	108:19111:21 113:9
antv59:21	nramnlNl	HHS \f>	vmiAhJI'I?	I
I-’21	referred 76:11 94:13	57:2100:3101:3,7	117:24
112:7,913:15,18 26:7	referring 31:14 65:13	102:19 103:6,10 104:22	reviewed 22:9,1124:13
J:9 66:13 67:1 73:17	66:16 68:13 73:2,21	105:8,18 106:1,9107:3	49:2156:21,24 57:4
)3:22112:8,9113:24	75:2 76:3 94:6	107:7 108:2,11 109:2	68:22 92:25 100:7
14:6,21,24128:7,15	reflected 118:12129:17	109:16110:19,23111:8	108:19111:24117-20
S8:21	refltcd 44:4	115:8 118:5 120:14	118:2 123:21
dtr'* 24:3 39:23	refuted 48:10	128:17129:2,4 130:22	reviewing 18:14 29:8
tins 13:14 119:5	regard 64:20130:10	reported 67.11 72:13	revise 30,1
53:4 54:17 55:6	regarded 103:5	83:2586:2296:17	Reynolds 3:6 6:25126:12
!:l*	regarding47:2	120:12 131:12	ReynoldMpwuored
lie 19:24 41:22 90:11	regular 13:14	reporter 8:16 52:12	J3l:13
12:22,23121:6	reiterated 96:13	reporting 6:12 7:11	rhetorical 124:14
lw*78:!3	relate 40:20	86:1794:17	rheumatic 15:12
ly 19:823:2129:14	related37:2 133:9	rep*rt*26:7 34:19 57:1,5	Rlcliard65:15
!:10 39:9 55:17 64:15	relatetl4:S	63:10 97:11 101:8	right 9:2011,10 31:13
!?!! 82:6	«l*rtng 23:24	102:19103:19,21	34:18 36:4 38:1,1142:4
1:1389:2394:11 97:1	relationship 10:23,25	104:15 106:3,19 118:5	42:11 52:5,15 55:18
r:l,2104:13 112:21	11:820:5 27:329:16,25 118:13 130:20131:19	56:5 58:2061:1 62:2,5
ll!« „	3ft7.ll J1:»4WS	represent 7:2,5 111:1	66:1867:1,271:376:21
on 23:10 28:20 71:16	46:668:669:7	representation 75:3	77:5,21 78:12,15 79:1,3
1:17 77:23 108:3	relatlve42;17 58:3,15	representative 114:8	80:1187:2190:9 94:5
onable 11:19 67:15	59:10,13 60:1264:1	represented 51:24	102:24 103:13110:4
repmenting 6:23,25	117:16118:22121:18
on» 86:25 120:24	relatively 108:9	represents 113:19	121:24
8:3131:7	relevance 23:6,16 38:13	request 129:19	ring 49:6
1116:2318:1958:1	relevant22:18 50:24 62:7	requeued22:15	rlte20:2 21:24 51:21
:S 93:20 94:6	62:8 82:14 98:25	require* 27:10,13,14,16	rising 53:12 55:20
!¥*^4«W	115:10	27:17,1836:8	risk 36:6 54:17 58:3,15
twd 102:18	reliable 47:3,8,12 50:4	ramch 12:715:22	59:10 60:10,12 61:25
at 78:6 97; 13	relied 55:5	17:14,1618:1024:8,21	62:1,5,5,16,2379:15
« *	rtlucUnt 99:18	24:22,24 25:12,14 26:2	84:3,11 122:7 131:25
»ed46:l8 65:3 92:8	rely 50:14	26:3,5,9,2427:1840:4	131:25132:1
6:“	remain 76:5	41:582:20,2088:18	rUks21:ll,2S 85:3 86:17
Enltton 84:3	remainder 65:5	117:2120:13131:13	92:1 115:22116:16
Bnlie 14:20 79:4	remained 87:8 97:11	residing 7:15	119:15
Enbed 84:18 96:10	remain* 127:11,17	reiolve 102:10,12	rliky 62:8
7:6108:5	remember 58:25 59:13	resolved 115:3120:21	Road 7:1 J
llect 48:24	60:2132:2	resource* 114:22126:14	Robblm 69:3
[lection 100:19	rem1nds73:15	respect41:14103:21	Robert 73:8
Elections 51:3	removed 98:20,21	118:10128:19	rodent 70:7 96:22
mmendatlon* 102:4	render 11:1838:2281:19	respected51:5	rodtnls4);570:1372:17
128:16	respiratory 63:25 74:8	Rodgman 94:7,16 96:15
•9126:2$	rendering 128:9	75:9	96:25 100:15
rd 6:2,14 7:24 8:17	renowned 50:17	response 20:6 45:5 105:3	role 24:15 25:21 123:3,5
:17,20 52:18,19,20	replace 52:25	responses 93:7	123:7,10125:3
2155:10,11,12,13	report 5:3,13,14 8:19,21	responsibility 105:25	room 20:12
1,7 92:7,13 126:21	17:2018:1323:426:14	responsive 82:6122:16	root 55:22
5:24129:13,21	26:1628:9,13,16,23	result 45: II 52:15 53:16	rosenthal2:23 7:6,6 8:19
M0133:8	30:20,2331:733:17	127:11,19	129:13
«te21:2,4	34:537:4,938:740:1	results 14:24 24:21 57:20	roughly 18:15130:8,25
dng41:6	46:12,24 56:16,23 57:8	66:2079:6	Royal 102:2
:tlon 44:14	57:12,22 63:16 64:21	retention 18:9,22	rule 16:24 22:16
52:365:1473:7,20	65:12,1371:1576:1	returned 107:13	run 105:8
25	77:1384:21,22,2485:1	review 23:23.23 49:3	runnlntSM*	i
J6:25126:12131:13	124:16126:20	showing 128:20	91:4 108:6 109:5
--section 74:3	shown 29:23 67:5,10	115:19*20121:3128
-8--sedentary 37:17	thowi 1J;2029:S	128:11
4:15:16:1	Sedgwltk 2:19 6:22	tld« 20:8	smokes 42:7 44:20
ifety 77:25	see 31:10,21 33:840:7	rifted 106:7	snlpplts86:2
ime 39:1941:3 42:8	49:4,1153:6,17 54:8,18	Signature 132:16	tocltl 107:18
43:15,22 44:1984:21	54:19 56: 1,21 57:24	slgnlflcance31:l6 75:12	sodety29:2 56:166:11
86:15 109:14,14 110:13	65:19,2471:11740,10	102:8112:15	101:20 105:4 108:13
110:20121:22	75:176:8 86:24 91:21	significant 50:13 73:23	122:2
1(86:24 118:14	94:9,1396:24111:10	73:2474:1,9,14,15	io 111 30:6
ititfy 25:14	111:20116:23 123:18	97:2498:2100:23	sole 117:18
iw97:18 100:16	126:10,14 127:17	significantly 13:17	some 8:10,1312:7,21,3
tying 12:11 32:24 35:23	seeing 122:1,1	similar 37:8 99;14 102:1	13:514:17 17:1422:
37:2285:1886:1,18	seek 27:19	109:15	22:1124:626:8 29:9
87:16,1889:2490:8	seem 31:10 32:13 80:4	limply 43:12 51:25 83:5	32:16,17,1833:3,5,8
91:199:7,9 109:13,17	seen 50:16 57:11,14 58:7	87:24 126:16	34:1 35:14 36:1537:
117:22 118:24 125:21	58:2059:1,560:261:2	line* 13:7 54:7,22,23	40:13,1341:644:6
sys26:20 32:10 47:1	111:4 123:8	69:1694:1295:21	47:2151:7,1059:22
51:2054:15 61:873:20	sets 119:2121:21	101:9121:5	60:2261:17,2562:1,
97:5124:12	seized 40:4	single 28:6 91:22	67:4,25 68:2570:5,1
cholarly61:7	selected 98:23 129:7	sir 8:21 9:16,21 65:25	70:14,14,15,16,17 It
chool 10:312:2413:2,7	selection 43:2*3 120:11	tit 64:15 88:2	76:14 79:19 84:158'
13:1234:3	selective 98:22	sitting 20:8 36:17 48:24	94:2498:18101:18
Chrek 73:9 74:11	Senate 126:13	62:21 81:22	102:3,16103:23 104
clence 13:1 15:17 32:4	sense 24:8 33:21 63:9	ill 36:10105:11	104:2,3 107:6,17,19
82:10 104:3	79:1991:22 106:8,18	cbcty27:7	109:3,8,19,20116:1!
eleaees 13:23,2514:3	118:23119:8	sh-year 105:8	120:5121:18124:11
118:18	senslcalty 109:23	skt»44:l5 70:9,17 76:16	128:15130:17
eJentlfle 18:11,14 20:4	tent 129:13	96:2299:4 130:17	somebody 32:18
22:2323:12,14 25:19	sentence24:10,II 26:20	131:9	someone32:10 44:20
26:22 27:4,6 30:14	31:1447:1 53:24 54:2	»1dni72:16	88:12100:19122:8
31:1833:2434:2435:5	54:15,2174:10,1875:1	skipped 63:2	131:3
37:1340:1847:3,13,14	75:6,6,11 1120	slightly 15:16114:10	something 15:16 25:8;
50:763:12,1964:17	sentences 112:10	slow 29:25	45:1047:18 50:14
79:5 80:14,23 81:11,24	separated#	small 95:16 96:19 99:10	51:1155:259:164:2
82:11,1687:20,23	series 30:6 48:2,9 96:1	130:24	78:1 80:1981:7,890
88:13,1689:2,1392:21	serious 47:4	smoke 43:7,22,22,25 45:8	94:1395:12 104:21
92:23 93:15 97:198:3^4	Service 69:4 105:4,23	62:1669:23 70:12	108:14114:9)18:11
104:11,1 U3 105:13,20	services 17:12	72:14,15,19 76:7,15	121:10128:6129:3
106:10,25 107:16	set 27:1130:9,1843:21	77:1494:996:13,18	something’s 107:4
108:18,23109:3 114:2	66:1971:1796:8129:1	97:1599:5100:8,25	sometime 63:16
117:2118:17125:14	129:4 133:6,13	115:22120:4 121:20,22	sometimes 10:2412:13
129:17,22130:4	settlng42:2	122:20 123:2,2 129:23	61:8,9 78:18
dentine-medical 79:1	seven 36:10	130:5,24 131:25	somewhat 124:4
dentist 99:17103:5	several 55:23 98:7 106:13	smoked 116:10	somewhere 36:24 95:5
dentists 21:4 31:17	Shannon 3:8 6:25	smoker 20:15 41:14 42:7	107:20
32:1342:1255:23 56:4	shellfish 130:11	42:743:1744:24 45:4	sophistication 51:25
70:7,13 82:4	shield 1:3,15 2:2 6:6,16	45:20.23 58:3.22 59:17	sorry 8:17 46:21 52:24
cope 95:2	6:18 7:17,22 8:12	59:18,23 60:4,5,9,11,17	55:17 63:23 79:18
lcott3:8 6:25	Shook 3:2 7:4	60:17 131:1	86:23 93:3110:22
*16:5	short 92:6	smokers 21:10,14,17	124:15
M 130:7	shorthand 12:13	43:2244:246:1048:18	sort 28:8 88:17 89:20
coond 31:9,14 40:3	show 21:24 44:2 57:9,10	58:2,22 59:661:3,4,8	100:10,12 106:14,19
48:1153:2554:255:10	66:4 67:4 87:5112:24	61:11,13,14 62:15,19	109:16
66:19106:5119:25	showed 66:13 67:3 85:10	62:2272:25 84:11 91:2	sorts 77:24119:14
117:9125:7,1] 12s: I	41:1244:1,2548:1,12	64:2571:1 72:21 77:22
'117:18	Kates 1:119:24 54:3	49:8,1850:16,20,21,23	84:4 88:5 97:2 103:15
80:17^5111:8 116:11	51:2,3,1060:2365:22	104:12107:9 110:20,23
ng 30:22111:3	133:1	66:3,20,24,2567:4,6,10	123:8 129:21,25
>15:3	sttte-of-the-wt 88:17	67:25 68:12,1369:22	surge 51:24
Ity 9:22,22	static73:21	69:2270:9,9,1671:1,12	Surgeon 17:2018:13
(72:8	statistic*] 36:9 53:16	76:1282:12,2184:15	23:428:9,13,18,22 30:5
c 24:18 28:25	65:1770:671:2074:20	98:10121:8122:22	30:19,2233:1734:5.19
044:6 47:24 48:15	74:22,24 75:13 107:25	131:19	37:3,9 57:1,22,23 63:10
6106:13 ■	111:18	study 10:2214:1416:2,6	64:2071:1584:20,22
cally 14:22 26:20	lUtlitkilly 73:23 74:8	28:239:1844:1249:24	84:2385:1,5,1396:9
549:2561:2274:5	74:14	51:4,757:561:19 66:8	100:4 101:5,7.8,13,24
0127:7	statistician 55:25	66:15,17,2071:1273:8	103:6,10,19,21 104:15
ct 18:1949:5 81:18	statlstlcUni 67:24	86:22102:3117:6	104:21 105:8,18,25
wcopy96:2	tUtlfllcl*n'» 58:16	118:7	106:9,18107:2,6,13
am 72:7,11	statistics 35:20 53:14	studying 11:8 40:24	108:2,18109:16115:7
10:7,15 64:12	54:15	80:22 103:2	117:22118:5,13 120:14
S	status 125:13	subject 15:7,19 17:3	130:22131:12,18
71:15	stay 77:4	19:1920:2331:834:22	surgeons 51:5
13:114:4 21:3	stayed22:16	66:876:23 78:8,23	surgical 51:1,4
20	iUytog31:8 105:2	107:13 129:19	surrounding 101:5,13 82:5	steadily 98:12	subjecting 77:19 78:7	survey 16:1 bn6:127:M	steady 21:24115:16	subjects27:l	surveys 14:11,1321:16 >7:17	Stenotype 1:22	SUBSCRIBED 132:18	56:22
17:24	step 77:25	subsequent 97:10101:8	susceptible 78:19
nun 24:7 86:20	stick 47:10	103:19,21 104:14	suspect 111:25
•red 13:2 26:2,6	still 12:24 71:14 90:15,18	substance 11:189:10	inspected 77:19
3:21	110:12114:20 123:17	108:4,17 109:11,18	twear7:ll
us 53:16 94:21	124:2,10,13,19132:2	110:17	switching 120:16
21	stimulation 8:1	substances 55:24 56:5	sworn 1:177:19 132:18
2	stir28:5	72:15,1676:2096:19	133:7 fl
M2	stirred 28:5	99:23 110:14	syndrome 108:1	B
rd 79:5107:6,9	stop 109:6	substantial 22:5 51:21	systematic 24:2,8 25:9 B
10119:20	stories 19:15 24:5 85:9	67:1271:272:199:23	86:16 fl
rds 16:10,12,13,14	story 27:19 41:842.12	success 96:22	_B
S	71:11	43:4 99:13,14113:4	successful 20:9	_________ T_
5:23 51:22 65:8	straight 130:23	successfully 70:13	T2:184:l,15:l
783:8121:2	ttraln78:18	suffer 62:23	table 94:14,15110:9
iS	street 2:10,19,24 3:3,8	sufficient 10:16,2211:18	130:1
183:16 106:3	62:1	74:25	tacks 80:4
7:1918:1031:15	strength 67:9	sufficiently32:25 53:13	tike 22:7 28:1 45:848:14
5101:4 106:20,24	Strike 10:23 16:122:8	suggest 54:25 64:22	52:7 53:23 57:15 64:22
I	39:1841:18,2158:8	85:14	68:2173:1679:1592:6 23:1043:21 84:8	79:2586:890:16	suggested 55:20	92:20 120:17,24 126:17 196:11113:1	striking 53:14	Suite 3:8	126:17 128:9
Hit 5:15 7:23 9:6	strong 66:21 67:271:2	summattee26:25101:14	token 1:19,2211:25
131:21 37:1,6,8,8	75:7	summary 57:3 74:2 104:7	64:23 66:21 69:24
53:11,1155:19	student 14:120:16	summer 13:1	80:10117:12 128:5
76:384:585:14	students 20:7	supplement 106:6	taking 75:14 91:9,13 fl
7	111:12114:8	studied 32:8 48:1 85:25	supplemental 92:18	101:10106:14 121:15 I
14	126:11 127:7,15	86:16102:17	support 52:2 54:16 56:3	122:18 132:12
II	studies 10:18,23,2411 ;7	supporting 26:9	talk 20:1,2,3,5,19 32:1 enU 23:24 25:16	11:12,2012:15,19	suppressed 129:16	35:15,2557:274:19 ! 27:24 39:25	16:11 26:22 27:25	tun 26:1.1 5 35:54
KM 27:21 83:17 88:4,5 Thank 132:5	104:23 107:1 111:9	61:17 63:15 64:3 79:18
94:10108:1.11	their 10:8,15 30:1,2 32:9	114:6117:9125:20	88:25 89:17 91:18 93:<
king 11:6 15:16 23:13	40:2243:2,347:1548:5 128:17 131:18 132:6	95:8113:22114:9,11
*5:18 32:1,341:21	50:17 51:4 61:1069:11	tone* 24:5 2623 27:21,25 117:12 125:6132:2
53:2254:10,2081:19	69:1276:12 83:19,22	32:17,17 39:2260:23	Tuberculo*l* 29:3 101:2i
*7:12 93:894:2598:8	84:24 91:5.12 96:12	60:2561:5,22,23 76:18	tumoK44:15 68:15 70:1:
103:12 107:25 121:7	100:7 102:19110:8	91:23 118:13 123:15	96:22131:9
k* 127:25	119:13,22 121:5 122:5	tlt»u« 12:16	tuntd91;24
>e 65:2,8 126:25	123:1,2	tobacco'* 130:10	(urn 14:1040:1 84:1
■40:6,841:13,2242:2	themietvei6:13 10:7	today8:221:1922:831:2 turned57:2291:4 114:2!
12:6,15,2044:3,14	tbereabouK 19:6,7	36:1,1,1843:13,13,14	Twelfth 2:24
15:12,18,25 68:13.14	thereon 38:23	48:24 62:2) 64:15 775	two 31:25 43:22 70:12
f2:5 94:23 95:3,6,10,18	thing 50:14,15	77:4,17 81:22 87:19	76:1291:2396:11,14
'5:2198:11	thing* 15:920:1021:1	92:19 103:4 129:2,5	97:8,2398:17 104:24
rife?:1*	27:6 28:10,14,15,22	131:24	112:9 123:17129:14
igbt 121:19	30:442:1969:1381:17	(odd 2:14 7:1	130:25
ch 19:16,17,18,22	86:1 99:17 107:22	together 56:15 59:2	Tylecote 49:5,8
22*i*	108:2110:11 113:22	told 34:4116:7 123:20	type 43:7 121:22 123:21
«82:23	115:25 119:14 122:1,4	Tom 6:24	typ«39:7118:8,8 123:IS
hnlque 76:20	131:9	t»158:17,17	_
hn1que*65:17	thinking 21:17 69:1	tool* 30:3 52:1	_U_
n-»ger* 119:15120:1	79:1297:13	top 103:1 105:2	Uh-huh 34:21 38:2049:7
20:9,23 122:12,13	tblnlu 110:16	topic 16:6129:9	53:954:1 56:2062:3
phone 119:22	third 26:19 65:21 119:25	foplei 106:17129:6	67:7 73:1074:476:2,9
18:731:23 36:22 67:8	124:18	totally 82:5	93:25 107:2 123:22
2:1998:1 119:21	Thirty-Ninth 2:19	tenth 78:15129:20	126:15
21:8122:10	THOMAS 3:7	touched 129:15	Uh-uh 85:23
!ng 39:20 87:2 117:14	though 33:5,9 53:2 72:22	toward 65:23 70:24	uUravtr«197:I0
17:25	thought 22:13 24:22	toxlcologtit?8:4	unitble 120:15
ipora!21:5	37:2044:1250:18 68:4	tract 74:8 75:9	unamblguw* 39:14 92:3
60:25 61:5,2294:16	68:5 B6:21 95:4 97:7,18	Trade 43:21 57:8	uuautwered 70:23
1)33:541:1845:2	103:16108:16,20	traditional 95:11,24	uncertainty 53:20 54:3
0:1264:19	111:19114:3131:7	train 27:11	uncomfortable 110:13
M 35:3 40:21	thousand 27:7 95:7	trainee 14:2	under 1:2349:1471:14
44:3 45:13 76:20 77:6	(houiandt 85:8	training 9:2510:2,14	undergraduate 12:24
7:7,18 78:25	threat 47:5	12:5,21 13:12,13,22	underwore26:2l
ed 94:23	thr«22:ll 25:10 76:10	14:11,1415:4	understand 8:1012:17
Ifled 7:20 18:18 87:18	76:13 91:23 93:1,2,3.4	tralni99:!8	16:1318:1621:13
93:7,18,20112:4 127:7	tranwrtbed 1:23	23:21 24:9 36:12 38:16
Ify 8:3 18:4,17 27:1	three-year 106:4	traiucript 133:7	43:13 60:12 64:4 71:6
5:1038:8,1740:8,20	through 24:3,4 28:25	trantmltted 8:19	125:6
7:164:16	38:8 39:2242:348:3	tremendoui 70:8	understanding 22:5
Ifylng 23:135:10	56:2565:22 102:20	trial 8:3,11 57:16	58:16
):25125:8,16130:3	115:2 129:18130:8	tried 59:14117:24	undemanding* 21:13
!mony 8:1,1122:8	throughout 85:4	trouble 99: IB	79:9
f:23 33:20 39:17 63:6	tl«J 44:23	true46:151:1279:7	underttand* 60:10
>:892:1999:11	tlrae6:3,1214:417:11	112:14,22113:2114:12	understood43:1256:18
10:23 101:12,15	18:21 19:1220:2321:3	115:12,23 133:8	77:1278:13 85:11 86:4
>3:20133:8	21:12,14 22:727:12	truly 72:9	86:6 109:4 115:7
moiiy’* 49:17	34:2035:2542:10	truth 51:9 54:7	undertake 23:23 41:12
ng 78:9 97:10	43:10,12 46:3,4,14	try 11:1320:11 28:23	undertaking 35:8
178:7 95:14,24 97:9	49:14 50:156:14,25	88:24 122:4,11 129:1	uufltte«d41:15
=20.23	57:1,160:21 64:13,23	trying 14:1920:2021:3,9	unhealthy 120:2
104:6	67:1468:1071:15,16	21:1429:1543:944:24	united 1:1 19:23 80:17,25
DD.£	TTVIIU IV/;/
18:21 19:1 23:3	vleweri 1)8:19	90:591:1894:499:14	wouldn't 50:14 70:19
!0 76:5 86:10 88:20	view* 22:3 81:11,12,13	99:15 103:22 108:25	78:1,19 80:9 91:1
:1	81:14,21	110:5113:18114:9	write 16:2519:12
*90:2	Potent 2:4 6:15	115:11117:15,20	wrltlngl6:8
*1130:10	virtually 119:24	120:22 121:1,12 122:15	written 15:7,9,10,11,18
nlii|8:ll	virtue 45:23	124:3,16130:6,14,15	16:9,12,13,14,16,19
ed9:8	virai29:18	131:18	17:2 19:19129:18
':8 32:3,11,23 33:5	VIccue161:8	well-being 69:11	wrong 35:19 84:2491:9
145:250:12,13	vl.lt5:13 110:19,23 111:8	went24:3,4 102:20105:9	97:22
674:24 107:5	112:5	weren't 18:7 29:14 34:1	wrote 124:25
:21,21	vitlting 1)3:10	51:2,2 70:14	Wynder 65:15 76:10
4:19 26:11 33:22	vlt«5:4	we'U9:10 32:2 52:25	77:1196:1298:10
1076:24 96:1,2	vllal$4:l5	56:14 64:23 80:8	100:6
:24107:7	volce6:13	we’re6:2,4/4,68:1811:6	Wynder'i 44:11 83:24
1:2	voluntary 101:19	12:1249:1468:1293:8	_
12:12,1630:836:5	v»l:5,9	98:8110:20132:8 _X_
!4	--we've7:259:1526:15	X5:I52:1
y 59:22,23 86:17 -ffi__27:21 52:24103:11	_
:10	W3:7	121:7 _Y_
>:3	want 26:19 46:12 53:10	WHEREOF 133:13	yeah 33:1180:5 90:5
569:3 105:3	58:1562:1363:373:17	wherewithal 114:6	104:13 115:18120:5
5:13110:19*24	1)0:20,23 114:4 122:25	whUe71:23	124:12 128:13
:17	129:25	whole 14:21,2143:23	year 18:2230:1837:3,6
---wanted 51:8 90:11	44:1749:1566:21	58:5 <8:24 70:12 77:22
-X--wart 72:10	69:24 108:17,19119:10	101:9 105:12119:18
127:18	warti70:1794:24	wide 104:1	121:1
00:2	Waihlngton 1:11,202:25	widely83:25 84:1685:6	year* 12:1 17:1520:8,16
Jf 69:12 101:23	3:96:4 123:15	118:11 120:19	28:17,1729:1734:5
20	104:1	wain’t 18:6 29:20 38:2	widespread 29:6108:13	37:539:1054:1876:11
1*8:1213:314:16	67:22 78:22 87:25	wflllumi 3:7 58:12	76:13,19 78:8 84:22
1,17,19 29:22 36:16	97:20 103:17 104:13	Williamson 2:12,17 6:23	85:1986:10,11 100:19
58:11 95:14	105:14	7:2113:7	104:24 115:2,12 119:20
14117:23	watched 118:14	with 94:5	yield 43:7
ig 96:22	water 130:7	withdraw 9:9	yorlt 1:2 2:5,5,20,20 6:6
5:20	way 12:1136:19 37:21,24	withdrawal 108:1,5,8	24:539:22118:13
»:15	38:443:2544:1758:18	wlthMld22:13	123:14,15 131:3
r 109:2	58:21 59:4 60:379:11	wltneti 1:14,174:2 7:12	young 1:17,23 7:10
sd 97:23	86:1695:1196:8	9:1 17:656:1075:18	122:19133:4
n 52:25	103:24 109:24 112:1,6	116:13 124:24 125:19	younger 121:2
[6:7,98:12 70:9	112:10113:8 117:1	132:16133:6,8,13	_
5	118:4 126:9 133:11	wltnessef 128:19	_I_
0:1,9,2542:11,24	wayi58:14	women 34:14,23	15:38:17,18,2326:15
551:11 77:11 84:4	Wedneiday 1:12,21	word 31:24 32:3,23 50:8	46:2452:565:2,14
1,16	99:10 102:23	we!ght42;20	51:1678:12 90:10	94:15 106:15 123:13
4116:16120:13	well 10:611:515:2316:3	100:20	129:18
2132:5	16:1920:1621:2223:1	wording 58 :H	1:1465:4,8
irapher 3:12 6:2	25:4,13 28:1331:17	word* 32:9109:5	1:2346:21
46:17,20 52:19,21	34:14 38:1740:16,24	work 16:22 18:8,2335:8	1017:1540:1
1,1365:1,7 92:7,13	43:2344:7,2045:23	49:995:8114:6	1002:10
21,24132:10	47:2548:11 50:851:13	worked 12:25 13:18	10004-24002:20
laped 1:13	52:2 57:21 58:7 59:12	worker* 1:8 2:8,13 6:9,21	10019-60922:5
0:2142:2563:11	59:1566:2568:23	7:38:4	11:0346:17,18
398:19 104:9	69:14,2070:777:4,8	worklng21:6	11:2346:19
iw iwn	---- - - ■ ?<<n 4fi*?Q9«iA
1:22	1PM 17:2018:1523:4,9 _3_ 7.00029810217
5:11,14	28:929:2231:2033:16	3 5:552:8,1365:13 iKs
I	33:20 85:6,1086:11	126:25 7*,.c'
1,1528:17	87:6,20,2388:12,20	3rd 8:20 K*.n
1:7	9^6:10101:7,9105:19	3,498:6,7 70120*14
5:2,3	107:3,7 109:7,7114:14	3,4-ben«ipyrm94;4
I	115:8,15117:23	3,4-bttupyrtne93:2l g
)	196521:21 22:1	94:3,895:22 84-55-3 414 nfr 18 i«>
5	196640:3	3:13126:21,22 123 11 12
1	196796:13 100:7	3:29126:23,25 8091*25*
!»•	”:2S35:3	3:38132:11 12 «0,18:2163:20 64:6
1^0:11107:22
)	1970 123:13	30^03:8 8163*4
}	1970*37:10 87:7	31 133:20 MIOS’ll
•old 119:2,9	19715:14 ) 24:1,10	3122:16 84ID0;i8
9,25	122:7	197836:2437:1,5106:1	32871:5 861.21002 16
-olds 119:6	1979 37:3,9 107:14	342-85213:9 8912014
)	198036:2537:6,22 108:6	35122:25 '
6:14	1980» 63:17 87:7132:4	__9
1:7	198157:9,12	-i- 95:1538:856:16126:5,6
5	1982108:11 126:14	45:756:7 73:7 126-10127'21 JO'lft
16,1753:2,24	127:15,23	4044:1397:6 9*811:2161
19	198499:16	40i 56:25 M9\:2S
•‘i*	iSS??.	Slf! 90*97:14,16100:11,11
;7,l$f24	1987108:1$	4197:6 109*19
:13,16,25 51:14	1988108:19,22109:9	4102:11 9107.'i5
1:2096:21	198957:3	42242022:20 «513
:3	1990* 132:3	474*65503:4 942-54915-25
8:3,751:20	199819:4	_ 981?
:3 29:14,22 47:21	-.--5- 98-CV*32876:8
1950:22,23 73:9	_I__55:973:11,16 126:20 ooi-o
118:15	2 5:49:4,10,11,15 55:17	127:6129:19 99-CV.14926 11
2:2023:19,25	65:8 111:10129:14	5020:8 122:25 *
,1947:252:2	2,000104:24	50(21:24 66:2100:16
67:169:195:4,19	2:0492:7,8	525:5
>8:8,22116:6	2:1$ 92:9,14	5552:24
20(h 19:15,18 27:14 53:4	565:7
12	55:2185:7	5774:2
:24	2002:15 132:19 133:14	5884:4
12,394:21	20001:12,21 6:38:20	_
:8,9	22:4 66:24 77:22 78:5 _S_
:4	121:1 129:14	65:1131:7,1275:20,24
:15,19 67:9,11^1	20004-12062:25	101:3
1169:16,2170:21	20007-51083:9	<0*66:3100:16
72:2,4,1973:4	2004133:20	606012:15
,1383:7.11,16,18	2022:25 3:9	6428:1484:19,2088:18
100:2 111:7,2]	212 2:6,20	108:3 130:22
4113:2	21201 2:11	64105-21183:4
:3,4 94:6 96:16,18	231:12,21	649-2086 2:11
98:5,15 •	23rd 6:3	652W.4
1:20 23:19,25	25100:19	6734:17
95:19 116:7	25-year57:3	68 34:18
2:5	259-75672:6	6934:11
AtESMl&ttOllftMW	'	10KC0M
April 3.2000
FACSIMILE	.
erMcDcvitt, Esquire y Balianline LLP Avenue of the Americas
i'or'k, New York 10019-6092	. .
A ’
.v ‘
Heathen	' *'
Enclosed is a revised expert report for Dr. Peter C. English.
Best regards.
Sincerely,
CLo
(/James M. Rosenthal
defense Counsel ackie Segal, Esquire
I am Peter C. English, M.D,, PhD,, and defendant have asked me 10 testify about cuy of medical find scientific knowledge regarding cigarette smoking and health public health community's response to The evidence suggesting a possible link
1	smoking and disease.	j
I am a Professor of History s»d th* Josiah Charles Trew Associate Professor of lory of Medicine at Duke University. 1 em bIso a jractleing primary care clan. A current copy of my curriculum vitae is at ached.
The history of medicine is a recognized, independ ent field of study. Iwill e professional standards in research and interpretation in the history of medicine necessity of applying these standards and histories] methods in conducting • h. in die history of mediolne In general and in the history of stnoldng nnd health In
Lar. I will underscore the necessity of being compijchensive; of interpreting 3c statements, studies, and documents in the come: ;t of the times; and of avoiding ht when, conducting historical research. 1 will describe the rigorous training that 1 historians undergo in order to conduct research c insistent with these standards. (•.
I will testify about the state of medical and acienti: ic knowledge of s mokine * es, lung cancer, and a possible relationship between cigarette smoking and lung in the United States from the early 1930s to 1964. jl will testify thn, prior to the ?50s, there was no evidence regarded as reliable or credible by the scientific or 1 communities that cigarette smoking posed a serious threat to die public health.
Id the 1930s and 1940s, physicians and public health officials noted a substantial [he frequency of diagnosis of lung cancer. From the start of ihcse observations, ans questioned whether this increase represented ajsurge in the incidence of lung or simply improving sophistication in diagnostic topis, such as the X-ray. This persisted well into the 195Ds. In ] 959, a distinguished panel of scientists reviewed ic rad concluded that definitive data did not exist to answer the question;
because of the uncertainties associated with changes in diagnostic accuracy, no firm conclusions can be readied on whether the rate of increase in lung-cancer Mortality has, in ■truth, accelerated since 1920.1
who argued that the incidence of lung cancer was ir deed risiug suggested that vast sin the twentieth-century environment, especially t ie proliferation of inhaled	.
ds, might be the root cause. Scientists proposed sc /era! plausible substances.	‘
rome Cornfield, William Hocnsxel, B» Cuylw Hupr load, Abraham H. Lilienfeld,
J B. Shimkin, and Etnesi L. Wynder, "Smoking ant Lung Cancer: Recent ce and a Dijowsioo of Some Questions," Journal ofithe National Cancer Institute 22:176.	•
■	among the numerous changes that have 01 cutied in	.	‘
environmental factor during the last half ;entuiy has been the tremendous rise in the prevalence of c irtain inhelmts to	'
which the human population is exposed, i Icrc I will
discuss just five common lnheletnta; otuae y, (1) soot and	*
tomes from coal furnaces, (2) soot and fill ICS from oil
furnaces, (3) fumes from internal combust ion engines, (4)
dust from bituminous-surfaccd roads and i ubber tires, and
(5) cigarette smoldn^1
c words, to scientists into the 1950s, cigarcttc stno ting was just one of several a] culprits. As such, most physicians were cautioi:; in reaching conclusions. For ie. in 194&, Edward D. Churchill, & distinguished surgeon at the Massachusetts
1	Hospital - writing on behalf of lie Amori&an Medical Association and the :an Cancer Society - summarized the state of scientific knowledge about a c link between smoking and lung cancer;
nothing is buown about the cause of the disease that can be translated into effective preventive measures. It is possible that an actual increase in the incidence of pulmonary cancer hu taken place daring the lint half of this jeeatury. Several statistical studies support such an interpretation. On the other hand, Boyd, who is in a position to speak freely of the -shortcomings of pathologists, thinks the disease was not recognized twenty years ago because it was not looked for.
At any rate, evidence that pulmonary caneir was on the increase led to several speculations about causative agents, and among other things, cigarette smoldngjwas incriminated. Further knowledge about the nature and the mode of action of wcinogemo agents, and:a careful recording of the smoking babits of ample numbers of ' patients with the disease, provide no factuaj evidence on _ which advice to give up moldng for this reason can be based.3
In the early 1950s, studies appeared in leading scientific and tncdical journals that concerns in the medical, scientific, and public healta communities about a possible tween cigarette smoking and lung cancer. These studies sparked medical and	•
Cuylei Hammond, ''Lung Cancer and Common Ini altuits,” Cancer (] P54) 7:1104.
Iward D. Churchill, "Primary Carcinoma of the Luri j,” Journal of the American &L£k5sariaSiflnU94E)i37:456.	r	^
Scientists advanced thttfi lints of evidence - frot i three separate fields -
mating smoking with lung cancer, epidtmiology, c* >criinont6l biology,'and , logy. Eich sparked a lively scientific debate. First physicians, such as Ernest let, Richard Doll, Bradford Hill, Cuyler Hammond, and Puuel Horn employed biological snd statistical techniques to propose an i ssociation between smoking and ;u>oer. It is important to step back and understand hat this proposal came at a time most epidemiologists studied infectious germs, suca as bacteria and viruses, md ■ole in producing human diseases shortly after expojure to the germ. Smoking and :an«r presented a sharp departure from the norm. J^ung cancer did not occur diately after the Jnitiatian of smoking but arose decades later. Lung cenccr, of e, WAS not an infectious disease. In order for epidemiologists to rigorously study
>	utcer, they needed to develop the tools of chronic disease epidemiology. Over the lecade, smoking and lung cancer served as one c&tajyst for this change.
Epidemiologists needed to devise good eue-contiol (retrospective) studios and ation (prospective) studies. Investigations employing retrospective and prospective ids drew constructive criticism from within the f talisticsl and epidemiological lunitiM. In addition, these scientists - in order to evaluate data - needed to devise rate mathematical equations, such as ‘Volatirc risk.,,nTaken together, these methods ospcctive studies, prospective studies, and mathematical analysis - transformed lie disease epidemiology into a. highly specialized field/1 *
(
Epidemiological studies, gathered through the 195’Ofl and early 1960j, pointed ■d an association between cigarette smoking and lung caaccr. What next occupied biologists was whether smoking was simply an association or a causal agent. This t seem like a simple step - especially for those of us ivho have lived through over ■five yean of an aggressive public health educations^ campaign - but physicians, c health workers end scientists debated the point up until the Surgeon-Geacral's first t ia 1964. Two examples shed light on the nature of’jhe probtam, Parents have said ■nturies that teething in infancy causes fever. As it turns out tooth eruption does not
i	much in the way of higher temperatures. Instead, most inihnts are cutting a tooth at ime time they contract a viral cold. Of couna, parent* cannot see a virus, but they pptcciate a new tooth. Similarly, most cases of pneumonia occur in winter, leading : notion that wet feet or a chill causes pneumonia. Ai it turns out, bacteria end
-olin White, "Research on Smoking and Lung Cance : A Landmark in the History
ironic Disease Epidemiology," Yate Journal of.Biol&j y and Mcdidw.(199(» 63;	'
S.
Richard Doll, "Uncovering the Effects of Smoking: H .storioal Perspective,"
Lfafli Methods in Medical Rosc^h f!99Bl 7; 87-117,	.
Ernest Wynder, “Tobacco as a Cause of Lung Canccr: Some Reflections," American al of Epidemiology f 1997^ ]46: 687-694.
-a
Wien Withers of the first retrospective studies oa smoking and lung cancer
1	the question of association and cause, they cle itly noted the difference. For
►	one of the authors of the first retrospective scut ies, Robert Schrek, explained
the eoQchtioA is definitely statistically si) ^lificnot, but is it 1 biologically sigtuScent? A statistical study cannot prove -whether there u a causo and effect relationship between two factors. At beit, the statistical evidence can provide circumtontlBl evidence that a correlation 1$ biologically significant,7
initially, in 1953, researchers at the National Cancer Institute concluded:
Aside from the statistical significance end [apparent redness of these associations there tomaim the question of v&cihcr smoking is ecologically related to lung cjAccr,
ComidornHoDj .v? prcaontcd which lead lo the conclusion that the etiological significance of these associations remains uncstablished.1	j .
n April 1953, John R. Heller, director of the Naiilnal Cancer Institute, testified
committee of the House of Representative: that he did not believe & caiwitlvc been established/ sentiments shared by B. Cuyler Hammond of the American Society and recorded by a reporter for The New York Times:
There Have been & number of studies th&t link smoking with lung cancer deaths, he pointed out. To & statistician, Dr.
Hammond said, none arc conclusive, became thoy show only a correlation bctwsen smoking and ca tccr, So far, he reported, no statistician has been able to su ic whether tile -
ion Shrelq Lyle A. Baker, Oooreo P. Ballard, and Sidney Dolgoff, "Tobacco ; as an Etiological Factor in Disease. I. Cancer/' Oanoer Research (1950) 10:56. ”,
is A. Sadowsky, Alexander G. Gilliam, and Jeiorc e Cornfield, “The Statistical ion Between Smoking and Carcinoma of iho liune," Journal ofthcNational HSilutc(lS>53)13: 1255.
ncer Aide Testifies. Tie to Heavy Smoking is Hel J Not Definitely Established,’’ v York Tiith-_« /April 30, 1953) 34: 6.
•<J.
;d epidemiologists end statisticians* such as Jose ih Bcrkson of the Mayo Clinjc,	'
nous substantive methodological end Lntwpretiv e objections to those who that smoking caused lung cancer. In the late 1950s and early I960},’
Jlogists recognized and studied Berkson’s critLqi e and, in responding to Bttkson, ew criteria for establishing causation announced in the Surgcon-GcneraTs report, words, thU give-and-take was 4 conitnictive pro :ess with sound points made on
&	the 1950s, many epidemiologists believed that aboratoiy confirmation was a bolster statistical associations. For example, ir 1951, Evarts Graham, the Dllaborator in Wynder’s 1950 study, explained to ait audience At the New York y of Medicine:	•
The evidence, therefore, seems at least suggestive that'
excessive cigarette smoking carried out for a long period of time (twenty years or more) hai been & facta Id earning tho remarkable increased frequency In bioiichoganic carcinoma during the last thirty*fiveyears. The proofs lacking and will remain absent until‘it bcconues possible to produce cancer experimentally from some or all of he proddcts contained in cigarette smoko11
satisfying demonstration from the experimental la ?oraloty faced many obstacles lEincd largely unsolved at the point of issuing the 964 Suigeon-Gcncial's report.
Most experimental biologists approached the problem of smoking and cancer by [ various extracts of tobacco or tobacco smoke on {he skin of laboratory rodeuts.
at Wynder explained in 1952, there were meny differciicw between anbaal
and human disease. Scientists and mcdical practitioners recognized that a mete that painting smoke condensate on the backs of truce could produce skin warts tors did not establish causation, especially since attempts to produce lung tumors ation experiments h&4 been unsuccessful. For example, Wyndei cautioned
there aro other reasons why we must not be too hasty in drawing definitive conclusions in regard to lung cancer from animal experiments. In an experiment with tobacco
Beet of Smoking In Cancer Obscure,” The NcwYtldt Times (October 16,1953) *
s. Vandcnbrouckc, "Review® and Commentary; Tt osc Who Were Wrong," to JQumoIjjfEpidcmj'ologv (1989) 130; 3-5.
urtj Graham, “Primary Cancer of the Lung," gullet n ofthe New York AcndcmY icin£<l9Sl) 27:267-268-
*
mating animals smoke,”
For example, Wyuder acknowledged:
Animal data do not iiccesiarily confirm o deny human ‘ data, although historically much of our present understanding of carcinogenesis is based in corollary studies bctwoen clinical and laboratory research....
■	The most fur-reaching effect of this observation, perhaps, does not lie in its immediate relationship to human carcinogcncsis, but, rather, in that the proven susceptibility of animals furnishes ms with a working tool which may enable us to identify uld isolate tho caicin >genic agents) within the tort,34
f afterwards, scientists discovered the presence of carcinogens, such as 'rone, in tobacco smoke.
Pttthologitts, such as Oscar Aucrbach, also sough^to establish causation through S3 of autopsies. His closely followed work was difficult for some researchers to a find remained open to interpretation at (he writing of the Surgeon-General’s
in1964.	■
Whnt might seem obvious from thft vcjitage of the turn of the 21 * century in fact sioxa sorting out. I ■will describe the significance ascribed to these many studies rslclans and scientists as well as by scientific and public health organizations and otroversy about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer that continued at mil 1964. For example, in a 1962 article, Dr. Lewjj Robbins, the Chief of the r Control Program of the United States Public Health Service, summarized that the medical investigator, however, the evidence still does not add up to conclusive lhal cigarette smoke cmes lung cancer,’’u . • ‘
I will narrate the circumstances surrounding the creation of the Surgeon'Gcneral's ory Committee and the publication, of the first Surgepn-Geoeml's report in 1964, will discuss subsequent Surgeon-GeneroTs reports published almost every year 1964.
- -	- -	r '
roestL. Wyndcr, "Studies on .Lung Cancer In Relatim to Smoking " Archives of
MMttftand OccuoRliond Mtdicinc (1952^ 5:724-225.
ruestL. Wynder.EvditsA, Graham, AdeleB.Croainger, “Experimental ction of Carcinoma with Cigarette Tar," CanecrJfasi arch (1953): 855-64,
awjs c. Robbins, "Medical Practice and Cencflr," M nnesota Med Icing (1962) 131. £ '
-c 10 maxe judgments awut caujauon in chronic discaics, juch as lung cancer: (L The consistency of (he association
b.	He strength of the association '
c.	The spccifidty of The association
& The temporal relation of the a** ociatlon	'
e. The coherence of the of the association
[his new standard of causation, ih& Advisory Committee determined that flic . ec v/as sufficient to coocludc that *‘[c]igarettc smolcing is causally related to lung in man.” The stunt standard did not find a causative link between smoking and mcer in women or between smoking and coronary ^artery disease.
The public health community and federal, state, end local governments mounted whelming education!] campaign in response to the evidence linking smoking and : from the time that evidfcnee firs! emerged through the present day. Unparalleled >e and magnitude, the campaign warned the public t>f the risks of smoking and ted smoking prevention and cessation. For example, %vj thin months of issuing the the federal government appointed ihe National Interagency Council on Smoking :a3th, with Lewis Robbins as acting head. With ihejpmpose of coordinating the s public health response, the Interagency Council represented the U.S. Public Service (Surgeon-Gcneral's Office), the National institute! of Health {National
■	Institute), the American Cancer Society, the Children's Bureau, the American \3SOciafion, the National Tuberculosis Aasooi&tioniflalor the American Lung ation)j the American Dental Association, the American Phannaceutical ation, the American Public Health Association, ana many national teachers'
. In addition, in 29 states, state and local governments, state and local health nents, state and local public health associations, end state and local branches of il organizations (for example, the American Canccn Society and the American Association) joined this effort.’* Four public health;organisations (American Health Association, American Heart Association, American Cancer Society, and Tuberculosis Association) issued the Medical Bulletin on Tobacco, -which I the nation’s 244,000 physicians, or every physich a in the United States in activc
e.
In 1965, the federal government creatcd the National Clearinghouse on Smoking alth, an agency dedicated to keeping abreast of, evaluating, end disseminating the ning scientific, medical, and public health literature on smoking and health in £ ring series of Surgcon-Qenerel's Reports. For exan pie, the original n-Gcncral’sreport consulted 7000 publications. Fo: the first supplement io 1967, rerc 2.000 additional publications; by 1979 (the fifleinth anniversary) there were
merican Public Health Association, American Heart Association, American Canccr
f,	and the National Tuberculosis Association,, "Natie nil Interagency Council," ^-Bulletin on Tobacco (Winter, 1964-1965) 3: *1,2|
ng experts wound the country to insure that each S^rgeon-Ge&mTs Report ivcd a great degree of consensus.
Public health organizations and governments aleAed the public to iho dangers of dag and aided in smoking prevention and cessation. For example, as early w 1957, con General Leroy Bumey testified before Congresj that:	.
wo have informed the public through the i xccllent coverage	■
of the press, radio, end TV. We have lnfc med the ofSeial ' heilth agencics In tho States who exe responsible for this . area, and wb have informed the American Medical Association, recognizing that many peopL: vail go to their own physicians for Advice.
r
The activities of the American Cancer Society (A 2$) provide jujt one example of sope of the educational campaign. By 1966, the Ack had distributed over 2 million jhlets and produced fiv* educational films. During die late 1960s, the ACS sored 23 different public service messagej for television audiences. In 1972, the distributed an article from Reader's Digest to evejy Jsecond&ty school student in the n and conducted more than 140,000 antijiuoking educational program* in schools.
74, it printed an antisruoking message on 250,000 milk canons in New Jersey every.
In 1977, the ACS started the Great American Smoki-Out, which, in 1983, attracted j than 19 million smoker-jpaitlcipants. When the American Canccr Socicty tallied its t (for the Target 5 Campaign begun in 1975), the ACS believed it had brought Us moktog message to 50 million children, 20 million aJull*, and sponsored over 50 Quit Clinlos.11	|
i
Tbs American Ceocer Society also sponsored key 'research projects that limited the national end international scicntific discusjsions, for example, the . . imem” Hammond/Hom study in the 19505, tho first Ganccr Prevention Study in the
S	(CPS-l), and the accond Cancer Prevention Study in the 1970j.and 1980s
w-	I
The activities ofihe America] Heart Association (AHA) provide another >plo. In 195$ and in I960, the AHA issued statements on smoking and heart disease, statements recognized the findings of early epidemiological studies, but each luded diet these preliminuy data were insufficient to prove a causative relationship jasqe a public health recommendation, Keenly award of the significance of the :ct» the American Heart Association joined with otherjgroups to ask for the creation ’ s Surgeon-Oeneraj's advisory conwutt&e. ^fler the report w« issued, the AHA d in the National Interagency Council on Smoking and Health. Like the American « Society, the American Heart Association launched a major public education >aign- In thfe campaign, smoking cessation was a key but not the only, message
finnual Reoprts. American Cancer Society, 1953-199:
-B-
high blood pressure, obesity, $ats uj the diet end n the blood strwnj lack of o, stress, diabetes, and smoking. these many fac ors required balancing the public message. (Of note, analyzing multiple factors req ured tho development of Dal statistical tools.) Despite the complexity oftht problem, Tho American Heart ition wac ununbiguoua in its undsmoking message. By) 967, the AHA sponsored service messages for television and radia, educational films for school classrooms, nphlots for doctors’ offices and public health dimes. The AHA developed a iool program (‘Heart Treasure Chest”), a middle school and high school program a Sweet Heart'’), and a workplace education program ("Heart at Work"). The an Heart Association and the American Cancer Society were just two of many ly-funded groups which joined in the public healflj campaign
The federal government also participated in the educational campaign, It funded -ojects in communities, developed educational programs for school children at all required‘warnings on cigarette packages, regulated cigarette advertising, red public service messages, funded rcwarch, is*u^d comprehensive n'Gencral’s reports, raised excise taxes, limited smoking in federal buildings,
Americans about their knowledge of smoking risk^-to mention ordy o few C3.	j
All aspects of the public health initiative were closely followed and analyzed in dig.
Americans heard mid understood the enthmoking nessage. In 1989, the -fifth anniversary of the first Surgeon-General’a report, tho Surgeon-General itod the public health educational triumph: by 1975 90 percent of adults agreed jerctte smoking was harmful to health; by 1987, 89|percent of all adults agreed that ig caused lung cancer; by 1987,77 percent of adults agreed that smoking caused incer; by 1967,85 percent of adults agreed that smoking caused emphysema. As in OeneraJ C. Everett Koop concluded in the preface to his 1989 report, the noktng campaign has been a major public health success,'* Half of &U people who cr smoked had quit; smoking prevalence among men fell to 32 percent in 19B7
0	percent in 1965. To Koop, these accomplishment had “few parallel# in the ' of public health," In Koop's colorful phrase, “the ashtray is following tho spittoon ilivion.",? Educational sucoeises oontiniud; by 1P9), a Gallup Poll found that f Americans believed that cigarette smoking is baza dous to their health, that 94% erieans believed that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, and that f Americans believed that cigarene smoking is one of the causes of heart disease.	■
fltmfll.Spparfo The American Heart Attodation, 19 [8-1994,
cducinLthe Hcrich Consequences of Smokinr: 25 Years of Progress. A 'Report of rgcon-Qenqn^, (19B9) preface, chapter 4.
resiauw smpKers. m jact, i-utiiei Taiy, on the mil anniversary of the 1964 jn-Gencral’s report, expressed his dismay about Dw number of American smokers, iihe next few years, his successor, William Stewart, and other members cfthc health com mUflity took up the cKaJtenc^ of the residual cmokor. The public health je was dw: stop smoking Mid don't start. The jnJhHc health, challenge was: what the millions of Americans who heard but chose notto hoed this advice?
In 1966, the public health comm unity seized on uroralslug insights from research erirocntal biology which indicated that cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine were one to ceusc cancer. This research, grounded in studies performed by Ernest er and others from the 1950s, was earned out in animals witb skla-ptimuiis marts, and, as such, was subject to oil the limitatiops that plagued extrapolation to i lung canccr. Nevertheless, the results encouraged the public health community. :amplc, as early as 1957, Dr. Ernst Wynder recomihcndcd “mow effective on," predicting that ’'If the average smoker were exposed to only one half the it of tobacco tar to vriuch the smoker of rcgular-sized cigarette! is now exposed, his
■	risk would "be significantly reduced."1® The public health community wu cnt thata “fcss hazardous*’ cigerotta - fiiujred and lower In tar and nicotine yields -provide a cleat benefit to residual snftkers, ■
The public health community was aware that the benefits of smoking a low-yield ttes might be offset if tha smoker smoked more digarcttet e*ch day or srooked the lumber of cigarettes more intensely, for example, inhaling mote deeply or by ng the cigarette to a shorter butt length. This concdn abou t in dividual smoking in response to cigarette modification become known aa “compensation,” For >le, Eraen Wynder, in his first paper on the health b incfits of filtered cicaietics in stated:
It is feasible to produce filter tips that will illowthc	.
cigarette a satisfactory pressure drop and satisfactory flavor and, at the same time, remove about 40 percent of the tar of the cigarette smoke. Such a filter Incorporated into & regular-sized cigarette, which normally yields 30 mg of tar in its smoke, can reduce the tar ensure of an individual smoking tills cigarette to about IS mg. A r Eduction to such level, as both animal experiments and hum in statistical Studies show, will be followed by a signifit ant reduction in cancer risk, provided the number of cigaret os amokod is kept constant
roest L. Wynder, Patricia Kopf, and Helen Ziegler,1A Study of Tobacco ©genesis. II. DoscRespotise Studies." Cancprfl95^ 10-1199,
tha smoker is exposed,3*	J
i’s temnrks were rdOseted in several articles in tl s media, including a widely cited Roafo’s Digest"
The public health community was yeiy aware of he issue of compensation. For [9, when In JP67 the Federal Trade Commission announced its plan 10 measure-tar wiine yields in cigarettes, it explained thV: j	’ no two human smokers smoke in the same way. No
individual smoker always smokes in the same fashion, The
speed ttt which one smokes Varies both arrioug smokers,	.
and usually also variei with the sane indr 'idunt under
different circumstances oven within tbo sa no day. Some
take puffs (or draws); some take short puC ‘s. That variation
affects the tar and nicotine quantity generated.
Even with the sane type of cijarette: indli idual smokers
take a different number of puffs per cigare le dreading on	'
thcclrcumstwices, When concentrating, or talking, fhe
number of puffs is usually less. When listening or required
10 listen to another person talking,' the nurribcr of puffs per
cigarette, w well as the duration of each puff, usually
Incmjcs
The public health community never intended low-yield cigarettes to replace the ducntional message of“stop and don't start,” wid itjncYcr claimed tbai a low«yield to was "aafe;" Mther the public health community always used the terms “less ous” end occasionally "safer” One measure of this'public health thrust was ling tht Federal Trade Commission to reverse its ban on tar and nicotine content in te packaging and advertising in order to permit resi lual smokers 10 choose :entiy.
From the beginniag, the public health community 1 wlisod that the development of lazardous cigarette would requite the creative intera :tion among scientist* from Itgciplmcg, public health officials from within the government and from national uy groups, and from members of the cigarette induj uy. In addition, the enterprise
nestL. V/ynder and Jona Mann, “A Stndy of Tobac;o Carcinogenesis. HI, Filtered Wes,” Star (1957) 10: 3204.
jis Mattox Miller and James Monahan, "Wanted-An i Available-Filter-Tips That Filter.”Reader^ Digett (August 195?) 44.
denJ Trade Commission, News Release, nFTC to B jgin Cigarette Testing," I : 1967,2.
•
ic federal government was ultimately involved Cn cigarettc design . ions. For example, in a 196? Technical Rjcportltuhmittcd to Congress, the ate) Public Health Service concluded that ,4tbo nrepoqdarance of sciantiftc strongly suggests that the lower'the *tar* end nicotine content of cigarette c less harmful would be fee effect" Based on this conclusion, the Public Health ■ecomraendfedj to the Surgeon General that action be cneouragfid which will he progressive jcduction of lie W and nicotine content of cigarette KnoXc/’54
le Department of Health, Education, and Wclfalt?, the U.S. Public Health nd the National Clearinghouse on Smoking an^ Health responded with a entitled “If You Must Smoka: Five Way* to Reduce the Risks of Smoking," dsod smokers who refused to quit to "fcjhoose a cigarette with lesa tar and Thi» pamphlet - for distribution in doctors' ofljces and in public health clinics :usscd in an editorial in The Ncy York Times and in an article in the Rca^s
1968, the National Cwtccr Institute developed a Smoking and Health Program : the risks of disease in Smolctra." Its key policyiand integrative centerpiece was co Working Group (TWO). As early as 1966 and 1967,‘we can see the origins rG in Interviews with Kenneth Endicott, direoto^ of the National Cancer congressional testimony of Surgeon-General William Stewart, end In a i of an NCI-sponsored conference, “Toward t Less Harmful Cigarette," This
o	head the &sl epidemiological confirmation tljat smokers of low-ywld experienced lew Jung canccr.^ Membership ofjtbe TWG consisted of t members from industry, government, and private research groups. The f the TWG w«:
Identification of individuals at high risk to lcveloplng tobacco-related diseases;	.
Development and evaluation of pharmacoI< gic and behavioral intervention approaches toward juaotf eg cessation;
Development of o less hazardous cigarette.
ncli ofthsTWG's work was necessarily quite tec hnical in nature, for example, jr inhalation carcinogenesis (Sam P. Battista), ciEsa toxicity (Sam B. Battista),	‘ oasis (Fred G, Bock, Umberto Saffiotti, and Benjamin L. van Duurcn), al engineering, (T. C. Tw), tobacco chemlsny (N Ichftol R. Guerin),
c Health Service Technical Report on *,Tw,, and Nicotine (1P<?7),
J. Bross and TL Gibson, “Risks of Lung Canccr it Smokers who Switch to Filler I* American Journal of Public fodrh flOffl 58:1396.
_ n _
response (Paul Kotin), end policy (Marvin a, Schneiderian). ‘
Members of tin TWG sponsored and participated in many national and ifttioaal conferences: Saeond World Conference on Smoking and Health (1P71)
I World Conference on Smoking and Health (197J),I Conference on the Primary* ation of Cancer Assessment ofKisfcPactors and Future Directions (American bfoundation, 197$), and theBanbury Conference HA Safc Cigarette?" (1979). The r'3 efforts produced over 300 sricntifio publications, rcpoas, and workshopr, As a : of these efforts, many prominent members of the public health community mged mawfactUKK to develop cigarettes with reduced tar and nicotine yields end cd smokers who refused to quit to choose lower yield cigarettes. For example, an ial in Medical Bullatin on Tobaoep itateit	.
manuficrorflrj jean to be able to alter the amounts offer - ■ and nicotine In their products through choice of tobacco, treatment of the Iced) tad selection of filters. This being so we tmut turn to the ijuestioo of responsibility on the put of cigwcttc manufacturers. It scerai cogent to uk. dots i\ot the manufacturer novy shoulder a greater stare of responsibility that be did previously in producing cigarettes that can be lws hamfbl to smokos.**
7), the Sccond World Conference ott Smoking and Health recommended dux “the factvtrer should be encouraged to produce cigarettes with Increasingly lower ur and oeyieWi"
By the mid*] 970s, enough progress had been made for the Tobacco Workiog } to begin assessing what & less hazardous cigarettc would look like. This optimism ublished widely in the scientific and medical literature tnd was covered slasticaUy in the popular press. These scientific findings had policy ramifications, ic cunroi Surgeon-General (Julius Richmond) and Secretary of Health, Education,
Welfare (Joseph Cail&no) came (a believe that the success of the TWO “leu iou$M djjainte project would overwhelm the primary educational message of “stop otft xtjjt," In July J 977, Caiiftno disbanded tha TW<5 (tnd its governmental wtSWOTB assigned to other duties,	,
_ i Despite Secratuy Califano’s decision, the public health comraunity continued to «t less hfctwdous cigarettes. In 1976, the results of the American Canoer Society's -it Prevention Study (CPS-I) gave strong epidemiological support to the value of
i
A Relative Choice frditotialV1 Medical B^ogtLOq Tobacg; (Spring. 1967) 5: #1,
lean Ciucct Society tetffinned An "those who era nor ysi abl* to quit would be idvfcedto witch to brands with the low# possible ur end nicotine (IVN) it" Theic recommeaditlohj were bund on credible laboratory and niologicd evidcflce suggesting that lower yidd dgarettas had a reduced rick of
*• i
lnJunury, 197$, Califano announced -to wide ^qpvlar pitss coverage ~ a new f h«jth message which stressed only "stop and don’t start,’’ Eighteen months later,
LTgooQ'Oervetal announced a new study of the loiv-yicld cigarette, ia Ojjcticc
ring the conclusions of (he 19CT Teetaictf Report nijo preponderant of evidence The new oonduMoaa, publish*! as Tfa Health Con*.«uIcncq of SmoMng; Tha tine Ctwrclte. A Report of the Sprgeon*Qoignti flSgn-despitetha^M • Wratic leadership - largely reaffirmed (be earlier Technical Report:
in this 1981 Report; flic Public Health Service has review^
60	question again wd in far greater depth thin before.
Overall, our judgment is unchanged fiom thu of 1966 and 1979: smokers who arc vnwiUing or as yet unable to quii are well advised to switch to dgajettos yielding less *<tar" end nicotine, provided they do not increase their smoHnjj in other ways. (Preface)
sing leads uncovered during the TWG's productive yeajs shaped many of th? jpmcots in Icw-yield cigarette manufacture that continued for decades aflir the NCI wwdJitolved*5 .
I will also discuss the reception of “non-convantianaT cigarettes, such as Premier, tf and Accord, by governmental regulatory agcncies and by the publie health [Unity,
Federal, state, and local governments regulated cigarettes and smolang In ise 10 the evidenw wggwtwg a link between smoking end disease. For example, detal Trade Commission's (FTC) actively regulated cigarette advcntring. Since 4*1950*, ttoFTCisHtcd guidelinesprohibiting wy claims that lower yield ttos were healthier absent scientific ptoofj and, bchwjea, 1935-1957 and 1959*1966, 'C prohibited advertising tar and nicoiina yiolcb in cigarettes. In 1968, (he FTC iped a sandaidixed method for measuring the tar and nicotine yields in cigarette
, Cuyler Kwwnond, Lawrenco Garfinkel, Herbfttt SeLdmiu, and Edward A- Law, and Nicotine Content of Cigarette Smolee in Relation to Death Rates,” mmcntel Research f 1976112; 263.274.	J	■
meiican Cancer Socicty, “Cancer Fact j & Figures-jl989,“ (1989)21.
iotricb HoSnann and Ilsc Hoffimtnn, *Thc Changing Cigsrette, 1950*1995," llofToxicology end Environmental Health (1997) 5 ft 307.364.
Qjancnti The FTC’s re^Btoiy,position* werft diicusicd in tfacpopuJar I Ujo my opMojw upon my education, profMridual cxporftwo «id expertise ay
»fofthcpedhcitf pmnaiyaod jecoudMyllfaBture,^ other jtfoftiutioa * tably relied upon by jaanb<w of my profession. 3 may *lso fee wkoj to commeot oa the opinion* ofJilaintifS' witatsseiin this t**3 deposed on Juo628,1^6,i« AMaSMghLv. Uad tndmiri«
LBIm an action flwnpeoding in the Circuit Court for Baltimore City. I am amtcdst irate of S3S0 pcrbour. /\ t /j
muGL$cl
-•	Dr. PetsrC. EngUlffS	'
<3ffynl'rS.OD'O
« * '
*
i
*
t
■
■
• *
' i
■
■
t
i
i
!
" 1 -15* |
ess University Address (Pediatrics)	(History),
load Box 3675	328 Carr C 27707 Duke University Medical Center 919/684-8206 >42 Durham, NC 27710
4020 N. Roxboro Road Durham, NC 27704 919-620-5374 penglish@acpub.duke.edu
Academic Positions
1	Assistant Professor, Depaitmentof Pediatrics, Division of General
Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
Assistant Professor, Deparlmentof History, Duke University, Durham, NC.
)	Associate Professor, DepartmentofPediatrics, Division of General
Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
Associate Professor, Depaitmentof History (tenured), Duke University, Durham, NC.
Josiah Charles Trent Associate Professor of The History of Medici Professor of History Professor of Pediatrics
Josiah Charles Trent Professor of the History of Medicine
Associate Director for Academic Affairs, Centerforthe Studyof Medical Ethics and Humanities, Duke University School of Medicine
Administrative Positions
8	Pediatrician, Child Protection Team (Duke Suspected Child Abuse and
NecfedTeam, priorb 1983), Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
3	Pecfetridan, Duke FaJuf&to-ThriveTeam, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC.
ent	Attending Pediatrician, Newborn Nursery (Duke South Nursery, prior to
1988), Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
r	Unit Physician, Duke South Nursery, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC.
31,1993 Chief, Division of General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
; 31,1993 Director of Pediatric Clinics	,
/. ' Educational Background
t *
Graduated from public schools in Mountain Lakes, NJ.
AB Duke University, Durham, NC; Chemistry.
MD Duke University, Durham, NC.
PhD Duke University, Durham, NC; History.
>	First Year Residency (PL1)-Department of Pediatrics, New York Hospital-
Comeli Medical Center, New York, NY.
f	Second YearResidency (PL2) - Department of Pediatrics, New York
Hospital-Comeli Medical Center, New York, NY.
3	Third YearResidency (PL3) - Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC.
Memberships in Professional Associations and Offices Held
Association for the History of Medicine Program Committee, 1982,1985,1986 (Chairman).
Osier Medal Committee, 1983,1989 (Chairman),
Session Chairman, 1984,1987,1989,1990,1991 Local Arrangements Committee, 1985.
Garrison Lecture Committee 1995,1996 (Chairman)
le History of Medicine. Editorial Board, 1995-1999 sard of Pediatrics (certified, October 1981) na Medical License #22708 na Medical Society na Pediatric Society n of American Historians ]B Alpha
*
■ * *
Publications
ieorge'Washington Crite and Surged Shock: PhyaologyandSurgeryrAmef)ca198&-1918l
Shock. Physiological Sumeivand George Washington Crile: Medical Innovation in the ressive Era. (Greenwood Press,1980) (Pages xi/273)
theumafc Fever. A Biological. Epidemiological, and Medical Historvof Rheumatic Fever in icaand Britain from the 18*1 to the 20^ Century. (NewBrunswick. New Jersey: Rutgers irsity Press, 1999)
Did Paint: A Medical History of Childhood Lead Poisoning in the United States to 1980 (New swick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, forthcoming).
fhe Infant Who Faistoflwe Without an Oiganic Reason" Pediatric Annals.7:774-781,1978. and Katz, SL: "Disease," World Book Encyclopedia. 5:183-191,1980.
•	ruDiicauons ^oiuinuanon;
ind Grossman, H: ,RacfologyardtheHisti3iycfCt>klAlxrse,MBedg^a2J^£in^r 12(2): 870S74, ■ 3.	.
"Pediatrics and the Unwanted ChJdten h History: Founding Homes, Disease and the Origins Dster Care in New York 1860-1920." Pediatrics. 73:699-711,1984.
'Commentary on Stanley J. Reiser's Critical Care in an Historical Context1." Ethfcs and Critical idne. John C. Moskop and Loretta M. Kopelman, eds, Dordrecht. Netherlands: Reidel fishers, 1984, pp. 225-231.
}: Typhoid Mary." World Book Encyclopedia.
Diphtheria and Theories of Infectious Disease: Centennial Appreciation ofthe Critical Role of itheria to the History of Medicine," Pediatrics. 76:1-9,1985. /. '
HrtMhiafure MenandWomen: Abd^JaoobkVefcnofaNetfMedicalSpe^
,Chfcfren and Health Care: Moral and Sods! Issues. John C.Moskooand Loretta M.Kboelman. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1986, pp. 247-273.
'TherapeutKStr^iestoConnbatPneurnococcalDfeeasQiRepeatedFaiureofPhysidsnsto t Pneurrccaxal Vaccine, 1900-1945.” Perspectives in Bbiooyand Medicine. 30(2): 170*185,
7.
Taflure-foThrve." in Medians & Pediatrics. James D.Crapo. Michael A Hamiton, and Susan man, eds. Hanley & Belfus, Inc., Medical Publishers, 1988, pp. 598-599.
"The Emergence of Rheumatic Feverin the 19th Century" Mfoank Memorial Fund Quarteftv.
): 3349,1989.
aroaress
>. Resistance to Antibiotics: A History: (Book).
les Trent Memorial Foundation, “History of Psychiatry" (lecture series),
1es Trent Memorial Foundation, "History of Childbirth," 1987 (lecture series).
rtes Trent Memorial Foundation, "A History of Rheumatic Fever," 1988. (London re
/Vellcome Fund Travel Grant, "A History of Rheumatic Fever,111988. (London rese
losophical SoctetyTravdtoAntfwes Grant,"AHistoiyofRheumaticFevej,,11988 (London arch trip)
1R01-LM-04872-01), "A History of Rheumatic Fever," 1988-1989. (salary support
Wellcome Fund Faculty Development Award, 1996-2000. (Sabbatical support 199
5 Trent Msrnorial Foundation, History of Rhoumatic Fever 1997. (Sabbatical support1997-1998)
ries Trent Memorial Foundation, History of Antibiotics and Resistance, 1998.
rles Trent Memorial Foundation, Development of Medical Humanities, 1999.
Biddle Foundation, Development of Medical Humanities, 1999.
Biddle Foundation, Antibiotics and Resistance, 1999,
dcte Foundation, publication support. Old Paint AHistotvof Childhood Lead Poisoning in the .
?d States to 1980.2000.
Papers Presented at Professional Meetings
Id Welfare in North Carolina," presented to History of Medicine in North Carolina Conference jke University, 29 March 1980.
idical Biography," presented to American Association for the History of Medicine, I
nd the Unwanted Child in History," presented fbrthe Bradford Lectures in the History of atrics, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, 3-5 February 1982.
rses in the History of Medicine: Problems and Opportunities"Southern Association forHistoiy srraarciTeitirobgy/BsteMiMSdencaSo^
1983.
eumafcFever," presented at Johns Hopkins Institute forthe History of Medicine, 8 December S.
leumatic Fever," presented forthe Bradford Lectures in the History of Pediatrics, Children's ;y Hospital, Kansas City, MO, 25-27 January 1984.
Strategies in the 20th Century: Repeated Failure of PneumococcalVaccine to Win Physician ■oval,” presented at the Ambulatory Pediatric Association, 2 November 1984.
rCheadle and the Clinical Recognition of Rheumatic Fever,"presented to the Cardbthoradc Hospital for Sick Children, London, 10 June 1985.
}|^andWomen:Jusfet^fora NewMedfcatSpedallya Century Ago,"presented to the : Carolina School of Medicine, Greenville, NC, 12 September 1986.
ure Men and Women: Justification for a New Medical Specialty a Century presented to Lexington, Kentucky/University of Kentucky Department of atrics, August 1991.
jytefes Workii RheurnatcFe^"presentsd to Jchns Hopf^m Instiye for History of Mediane," *1991.	.
aticylates Work in Rheumatic Fever," presented to University of Kansas at Wichita;
idening Lecture, University of Kansas, September 21,1995. "Rheumatic Fever 1£
i Rheumatic Fever," University College, London/Feb 2,1998 Institute of the History of Medicine Fever
em oocieiv. ixew ror*: science msrory ruDiicaiions, iy/ / , Tor Annais ot acience.
>ne, Two Hundred Years of Infant Feeding in America. 1977, for Bulletin of History
snsteen and Sarah Wanoensteen.The Riseof Suroeiv. Minneapolis: Un weraiy of Mirmesda ;s, 1978, for ]sjs.
rfcero. HeaTna and Htetorv. Essa^forGeoroeRosen.^YotfcSdenceHisfewPub^^
J, for Annals of Science.
son, The Scientific Revolution in Victorian Medicine. New York: 1979, for Clio Med
i and John P. McGovern. Davison of Duke. His Reminiscences. Duke: 1980. for Journal ofthe trican Medical Association.
epherd, Lawson Tait: The Rebellious Surgeon (1845-18991 Kansas; 1980, for Cli<
•	^
I. Professbnaliana Modem Medicine: Paris Suroeons and Medical Science and Institutions in 18th Century. 1980, for Annals of Surgery.
fervey. Science at the Bedside. Clinical Research in American Medicine. 1905-1945. Johns kins: 1981. for The Journal of American History.
in. The Structure of American Medical Practice 1875-1941. Philadelphia: 1983. forthe Journal ie History of Medicine and Allied Sciences.
irnfriTheChibren's Hospital of Boston. Boston: 1983. forthe Joumalcf the Historvof Medicine Allied Sciences.
yd Fox, Dandv of Johns Hopkins. Baltimore: 1984, for the American Historical Re
a. The Development of American Phvsbloov: Scientific Method in the Nineteenth Century, imore: 1987. forthe American Historical Review.
ile. Mothers and Medicine: A Social Historvof Infant Feeding. 1890-1950. Madison: 1987, for etin of the History of Medicine.	.
sine.
issell, Rheumatic Fever & Streptococcal Infection, for Bulletin of the History of Me University Courses Taught i History (History 167) - with Ann Carmichael, MD PhD, Indiana University, sease and Public Health from Columbus to the 20th Century (History 195-196), edicine (History 195-196) smlnar in Medical History (History 351-352).
Jtorial in History of Medicine (History 371-372).
ling, and'History: A Survey of the History of Medicine (History 181-182 and 279-5 edical Specialties (CFM 227).
Demography, and Disease with a Focus on Indians in Central America. (History 3
eixelbrpediafofcresidents on BehsMoral and Da/eicpnentel Issues of'CWdren,1979-1984.
srature ISenbrsemharin Program in Science,Technology, and Human Values, 19B3-1984 07-108) and cone course, MasterofArts in Liberal Studies (Liberal Studies280)j-with Sarah ler English, PhD, Department of English, Meredith College, Raleigh, NC.
demies (Polio, Lung Cancer, Myocardial Infarction, AIDS) - a freshman seminar, (i
< Epidemics, FOCUS Program Health and Society. (History 105)
American Culture. (History 196) ■
Heine, and Disease in 20th-Century America (History 103)
t
0	Child Care Task Force.
1	Second Year Medical School Curriculum Committee, Duke University
Medical Center.
*	House Staff Advfeay Comnnitee, DepartmertofPediatii^ Duke University
Medical Center.
i	Steering Corrmfee,PiograminSc^^	and Human Values,
Duke University.
i	Provosfs Committee on History, Phlosophy, and Sociology of Science,
Medicine, and Technology, Duke University.
I	Planning Committee, Newborn Nursery, Duke North, Duke University
Medical Center. *
'	Executive Committeeof the History Department, Duke University (elected,
untenured member).
3	Executive Committee of the History Department, Duke University.
3	University Human Subjects Research Committee, Duke University
Cuniculum Committee, College of Arts & Sciences, Program 2, Duke University.
1	University Health Benefits Task Force, Duke University.
Ambulatory-Based Curriculum Task Foroe, School of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center.
3	Faculty Compensation Committee, Duke University.
1991-1992 Subcommittee, Medical Center Salary & Equity -Race & Gender
1991 -1993 Medical CenterCommittee, Ambulatory Care Building
1991 - 1993 Historv Department SDace Committee
eefing of Historians. Ubrarians, and Archivists in North Carolina interested ii Ksbiy ofMedb'ne, at Duke University, 18 January 1985 - ongoing at different North Carolina institutic
Community Activities
4	Durham Community Guidance Center for Children and Youth.
Board of Directors
Planning and Evaluation Subcommittee.
Building Subcommittee.
Vice-President and President-elect -1985 President-1986-1988
■	Coach, YMCA T-Ball (6-8 year olds).	^
Duke Chapel, member, Advisory Board 1994-1997	*
Personal Information
jrity Number 157-38-4983
th	12 April 1947
rth	Elizabeth, New Jersey
tus	Married to the former Sarah Elizabeth Warder
Norma Rose Professor of English, Meredith College
David Warder English
■	/a	'
'—^ y co | ci	•
KS/ 8? - ■
!	'-	d ..... ■ ■ ■
:v	If	■£ 1 \ ”■■ ; • . ■......
. "	i	c fO ■
‘ " -x	r	' ' e
- C	<L	= . . ....	•
■	■ • i	a:	« M y'
“ ■ S' a = e	■ ‘=
•	- v a ^	■ ‘	,
-	i' - O	’ .	.■ ■
i. h- ■ = 7=T	' ■	•
3 (t U tO	'■*	1
-> a ; ■	■ -
t t- U.	.	.
C *0 ■■*•	_____r	‘ ,
r* * -*C	' . . -
ccc c. <JT	i r-	* :
£“c" $ in	■	■ ■
■» v. c rr	■	'
'	* L 0; 1 ~L
" ^ C l: * ^ j
=* u _ c r ^ c c	•
c.l; e	.
- Z	IE
—	—i	"I-	■
Jj—s. £ It L It r~.
,(0^{ i : , :
'f	2	o	•
1	,	- .
■	:x ■	a	s -a,	•	.
■	r	a:	- *	.
i-	~	v
•	=	If	c	■
.1	*-!•->.. • ■
I t ^ :	t	;	*.
:	C ■ - tJ-	■ ■	’ < . ■	■	r
i. T- ~ f*	. ■	• •
.	i kh :t	, .
E C* C Z S	.	. «
ii. .
» ; ; l. l	- - ■
— -c -ini	. ■ .
ir. j: jl - a. - ■
•, = I ■ 5	■
i	r " *■ h	l/ -p
. > :■	5 t	EXHIBIT HtV_S
\ *- n c •• ■' i~ w	/1.
A h - ...
and Lung Cancer: Recent Evidence and a Discussion of Some Questions1 #
Jerohe Cornfield,5’ * Wiluau Haenszel,* E. ■
Cutler Hauiiom)/ Abiusah H. Lilienfeld,’
/	.	Michael B. Shijiein,1 and Ernst L. Winder *
I	i	•	*
-	1	r
I \	*
I	"	T
. .	■	Summary	. . ■
|	This report reviews tome of the more recent epidemiologic and experi-
1	menial findings on (He relationship of fobocco smoking to lung cancer,
ond discusses some criticisms directed against the conclusion that tobacco smoking, especially cigarette;, has a causal rote in the increase in broncho* . . genic carcinoma. The magnitude of the excess lung-cancer risk among cigarette smokers is so oreot that the twulu con not be interpreted os oriitnq from on Indirect association ot cigarette smoking with some other , . QgenLarchargcterishc, since this hypothetical agent would~h<W6 to be at least Ossirormlv cssoclnicd with lung cancer 01 eicorette us ej ri6tueh ogent has been tound or suggested. ihe contiiieniV of fllf the epl-cfemiologie and experimental evidence olso supports the conclusion of , .
o	causa! relationship with cigarette smoking, while there are serious inconsistencies in reconciling the evidence with other hypotheses which . have been advanced. Unquestionably there ere areas where more research is necessary, and, of eourse, no single cause occounts for oil lung cancer. The information already avnilnMg hftwow, » tuffMcnl for planning ond activating public health measures—J. Nat. C*n«r Inat.
22:171-203, 1959. " ”—	"
In 1057 a. Stud; Group {75)i appointed by the National Cancer Institute, the National Heart Institute, the American Cancer Society, and the American Heart Association, examined the scientific evidence on the effects of tobacco smoking on health and arrived at the following con- . elusion: ’	‘	, - ■	, ‘ .
"The sum total of scientific evidence establishes beyond reasonable	■
doubt that cigarette smoking is a causative factor in the rapidly increasing incidence of human epidermoid carcinoma of the lung.”
Concurrently, a report from the Medical Research Council (57) of Great Britain appeared which also drew the inference of a causal relation-
1 ZUolrtd far publication Octoter i;, ijssl
1 School cf Bjffeae *nd Fubllc Et*llh, Xotuu HopMsi tfotantty, Biltlmort, M<J.	■
■	DeputtuBL c( Blomtbtlct, t»Co tm,
1 Xiilou] CmttT InsiltuU. Public Bealtb Eerflce, V. £. ncpvturot of Huhh. Education. Aifcl WtUarc, fclbodi, }M.
1	Atotrtnn Cucer Sodttr, Iw, N'iw Ysrt. X. Y.
174 CORNFIELD el al.	> f '
:	."a-
*	* ■ * . «. •	* ■ ship between smoking and. lung cancer from the statistical, clinical, and	\wajjis
laboratory evidence available by midyear 1957.	‘v s^^polyi
The consideration of the accumulated scientific evidence has led to the	, ■'• .v/n
acceptance of & similar viewpoint by responsible public health, officials	’ft&ec
in Great Britain, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United States.' This	'■
concensus of scientific and public health opinion does not' mean that all	' , •'' V.^iidp
problems regarding smoking and lung cancer have now been solved or	' ^^Arn'p
that valid questions and reservations about some aspects of the subject	' i^^Bsp'e
do not remain, in excellent collection of primaiy references and opinions	' ■
expressing both "sides'' of the question was issued by a committee of the	*'v^vti^n!
House of Representatives ($) which sought to examine the claims of	' /.v^Eigc
filter-tip cigarette advertisements. '	I V‘vi-iv^^yp
The .general, acceptance of the cigarette-lung-cancer relationship has	J ,^.V*<3gai
not decreased research interest but has accelerated research in this and	j /
in such rdated fields as respiratory physiology and environmental carei-	J 1 'VY^dlrei
nogens, and on the effect of tobacco smoke in a wide range of physiological	' < ‘t: • £ ■ In&3
and pathological reactions. . « ■'	’ .^‘Vjresei
The result is that considerably more information has bfcea published	’ ia-’o
or has become available through other media. Included in the recent	' , - i,.fepV
scientific evidence are the following: , .	.
1)	Addi tional retrospective studies (68, $9,7S) on men with lung cancer	' • '.not' and on matched controls bare appeared, ill show an association be*	’ ' fiin'i tween cigarette smoking and epidermoid-undifferentiated lung cancer.	mad
2)	Additional retrospective studies on women (54, 75) also show the	• ■’ tob association. .	’
3)	The first results of a third large prospective study [20), which	> ._ m&j* included 200,000 United States veterans who were observed for 30 months, •	• sjpec duplicate closely the reported findings of the Hammond-Horn (88) and the	' ' Otb Doll-Hill (18) studies.	'
4)	Analyses by Kreybetg and others (IS, 4$) substantiate that, epid$m*	... ■' iologically, primary lung cancer must be divided into epidermoid-un-	. ; differentiated and adenocarcinoma. The latter is much less related to	^ smoking and, so far as is known at present, to other carcinogenic inhalants.	non . 5)' Additional findings have become available on the impingement of . tobacco-smoke particles in the bronchi of animals, ciliary paralysis,	_ . ^ and penetration of unidentified fluorescent materials into the bronchial	’ • . g^j cells (40,41,45).	' this
6} Additional data have been published (8, IS) on the more frequent	-. q
occurrence of hyperplastic and metaplastic changes in the lungs of smokers	. be ;
as compared with the lungs of nonsmokers. Hyperplastic and metaplastic ,	,* ^
changes hare been produced in bronchi of dogs ocposed to direct contact	^ ^
with tobacco "tare” (ff£) and in bronchi of mice exposed to tobacco	, ofk
smoked).	. ’••.‘■•.y,I
7)	Additional confirmations have been obtained on the induction of	*'■, \ cancer of the skin in mice painted irith tobacco-smoke condensates (7,83,	, _ £h'e es,61,€S). ^	is.;
8)	Proeress continues on the isolation and identification of chemical	i 'jf\.V. rlci
Ess	constituents in tobacco smoke, including compounds 01 me carcinogenic
3|P	poljcyclie type (53,61,77,84t SS),	.	.
3®	The growing and consistent body of evidence -has bad no noticeable
asj	effect upon the viewpoint of & small but important group of individuals 4
HI . who would deny a.causal role of cigarette smoking in cancer of tie lung.
W	Among these critics‘are little .{££) and Hartnett (89), spokesmen for the .
American tobacco industry. Berkson (8, 4) has been critical of many aspects of the statistical studies, and his reservations are, in part, also 'M	evident in papers by Neyman (60) and .Arlan (1). More general objpo-
■|J	tions by Fisher (£5, £6), Greene ($1), Hueper C#S), Macdonald (54).
}& . - Rigdon (64), and Rosenblatt (67) have been published.
TVe have reviewed the criticisms that have been made regarding the Jo	cigarette-luDg-cancer relationship in the light of new evidence. In this
review we have several objectives:.a) to point out recorded facts that ’ directly answer some of the criticisms; 6) to define more precisely some * inadequacies of information, with the hope that this will lead to furth^. id* ' research. The particular references we have used were selected because, •
-*|i	la our opinion the criticism was well stated; it is not, our intention to .
t]	reply to'any specific publication or to any specific critic. Our view is that
Jj	all valid questions should be answered. However, some questions may
fti	not be relevant, or there may be,no information presently available for
;i||	an answer. In (he latter ease, we believe that a distinction should be ■ ,
i£j	made between data that are unavailable and .data that have been found
to be contradictory.	, ’ .	, ’ '
J?or! convenience, we have divided the criticisms and answers into five _ .if	major! topics, as follows: (I) Mortality and population data; 03) Retro-.
speotive and prospective studies; (HI) Studies on pathogenesis; (IV)
'Jj	Other'laboratoiy investigatioiis; and (V) Interpretation.	■ , '.
.jjj ‘ ’ . ■ • ' •'
''J	I. Mortality and Population Data . .	•
^ •*'} * * • ., • -J	The rising death rate from lung cancer in all countries that have suffi-
J,‘|	ciently detailed, mortantv etatisnps » iWmost striding neonlasUc die- ■
nomenon of "this ceniuir. That this increase is a faot and not el spurious ,‘.jj	r&ult or statistical classification, is now coffiStOaly accepted. An entirely •
’ contrary view is held by only a few persons (64;, though there are dis-.
^	seating opinions (89, ^ regarding the extent and time relationship of.
this recorded increase;.-;':?	■ ‘
Jsi	Obviously, the case for .the. etiologic role of cigarette smoking would ■
:h53	be seriously;compromised..if' it ,could, be demonstrated that, the lung* , '
cancer rate over the-paatlbelf century had been stationary, particularly rjfl.	after 1920 when much-of the zise in cigarette consumption, instead of .
other forms of tobacco; occurred (6S).:	• '	‘ • *' .
Sp	In a recent review,1 Rigdon and Kirchoff (65) document that primary1
m	lung cancer was first '-recognized as ah entity during the early part of
'J:.	the 16th century, and that its occurrence has increased steadily since then,
!	as manifested by tie recorded relative frequency with which it WAS
v 51	recognized in the'clinic’ and at1 necropsy. This is undoubtedly correct'
■A I	’I
j- ; V»t 35, Ki. 1, J1UU7 1959 |. Vl	,
tj :	«MI2—5J-20 ■ ’
$	*	V •	. .
176	CORNTIEU) el al.	JSH
T	' ffiSBW
but does not constitute evidence agiinst & true berease in the incidence '^Sfl
of the disease during the whole, or a more recent part, of the last 100 yefljs.	■38
Haeper (4S), accepting a (rue increase m the incidence of lung cancer,	raj regards an berease dating back to 1000, or before the widespread use of cigarettes, as evidence against the cfgarette-lung-cancer relationship.
His contention would hare crucial import only if it were mabtabed that	|£g
• cigarette smoking is the sole cause of lung cancer! .	|j|j
The vital statistics and the necropsy data that support the presumption	*§
of a real berease in lung-cancer risk certainly apply to the yeara after	'-$t
lMOj/iSeeause of the uncertainties associated wTm changes in diagnostic *]	^
'ptccuracy, no firm conclusions can be reached on whether the raie of b- I	:’s| ,. t — I crease b lung-canoer mortality has, b truth, aooelerated since 1920^—
WiK '-------------^	ii
1 At Effect of Aging	'■$
*M'/ • , .	ij
Rosenblatt (67) has raised the question about the affect of the agbg	-ra
population on the lung-canoer rate. This particular point has been	’ -3
investigated by the use of Bge-adjusted rates. Dunn (8$) has noted that	•. J
*	only one sixth of the over-all mcrease in lung-canoer mortality among males b the United States (from 4 to 24 deaths per 100,000 males between
, 1930 and 1951) could be attributed to an agbg population. Similar	' ■J ; findings (16) Have been presented for England and Wales where observe- . ■ -;'j
< tions on lung-cancer mortality date back to 1000; the 1953 mortality	: | t rate for both saxes, 34 per 100,000 population, was 43 times the oorre*
j , spondbg 1900 rate, 0.8 per 100,000 population. Allowance for increased .	,
i- average age of the population could account for only half this rise b	, 'j 1 • lung-cancer mortality, with a 24-fold difference between 1900 and 1953.
i Also, an aging population does not affect the age-specific death rates	' *i
. and cannot account for the phenomenon of boreasbgly higher lung-	^
: cancer mortality at all ages throughout the lifespan, which has occurred	"
' among successively younger groups of males bom to the United States and	' j, England and Wales sboe 1850. A similar but less pronounced "cohort
j; displacement’1 has been shown for females.' _	i
•	' ’ ■ ‘	it
jl . ■ • Diagnostic Factors	-4 j| • • •*. 1 ■ • : j; , little [68) and others, {64) have raised the important question on
|| whether better diagnostic measures and more complete reporting have	.
], 1 resulted b a spurious berease b the reoorded attack rate. Several special	J-
j; features of. the berease in lung-cancer mortality would be difficult to	•
■■ account for on diagnostic grounds. These include the contbuous rising	f
;■ ratio of male to female deaths, the bereasbg lung-cancer mortality rate	k
•	' among successively younger cohorts, and the magnitude of the current,	« . continuing, berease b lung-cancer mortality (IS). By 1955, among	■' Si- . ’ white males, 50 to 64 yean pf age, b the United States, more deaths were	. •
attributed to lung cancer than to all other respiratory diseases combbed.	^
Gilliam (£9) has made a careful study of the potential affect of improved	(
■! diagnosis on the course of the lung-cancer death rate. Even, assuming	(
*	t	* 1
Jiantl *< KfttfiaaJ Gmw £*jdta**
.	1
I®!	that 2 percent of the deaths .certified in past yeaia as tuberculosis or other
respiratory disease were really due to lung cancer, he concluded that’
" . . , ell of the increase in mortality attributed to cancer of the lung ®	sbce 1914 in United States white males end females cannot be accounted
for by erroneous death certification to other respiratory diseases without unreasonable assumptions of age and ecx. differences in diagnostic error.”
Sjg	Qis computations reduced the respective 26-fold and sevenfold increase-
in lung-cancer mortality among males and females, between 1914 and 1950, to the more modestly estimated/dimensions of fourfold and 30 ' percent, respectively. These estimates are-certainly the lower bound on W	the magnitude of the true rate of increase during this period,
f$| "	The Copenhagen Tuberculosis Station data, examined by Clemmesen
_ d al. [14), provide the greatest measure of control on the diagnostic im-Ms <• provement factor. In a tuberculosis referral service, used extensively ^
local physicians, where diagnostic- standards and procedures including -fs|	systematic bronchoscopy remained virtually unchanged between 1941 and
1950, the lung-cancer prevalence rate among mal.e -6xaijunees increased at 3f| '	a rate comparable to that recorded by tho .Danish cancer registry for the
total male population. This can be regarded as evidence that, the re- , ported increase in Banish incidence is not due to diagnostic changes. *
•■w!	..	' Necropsy Data . ' . »	• ' .
i	' '	.t. ■ . ■ '	. _	. . i,
■y£	Most necropsy data agree with mortality data on the increase in lung-
cancer risk. To establish this point'we rtf erred to a necropsy Beiies sum-y||	marked by Steiner (7$), and returned, to£be original sources for evidence
on the nature of changes over, time. Sinca an feasting compilation wag ' chosen, the results do not represent a .culling of autopsy series for data favorable to this thesis. ■ Tha findings from 13 series are summarized in'
'/•fi , ’ - texW&gure 1 as the proportion'of lung cancers in relation to all necropsies.
'0t	The relative frequency in terms of total turners or.total carcinomas
yielded results which wo.uld lead to substantially .the came inferences. .
.0	Mortality and necropsy data have their' own virtues and weaknesses.
V|'	Death certificates provide a complete report of deaths, but.do not,an- • .
0A	phesize a high quality of diagnostic ev&enc?, .while the reverse holds, true ..
for necropsies. However, since both, approaches leftd to the same infer- . , encea, neither great variation in the quhlity of diagnostic evidence nor the ’. unrepresentative nature of some ofvihenecropsy observations can "be . . jj;?j'	viewed as plausible interpretations of the results. .The alternative con-
elusion of a real increase in lung-caiicer remains. •	■
£&$	.	* • i '•«’■** i—■ /i;«) I ‘ '	* « **
fy?	' * " '	r	• , * .
g| ►	.	Urban-Rural Deferences■
Emphasis has been placed on the alleged incompatibility of the excess Jjs	lung-cancer mortality, among urban residents, with the cigarette-smolaiig
hypothesis (43,44, 64),' Mortality data from several countries indicate strongly that lung-cancer rates are much higher in cities than in rural Q \ f	areas, and the observation that urban males in general have higher lung-
■	■ ’	’	'1HI
' 178	coRNfi&XiP f( #t.' ■ • .
■	§!—,—_—,—_ . ;:1
Et	■	Wsa
-	°	jffiSsS
°S 4 -	•	.0	- ■ ':m§F
1	h ■ 'II
/ Jl/f : ■' '.’ll
■	i‘'	m
. ■ * .§ 1 " . ""v, .	~	^^111
■ • w o	?^zs j ,.•■•:-1__i_■ ,£§f|
' 0. T900	1910	1920 . I9S0	1940	.
\ ■	. YEAR • .	* *:$(#•
f \ * Teit-i-iouhe 1.—Etlative frequency of mdnomaj of the lusg found tt ueeropsy it ■' ' 13 eeriea, Complete reference* to xuteritl shorn are listed In Steiner (7£):
‘	(a) Frissdl, (b) Gibson, (c) Hedpert, (d) Jeuthtr, (e) Johnson, (0 Mat*, (g) Menne, ■ r||g£
(h) Ntgajo, (I) Perrone, (k) Saxton, 0) Steiner (1844), (m) Steiner (1950). • .
cancer mortality than rural males is undoubtedly correct. The assertion. •sjai . of Macdonald ($4) that". f . country people smoke as much, if not more, _ than do city people .. is'not borne out by the facts (55). Nevertheless, the evidence indicates that adjustment for smoking history could J3III account for only a fraction of this urban-rural difference (65). •	'
However,'this does not establish the converse proposition that control of residence history in the analysis of collected data would account for , the excess lung-cancer risk among cigarette smokers. Evidence now in hand weighs strongly against ,this last assertion, Stocks and Campbell (74), in their report on lung-cancer mortality among persons in Liverpool, -the suburban environs, and rural towns in North Wales, showed that -;$w heavy smokers have higher lung-cancer rates when urban and rural males '-.HI
■	were studied separately. Mills and Porter {68) reported similar findings
in Ohio, These results agree with the experience of the Hammond-Horn ;Vf«;
'' {SS) Btudy, which revealed markedly higher death rates for bronchogenic _ ^|||
_ carcinoma among smokers regardless of whether they lived in cities or in , rural areas. No contradictory observations are known to us. ' '
.	‘ ...	• ■ Sex Differences	. \*p||
•	The sex disparity in lmig-cancer mortality has also been cited (£5, Si) *?Js|
. as grounds for discarding the cigarette-smoking hypothesis. In this con- ■
’ nection it should be noted that persons advocating this line of argument ' &|l|, have minimized sex differences in smoking habits to a degree not supported ''
•	by available facts,, A survey of smoking habits in a cross section of the United States population {SS) demonstrated that men, on the average, ' have been smoking for longer periods than women. The sex differences in tobacco use were especially pronounced at ages over 55, when most lung- ,
cancer deaths flw.iir1 fl ft nBTw.nt ftf TTniU^ Rlatee	in this spa 'sk'SsHr
group bare been reported as current users of more than 1 paok of cigarettes '	daily compared to 6.9 percent of United States males. British data (7$) ,
glso revealed much lower tobacco consumption among females, particularly - . for the years before World War II. ■	• ‘ . .
The present data contrasting the experience by sex would appear to , support the cigarette-smoking hypothesis rather than discredit it. • When . differences in smoking habits are considered, it is possible to reduce the observed fivefold excess lung-cancer mortality among males to the 40 percent excess mortality which preveils for many other causes of death (33). One intriguing finding from these studies is that the estimated death rates for female nonsmokers agree closely with tbe death'rates de-' rived from retrospective studies on male nonsmokers (84).
'	.	. Evidence for Other Eticlogic Factors	’ "
' . . ’ . . . \	.. ’ V
Etiologic factors of industrial origin, such as exposure to chromaibes % -
and coal gas, are well established {iff). Excess lung-cancer risks among 1 such groups as asbestos workers who develop asbestosis, appear likely (IS).	'
One epidemiologi&study (11) of British, World War I, veterans exposed to mustard gas and/or with a wartime history of influenza revealed virtually no excess lung-cancer-risk among these groups.	.
The existence of other important lung-cancer effects associated with such characteristics as socioeconomic class cannot be Questioi^ed. Oohart • (IS) found that the poorest economic class had a 40 percent higher lung-cancer incidence than the remaining population of New Haven, .Connect!-,■ cut. Results from the 10-city morbidity survey (SI) have revealed a shaip gradient in lung-cancer incidence, by income class’, for white males, which is consistent with Oohart’s findings. Since cigarette smoldng is' not inversely related to socioeconomic status, we can agree with Oohart ”. .. that important environmental factors other than cigarette emoHng exist that contribute to the causation of lung'cancer/' These ottier*' findings are convincing evidence for multiple causes of lung cancer. It is obviously untenable to regard smoking of tobacco as the sole cause of lung cancer. “■ ■ • ■ • ,	\ • ,
' Two points should be made: The population exposed to .established industrial carcinogens is email, and these agents cannot account for the -increasing lung-canoer risk in the remainder of the*population.-^Also/the1 . effects associated with socioeconomic class aad related characteristics are smaller than those noted for. smoking history,'"’and ■ the'-smoMiig-class ' ■ differences cannot be accounted for in terms of these other effects. ' ; .
•	' 1 ■ :.:r.V ^ :r.	..!■	s’ ! . '■
Specwlrepuwtwn Groups ^,... / • t;, .
Haag and Hanmer (SB) reported'that employees in '9 processing plants , of the American Tobacco Company, with an above-average proportion of smokers, had a lower mortality than the general population of 'Virginia and North Carolina for-all ’causes and 'for‘ckhcerWd ’cB^iovascular'' ‘ diseases, but no higher mortality for respiratory cancer arid iporonary disease. They concluded: "The existence of such a population makes	.
*• ' • •
80	CORNFIELD it at.	* •'
•	’	• " .	s'
t evident that cigarette emolring per es is not necessarily or invariably	h
ssociated 'with a higher risk of lung cancer or cardiovascular diseases or	and
nth diminished longevity." . t	cons
The group studied by Haag and Hauxner waa too smell to yield aigoifi-'	and
ant results on respiratory cancer. .Moreover, a major flaw in tbe	Ine
luaion has been pointed out by Casa (/{I}. It is well known that mortality *	thal
omparisons cannot be dram directly between employee groups and the .	4)1s
eneral population, since the death rates for many groups of employed *}Wp(w	cun
tersons are lower than death rates for the general population with age,	higl
ex, and'race taken into, consideration. This is true beeaoee jtbere is a	&
trong tendency to exdtfde from employment those persons who have	me*
cute or chronic diseases or who are seriously disabled from, any caused ’vwSs.	^ 1
.nd those employees who develop permanent disabilities from disease or't$|||j| *'	P”
ither causes are usually discharged, retired, or dropped from tbe list of '	©I* egular employees. Seasons of this nature undoubtedly account for the
Lefidt in deaths from all causes noted in the gro^p of employees under,	1
onsideratioii. ' , * ’ ' ■ «'' v\':4i|raf	per A'different picture is provided by the Society of Actuaries (71) who '
aad^ s. study for 1945 through, 1954. The death da-fas for employees of *	clU( he tobacco industry .were reported to be sUgMly higher than, and ih£^Jwj|j • ^
lennanent disability cUims were reported to be over three times sa high	hal a; those for employees in nonrated industries as a whole.* This latter omparison indicates that the basic assumption of the Haag and Hanmer '
tudy is incorrect! Also, interpretation of group comparisons in. tbis	]
[eld should account separately for the experience of smokers and aoiir^i^Sj*	&t
mofcers. We hope that Haag and Hanmer will aupplement the report fo	s. s
tronde data for emokera and nonsmokers in the study population. ^ ^ ■. »	P*
*	* »» ' w ."“.(Swi	SIC
‘ ^	Retrospective and Prospective Studies	■■■
' * * * ' "	I.
The association between smoking and lung cancer has now been invest!-.3jjs|gf	tb
;ated and reported by at least 21 independent groups of investigators in	Pr
.-different countries, who employed what is known as the retrospective	r« aethod .(16, $4, 68, 69, 73, 76), In these studies, patients with lung’ .‘^^p
ancer;.or their relatives, were‘questioned about their emoMng histoiy	to
ad other past events, and the answers compared with those of individualsA$j|||a 1 *,	m nthout'Iung cancer who were selected as controls. Although these 21- .
tudies have certain features in common, they varied greatly in the	“
aethoda' of selecting the groups/ the methods of interview, and other, ^Ssj||	^
mporta&taspecta. ... ■ ‘	w
The association between smoMng and lung cancer was further investi- ’?pi|	v
;ated in two'countries by three independent groups (18, £0, 88), using ; '	®'
he prospective method. In these studies, large groups were questioned	® amokuig habits and other characteristics, and the groups Were observed •*
or several years for data on mortality and causes of death. The three. J|||	c
trospactive studies also varied in several important details including the !.';$S6®	1
ypa of subjects, the selection of subjects, and tbe method of obtaining '	?
j§ I ]	■	BMOSIKO AND^LUNG CANCER	18}
' ju caci! of these studies, an association mis found between smoking '
lilt	wad lung cancer. la every investigation whew the type of smoking was
I!!!	considered, a higher degree of association was found between lung cancer
gtp	and. cigarette smoking thanhetween lung cancer and pipe or cagarMnokmg.
Xn every instance where amount of smoking was considered, it was found
that the degree of association with lung cancer increased as the amount '
||§f	of smoking increased. When ex-cigarette smokers were compared with
J|f	CUIteEfc cigarette smokers, it was found that lung-cancer death rates were
SEk	higher among current cigarette smokers than among ex-elgtrette smokan: *
’	A number of investigators (3,86,64) criticized the retrospective ■
method but,, for the most part, the specific points of criticism apply only
&§&	to some of the studies and not to others. Some features of the three ■ i
~ prospective studies on smoking also have been criticized. Again, certaja
of the points of criticisia apply to one or another of tho three prospective
'	studies hut not to all three, Specifically, doubts raised as to the validity
of the early findings of the prospective studies have been eliminated by the . ■
persistence of the findings in the later phases of the same studies. , v ■
Avj	'J’he validity of the findings on these extensive investigations has been _
questioned in regard-to two major aspects: 1) the methods of selection of .
;j%|	the study groups, and 2) the accuracy of information regarding smoking
habits and the diagnosis of lung can«*. . . :	* , • .
iiji	I	* ■ ■ ‘	‘
f	Selection <jf Study Groups, ... \ , . ’
!§||	Neyman (SO) pointed out that a study based on a surrey of a population
rat some given instant of time may yield misleading'results/ Suppose that a study is m&de on a day when all patients with lung cancer and a group of JTj®	people without lung cancer are questioned about their smoking habits. • If
smokers with lung cancer live longer than nonsmokers 'with lung cancer, ■ ■lie!	there would be a higher proportion of smokere in the Iung-fancer group
■'v.':	than in the control group—this would follow without questioning the
proposition on which the model is based. HoweVer, only two of the retrospective'studied were. conducted in a approjamating an,
.3q	“instantaneous survey” procedure, so that this criticiBBi^does hot apply
►I®;	to most of the studies. Furthermore, this difficjul^y is wmpletely avoided
jWi	in prospective studies. ■ . ( ■ ‘	■ 1. .' ’.'. J- .
Berkson (8) indicated that people with two specific compl^ints are more S®	likely to be hospitalized than people with'only one of these wmplaktts.
If a retrospective study were conducted exclusively|on Hospital patients' . an association would befound between these tW.'specifio complaints,
even if there were no association between the s^e two ii&inpl^ts in the
^|§j ■	general population. ' This would influence theresulteif smokera with lung
cancer are more likely tobe hospitalized than nonsmokeis with lung cancer. However, Berkson showed, that this difficulty is trivial if a high percentage of people with’ either one of these two conditi6ns'is hospitalized, whichis the situation with lung-cancer patients, furthermore, one retrospective -jSi	study {74) included all lung-c&Dcer patients who were in the study area,
Mr	including: those not hosDitalized: another retrospective study (8£) was
' based on individuals who died of lung cancer and other diseases regardless. vjfag| of 'whether th&y had been hospitalized or not. This difficulty does not A'jjMk arise in prospective studies.	‘	•.; v$||f
la all but one of the 81 retrospective studies, the procedure was to, 'j'Wg, compare the smoking habits of lung-cancer patients with the smoking 'V'-pif habits of a control group who did not hare lung cancer. Hammond (Sfi),
' Berkson (3), and others have pointed out the grave danger of bias if the v % control group is not selected in Buch & way as to represent (in respect to ’'' smoking habits) the general population which includes the lung-cancer '.patients. Subsequent events have proved that this criticism is well .. . founded, though the -direction of the bias in most studies turned out to 'tfK _ yield an underestimate of the degree of association between cigarette	'
‘ y smoking and lung cancer: The reason was that in most of the retro-epedtive studies the control group consisted of patients with diseases _
1 other than lung cancer. The choice of such a-control group is tantamount - to assuming that there is no association between smoking and diseases which resulted in hospitalization of the control subjects. This was an
-	incorrect assumption since other studies have indicated an association , between smoking and & number of diseases, such as coronary artery	’
■	disease, thromboangiitis obliterans, and cancer of the buccal cavity.
Doll and Hill (17), recognizing the possibihty of bias in a control group . 1 $
' selected'from hospital patients, obtained an additional control group , by ssceiftautirig the smoking habits of the general population in a random . i.fy ' sample jof the area in which their hospital was located. The largest '
' percentage of smokers particularly heavy smokers) was found in the ; .:$■ luE^g-cancer group, the smallest percentage of smokers was found in the .
_ general population sample, and an intermediate percentage of smokers was j:f-' foundin the'hospital-control group. Similar results have been reported .-y'::
. • in a recent study of women (5^).	,	, '
. Berkson (5) pointed out that the criticisms in regard to selection bias in Vi-*
. - the retrospective studies are also applicable >to the earlier findings in & ' :;P '' ‘ prospective study. Suppose that, in selectmg subjects for a prospective- .'Aij ' ^study, sick smokers are overrepresented in relation to well smokers and/or ,. ’ nonsmokers axe overrepresented in relation to sick nonsmokers. In . T^,;’
.J' \ ■ .^this event, during the earlier period after selection, the death rate of the ■
■	kmokes.m the study,would be higher than the death rate of the non- •
\ .' ■' ,'smokers in the study, even if death rates were unrelated to smoking habits ■' -rf. of the'general population, if smoking is unrelated to death from lung . -v;
*	’ . cancer !(or other causes), the death rate of the smokers would tend to • 1 \)
'. equalize with that of the nonsmokers as the study progressed. Thus, the ■
' bias, would diminish with time, ejid a relationship due to such bias would
disappear; This general principle is well known to actuaries and is one of . / -v;-| v . * the cornerstones of the life insurance business.	■ v
1 " . ‘Hammond and Hoii (38), recognizing'this possible difficulty, excluded .
' . from the study all persons who were obviously ill at the time of selection. i;i .	As expected, the total death rate of the study population was low and .
veiy few deaths from lung cancer occurred during the first S months after 1 ,
i ' * - » 1 ....
I	A C0F*
a	SMOKING AND IrUNO CANCER	'	183	1
S	selection. The total.death rate, and particularly the death rate from • ~
|	lung cancer, rose considerably in the subsequent 3 years. What is more
|	important, the observed association between cigarette smoldng and lung
I	cancer was considerably higher in the latter part than in the early part
I	of the study, and the association between cigarette smoking and total
j	death rates was also somewhat greater in the latter part of the study.
I	This showed that the original bias in the selection of the subjects waa
j - slight and. that it yielded an underestimate of the degree of association I	between smoking and death rates.
|	This particular problem was not encountered in the prospective studies
I	of Doll and Hill (IS) who could observe the death rates of all physicians
in Great Britain (aomesponders as well as responders to the nmMrfng .
' questionnaire). The prospective Btudy of Dora (£0) also had a defined V population of veterans holding insurance policies, and nonrespondeis *r .
[ were observed as well as responders. Moreover, these two studies also ' showed that higher mortality from lung cancer among smokers was more evident during the later period than in the earlier period of observation.
Thus, ia the course of time, there was no disappearance of any selection
bias factor? that may have bean introduced into the original study groups, • • •
The subjects f?r the Hammond and Horn prospective study (SS) were selected by volunteer workers with specific instructions on how it should * be done, i Mainland and Herrera (55) have suggested that the volunteer ‘ workers may have introduced a bias in the way they selected the subjects. ■
The foregoing evidence of persistence and accentuation of the differences between smokers and nonsmokers, in time, effectively counters purposeful,. . -as well as unknown, sources of such selection. . 1	. ■ •	•
,	Accuracy of Information . .	.	' ,
. B^kson (3,4) has remarked that the two major variables considered m aU.these studies—the ascertainment of smoking habits and the diagnosis of disease—are both subject to considerable*.error. The accuracy of ’ diagnosis Is not & major problem in retrospective studies because the- . , investigator can restrict his study to those patients whose dfagnnaiq of	'
Jung cancer has been thoroughly confirmed. This feature has been ' taken into consideration in several retrospective stodie?.';-It is inore'of a ' problem m prospective studies since all deaths that occur must be included,’. f	’
and certainly some of the diagnoses will be uncertain. However, in' all ' three prospective studies, the totol death rate was found to be higher in	.
cigarette smokers than in nonsmokers and found to increase with tho , '
-	amount of cigarette smoking. If some of the excess deaths associated with cigarette smoking and ascribed to lung cancer were actually due to some other disease, then it means that: o) the association between cigarette , smoking and lung cancer yras somewhat overestimated, but 6) the associa-ion between smoking and some other disease was somewhat under-' • estimated. The reverse would be true if some of the excess deaths associated with cigarette smoking and ascribed to diseases other than uug cancer were actually due to Iune cancer. Hammond and Horn tttfl	1
154	coBNm&Dti «L
.	,	•	/$|KS
found that the association tfith cigarette smoking was greater for patients ■with a well-established diagnosis of lung cancer than for patients with
less convincing evidence for & diagnosis of lung cancer. This suggests ^§11	***
that inaccuracies in diagnosis resulted somewhat in an underestimate of	jjjj the degree of association between smoking and lung cancer. .1 , • >
The study on physicians, by Doll and Hill (/£), in'which presumably	«
the clinical and pathologic evidence of the cause of death would be	^ somewhat more than in the general population considered by Hammond ;gf§j| . and Horn and by Dom, yields almost identical risks to lung cancer by ;M§ ’ ^ smoking .class. '. _j
' In reganl to information about smoking, Finkner et al. ($$) have made i.^S?	„v
a thorough study of the accuracy of replies to questionnaires on smoking /s|||	u
habits. Their results indicate that replies are not completely accurate T	it
but that moat of the errors are relatively minor—very few heavy smokers . !	tli
are classified as light smokers. Random and independent errors simply v.-Wgj	ra
tend to diminish the apparent degree of association between two variables. ; juras	it!
A national eurvey.of smoking habits in the United States (<Sfi) yielded	^ results on tobacco consumption that were consistent with figures on -')||| tobacco production and taxation.' * • ‘‘
On two occasions several years apart, Hammond and Horn (S8) and ‘ ,^|p	bi Dom (£0) questioned a proportion of their subjects. The results indicated ' w
dose reproducibility in the answers. " ■ •:	ci
Hammond {S£)’and othere (Rf.) have questioned the reliability of the .-J	w
retrospective method on the’grounds that the illness may bias the responses	q
given by the patient or his family when they are questioned about smoMng	a habits, and that knowledge of the diagnosis mBy bias the interviewer.
This possible difficulty was minimized in several of the 21 retrospective ' studies on smoking in relation to lungcanoer. For example, in the study,
conducted by Levin (4$), al patients'admitted to & hospital during the	p course of several years were questioned about their smoking habits lefort .
a diagnosis was made. Only a small proportion later tuned out to have • • Xj33|b	c.
lung cancer, though many-had lung disease symptoms or lung diseasw - i^^p	0
other than lung cancer....Doll.and BUI .(IB) also showed that patients	h
■	whose diagnosis of lung cancer was,subsequently established to be erK>	c
neons had smoking histories, characteristic of the control rather than of the' ^5jjWj|| ,	j
lung-cancer group. p Furthermore, a larger percentage of cigarette smokers y; .	8
'have been found among patients .with epidermoid carcinoma of the lungs	i1
than among patients with adenocarcinoma of the lungs (A#, 45179). This .J|||	, could hardly have resulted from bias either on the part of the patient or ■
on the part of-the interviewer..v .. ;	(
; . •' •. ■ : Multiple Variables	. ' '	i
Artdn (/), Little (62), Macdonald (fif), and others have criticized the ‘	’
studies of cigarett^Iiing-«mcer': relationship on the grounds that only suoldng habits were really investigated, and that numerous other possible ,.>^S	,
variables were riofcbnsideredj • .	'
This criticism mays'eem especially appropriate in view of the accepted ., ■
'JJJ.'.i* i.L* ■>. « . 1	......t # _____ • »	XmM r
I	AND L1JK0 CJLNOEE	185 .
disease. The criticism may also be valid in relation to any one of theretro-spective and prospective studies. However, is the aggregate, quite & number of other variables have been specifically investigated or can be inferenti&Uy derived. Of course, all studies considered the basic factors of . age and sex; some dealt frith geographic distribution (74), occupation (8), urban or rural residence (74), marital and parous status (&{), and some other habits such os coffee consumption (£f). ‘
The Doll and Hill (/£) prospective study was confined to a single pro* fessional group, physicians. Thus then could be no great variation attributable to occupation or socioeconomic status. Stocks and Campbell (74) put particular emphasis on the study of air pollution and occupational exposure and included a number of other factors in addition to smokingv '
It is evident, in the Hammond-Horn (SS) study and other investigation .
' that there is a consistent relationship between urban residence and a higher mortality due to lung cancer. The important fact is that in all studies, when other variables are held constant, cigarette smoking retains its high association with lung cancer.
The only factors that may show a higher correlation with lung cancer than heavy cigarette-smoldng are such occupations as those of the Sohnee-
-	berg miners and manufacturer of chromate (16), We are not acquainted ' ’ with actual studies of.these and related occupation groups in which . cigarette and other tobacco consumption is also considered. Such studies, we suggest, would be useful additions to our knowledge of other etiologio agents and of the interplay between multiple causes in human pulmonary cancer. '	, '	'	■ '	' '
HI. Studies on Pathogenesis	' ,. '
, Inhalation, of Smoke	... 1
If cigarette smoking produces cancer of the lungs as a result of direct contact between tobacco smoke and the bronchial mucosa, smokers who ' inhale cigarette smoke should be exposed to higher concentrations of the carcinogens than noninhalers and therefore have a higher risk to the development of lung cancer. The retrospective afcudy of Doll-and HiIl'(J7)l however, elicited no difference between patients with lung cancer'and the controls in the proportion of smokers who stated that they inhaled; ■ 'ifgjl	Fisher ($S), Hueper (45),'and Macdonald (64) have emphasized this point
^	as contradictory to the smoking-lung-cancer relationship, and, of course, .
it is. Unfortunately, this particular finding was not reinvestigated in the $$	prospective study of Doll and Hill (18). ‘	‘ ! •
Three authore/LicHnt (50), Breslow et al, (8), and Schwartz and Denoix ’ ■ H	(ffS), however, did find the relative risk of lung cancer to be greater among
inhalers than among noninhalers when age,’ type/and amount of smoking ’ •
|gj	were held constant. It must be admitted that there is no dear'e^plana-
lion of the contradiction posed by the Doll-Hill (17) findings) though & number of plausible hypotheses could be advanced. More experimental work is required, including some objective definition and measurement of the depth and length of inhalation. ‘	‘	'
Hammond (37) has recently queried male smokers about their inhalation
, ' 1 ’ > •	' - ■ tmoTJln I
1	. • '	-	• ^»3h§!h8 '
*
186	• • • COBNFIEI1D etat •	>•
' practices. He found that very few pipe and cigar smokers inhale; iMtwllff ‘
most men inhale who smoke only cigarettea; and that there are propot-^^®	en1
tion&Uj fewer iuialers ampng men ^ko emoke both cigars and cigarettes	a ]
than among men who smoke only cigarettes. These findings are compatible;g|§f	*l ‘
with the view that differences in inhaling account for the fact that 'the $™§	. ^
' lung-cancer death rate of cigar and pipe smokers is less than the lung-'l«j||	^
cancer death rate of cigarette smokers; and that the lung-cancer. death !^|1|	,'
rate of men who smoke both cigars and cigarettes ‘is somewhat lower than \Mjj|	*°i
the lung-cancer death rate of men who smoke only cigarettes.	^
‘ 1 " . ' ‘ ’ ’’ '	011
. . ‘ . Upper'Resplratoiy Cancer vjfifg	cil
" ' ■ • ' y	or
Rosenblatt (67) has drawn attention to thefootthat increased consnmfr *»	.
tion of cigarettes has not been accompanied by an increase in UPP^|||| -	u
respiratory cancer similar to1 that noted in cancer of the lung and bronchus! ; &1||	fQ
Hueper (48) £lso hag pressed doubts about the causa tire role of cigarette ;$|||	cc
smoking on the basis thatcigarefcte smoking is not associated with cancer	Q< of the oral cavity or of the fingers, Tvhich are often stained with tobacco tarl.-gaffljj . ^
The premise that a carcinogen should act equally on different tissues not supported by experimental or clinical evidence (70). CatcinogensJ-,.^^ • jc
which produce Oliver tumors in animals, may be noncarcinogenio wheif^s|||j	^
applied to the pfcin. Goal soot, accepted as ecologically related to oai1-* } >s||	_
cinoma of the scrotum in chimney sweeps, does not increase the risk to f/Mjjk	t cancer of the penis.' - There is no tt ymri reason why a carcinogen
'produces bronchogenic 'caficer in man should also produce neoplastic .-.1^®	t|
changes in'the nasopharynx or in other sites. It is an intriguing fact;,£|||§	^
deserving'further research, 'that' carcinoma of the trachea is a rarity,	c
whereas carcinoma of the bronchus is common among individuals exposed "ramS	fc
to chromates, as well as among chronic cigarette smokers. , 1 '-V-lmsi	s
Several studies have established the association of all types of tobacco	t
smoking, including cigarettes, with cancer of the oral cavity (Si). How- ;-|^p	c
ever, the wfafiw risk of developing cancer of the month is greater for cigar;	c
and pipe smokers than for cigarette smokers, The risk of laryngeal oancer'.^g^j	j
is increased by smQldng and w/equal risk exists among cigarette, cigar,	l
and pipe smokers (80). • .The per capita consumption of cigars and pipe	i
tobacco has' decreased ance 1920,:while cigarette smoking has increased *	\ \{fS). -.1 ■ • . • . ' . !
These associations Contrast sharply with the findings on lung cancer; .-A&wi .
whidi have consistently shown that cigarette smokers have much higher • -wS	'
•	risks than either cigar or pipeanokers.;'. Since 1020 the increase in tobacco ,:$|||	.
consumption has been primarily doe to the rise in cigarette consumption	! (S9), and the stabler rates for intra-oral and laryngeal cancer, while the '-Wt .lung-cancer rates haye increased .steeply, .can be considered compatible vMsS with the causal role of cigarette smoking in lung cancer. ' ^Jjlj ‘ ' ' '■' ' " lffiect of Tobocco Smoke’on Bronchial Mucosa . ’ ;.'?M
e . • t. ti i	* lL ' ■; j-SS
*	\ !
'	SMOKING AND LUNG CANCER	187	j
duslvely on “statistics" and lac^cs "experimental" evidence. The differ- . ' eniiation between various methods of scientific inquiry escapes vs as being a valid basis lor the acceptance or the rejection of facts. Nevertheless	"■
it is true that historically the retrospective studies on 1»ng cancer preceded	■
the intensive interest in laboratory investigations stimulated by the sta- ‘	■
tisticsl findings.	,	'
Hflding (40) has shown experimentally that exposure to cigarette smoke	;
inhibited ciliary action, in the isolated broDohiel epithelium of cows!	■
Kotin and Falk (#) obtained essentially tho same resdts in experiments on rats aijd rabbits. Hilding (41) further showed that inhibition of	'
cilimy action interfered with the mechanism whereby foreign material is	,
-- ordinarily removed from the surface of bronchial epithelium. In addition',	'
‘he found that foreign material deposited on the surface tended to accumu- V . ! late in any area where the cilia have-been destroyed. Auerbach et <ti, (f) *' • i found that the small areas of the bronchial epithelium where ciliated ‘	I
columnar cells were absent appeared more frequently in smokers than in	^
nonsmokers. Chang (IS) found that cHtajwere shorter, on an average,	|
in the bronchial epithelium pf smokers than.in that of nonsmokers.	\
. - These studies have demonstrated the existence of a mechanism whereby	* •)
foreign material from any source (e.g., 'tobacco smoke, industrial dusts, - \ fumes from j automobile exhausts, general dr pollutants, and, perhaps,	' .1
pathogenic organisms) is likely to remain in contact with the bronchial	j
epithelium for a longer period in smokers than in nonsmokere.	'
Auerbach1 aod.his associates (£) 'studied the microscopic appearance of ' the bronchial epithelium of patients who died of lung cancer and patients < who died of other diseases. Each of these two groups of patients was	'
classified according to whether they were nonsmokers, light smokers, or heavy cigarette smokers. Among the cancer patients there were no nonsmokers. Approximately 203 sections from all parts of the tracheo- ' * bronchial tree from each patient were examined. Many areas of basalcell hyperplasia, squamous metaplasia, and marked atypism with loss of columnar epithelium were found in the tracheo-bronchial tree of mea who ‘ ' 1 . had died of lung cancer. Almost os many such lesions were found, in heavy cigarette smokers who had died of other diseases; somewhat less . . ■
_ were found in light cigarette smokers; mid much less in noumokers. ’ ’ * Chang (12) has reported similar findings in the brondiial epithelium of > . . smokers compared with nonsmokers.
The chief criticism of Auerbach's study has concerned terminology.	,
Following the definition previously set forth by Blade and Ackerman (6),	.
Auerbach ef al. used the ierm "carcinoma-in-iite” to describe certain lesions with marked atypical changes and loss of column or epithelium, . ■ ' Whether this is an appropriate tetm may be questioned, but it is not rele- . vaat to the validity of the findings. , Certainly there are no data to indicate what proportion of these morphologically abnormal areas would progress'' ' ' " to invasive carcinoma, "*	' . .
The recent findings of Auerb&ch el at. and Chang have been reproduced	■;
experimentally in animals. ''Hockey and his associates (55) aDDlied tobacco	■
.tar directly to the bronchial mucosa of dogs. Within 3 to 6 weeks,
tar-treated surface became granular and later dereloped wetrtiike
tions. Upon microscopic examination, hyperplasia, transitional
plasia, and squamous metaplasia were found in these areas. Leuchten- ffilplj
berger et al. (48) exposed mice to cigarette smoke for periods up to 200j||||ff
days. The bronchial epithelium was then examined microscopically.
Bronchitis, basal-cell hyperplasia, and atypical basal-cell hyperplasia were found in the majority of the animals* and squamous metaplasia in a few^JSppj Further work and longer periods of obsarration are necessary to establish whether some of these lesions would progress to frank neoplasia. -
IV. Other Laboratory Inrestigattoiu	. sMSra ■ ■ ‘
’■ . .	Skin Cancer in Rodents	,
_ ^ One of'the links in the total evidence for. the causal relationship'of	.
cigarette smoking and lung cancer is the demonstration that tobaoMH '$l|a smoke condensates (usually referred to as "tars”) have' the biologic property of evoldng carcinoma in certain laboratory animals, particularly mice. The production of skin cancer in mice, following repeated, long-" v||E|| term applications of tobacco t&r, has now been reported from at le$st-six different laboratories (7, £8,£8, 61, 68,83). It is undeniable that soaie.S ' investigators did not obtain positive results, perhaps because the dose, and .';7ms| ' ' other experimental conditions were different, or because the complex v'tlf . tobacco tara probably varied widely in their composition. The negative' --''If© . results of iPapy tt al, (68) hare been quoted by HuepBr (4S) and others/;;'!^ but a more recent experiment by Passey (68) with Swiss strain mice did *
■	, lead to the appearance of at least two carcinomas after repeated applies* tions of tobacco-smoke iwndensafe!’!1'	■' ‘
' Little (6$) indicatedthat'.the extrapolation to the human lung /3||| of results obtained by punting of or injection into the skin of mice is. |§|| decidedly questionable.1' ''Direct '‘extrapolation from one species ‘to, another is, of co'uree/not justified/ -Nevertheless, results in ftnfmnlfl are fully consistent with the epidemiologic findings in man. A quotation from tjwy Kotin (44) is'appropriate: “The chemical demonstration of carcinogenic agents in the environmeitt and' their successful use for the production .of . . tumors in experiments! animals do not prove or even especially strongly , suggest a like relationship, in .the instance of man. When, however,'a ‘demonstrable parallelism ’exists’ between epidemiologic data and labora-'.^^MgS ‘tory findings, gr&tS”jM^ijficanca 'aconies to' both. Medical history is ,\'$|||
' replete with examples•mjwM& laMratoiy findings have been proved v-SK . ultimately'to.ljave .their counterpart in'the human experience, 1 Excep* . •
tions have been Tay few.V''. • \v • -----.....‘L ’Vl|i	'
Greene .{$/),'whUe ducomting the significance of the induction of skin : carcinoma in Swiss mice because of "the constitutionally "high differential susceptibility” of the strain, believes that the failure to induce neoplasms Vu||j in.^ embryonic trmplmts^ exposed to .tobacco t tarr, is more important k :
•	evidence. Greene's mterestirig technique doe3 produce positive results- ' ffp | i
■	(	/	Jwrul of th* Nitliul Caarn lutltiu	j
SlfOKIHQ AND ttntO CANCER	lc9 .
' ‘	I 1
when pure chemicals suehas bert2o[a]pyrene ore used, end this chemical	j;
jjas been recovered from some samples of tob&cco-smoke condensate. We	-fi
are not acquflinted-with reports of neoplasms arising in embryonic tissue	|
that has been exposed in vitro to cos! tar, another crude mixture that	|
cont&ins carcinogens.	•	■	I
The high frequency of carcinoma induction reported by Wynder ctal. ., | (8$) has not been achieved by other investigators, who reported that no	|
more than 20 percent of animals, end usually considerably less, developed	8
carcinoma of the don. The presence of cocarcinogenic materials in ' | . tobaooo-smoke condensates has been demonstrated by Gellhorn (£8) and	. jj
by Bock and Moore (7). To the mouse data are now added the data on	I
the induction of skin oanoer in some rabbits painted with tobaoco-smoke . 1 condensate (SO); this condensate, when combined with a killed suspension "i of tubercle bacilli, and introduced into a bronchus, produced a carcinoma of the bronchus in one rat (ff).	T
Since malignant neoplasms have been obtained in several strains of ' mice, and a few neoplasms have been produced in rabbits and tats, the issue of strain or species limitation to the reaction is more difficult to maintain. It isj of course, a fact that many agents Shown to be carcino-	j
genic to the akin of mice have not been proved carcinogenic to man. In	j
most instances theft is simply no experience with such agents in man, so	' ’ |
that lack of proof really represents lack of data, pro and con.	•	I
.	’ The Problem of Dosage . .	f
little (Bi) has further questioned the applicability of animal data to ' man, as follows: “Tobacco smoke or smoke condensate has failed to ■ produce cancer even on the skin of susceptible strains of mice when . -applied in .the quantity and at an exposure rate that would simulate	.
conditions of human smoking," - ' - ...	. . ’ .
The differences in species, tissues, and conditions between the induction	.
of neoplasms on the of mice and in the bronchi of man preclude fine	.
comparisons of dose and time relationships. ,, ...	■.
’’ ’	ffroncftogenic Cancer in'Animals ‘,	j'/ ; ; •
■	The pulmonary adenomatous tumor in mice, .rata, and guinea-.pigs	..
*	cannot be compared .with .the bronchogenic carcinoma in.man >[70). . ■' ■ Until & few years ago,-the experimental induction of epidermoid carcinoma	.. ■
had been achieved oily in a few mice by passing strings impregnated with ■ • * ■ - - . ■ carcinogenic hydrocarbons through the lung. • Epidermoid carcinoma of	■
the lung was consistently produced in rats by beryllium (7S), by carcino*;	•
genic hydrocarbons introduced as fixed pellets into bronchi of'rats ,(47), .	■
andby inhalation of radioactive psjfacles (JS). ■> ■■	:l ..... . j
Little (££) has noted that . .. prolonged exposure of the lungs.of 1 . { rodents to massive doses of cigarette smoke has failed to produce bron-' ' j chogenic cancer.” This'remains true1 at the tune of this report, although	. j
i t can be questioned whether any animal receives as large a dose of cigarette	]
smoke through indirect .exposure as a.humanbeing does by voluntary
I
V*J. as i t______.
■ , f f *
*
, * . , *
•	■ ■ 1B0 .	■ ’ CORNFIELD tl at.	,	,
die ep inhalation. Therefore the failure may be a technical one, which may.'SS© , be solved by further experimentation. The early results of Leuchten'j|l§§ bcrger et <d. (48) suggested that this may be achieved.
Carcinogens in Tobacco Smoke	' '
' The isolation and identification of specific chemical constituents in . tobacco smoke, which are carcinogenio for the pulmonary tissue of man,' •!>«&
. . ’ is an important area for research. • . '
■' .It has been' deaf for some time that combustion or pyrolysis of most ■
■	, organic material, including tobacco, will form higher aromatic polyoydics ”■ "of established carcinogenic activity (8$). A number of higher aromatic ,%g polycyclics hare been identified and isolated (68, 61, 77, 84). Tbe^
" materials indude fcen£o[«]pyrene( benzo[a]pyrene, dibens^^anthracene^ ^@3 duysene, and, most recently, a newly established carcinogen, 3j4-benv fluoranthene. ’Whether these compounds are equally involved in human'"V/|p pulmonary carcinogenesis is, of course, conjectural.	'isft
,	little (6$) has implied that a specific constituent must be found to
account for the biologic aotivity of tobacco smoke. This is not necessary.'
. The situation is similar to the establishment of the cardnogenie 'activity , of tar, which was accepted before the isolation of benzo[a]pyrene by X&maw&y and'-his coworkew. In this instance, also, benzo[a]pyrene is ' most probably not the only carcinogen in the complex mixture called tar,'-'
. and there are strong indications that some noncardnogenio components v||r.]
. in tar Wy have cocarcinogenic effects. '	‘
. . ■	V. Interpretation	...
■	'	Three intetpretations of the observed assodation of lung cancer and
cigarette smoking are possible: 1) that cigarette'smoking “causes'Miing-' ^€5 cancer, either (a) through the direct carcinogenic action of smoke on human bronchial epithelium or (6) by a more indirect mode of action .$p,
.... . such as moving the individual susceptible to some other specific carcino- .
•	genic agent in the environment; 2) that lung cancer “causes'1 cigarette ** , smoking, perhaps because a precancerous ’ condition sets up a process.
: • wlichleadato aaavmg for tobacco'; 3) that cigarette smoking and lung '■ l‘M
■	‘ cancer bifch have a common c&tisBj usually specified as a special ooastitu- ■ ;*pj:
’ ■ ‘ tiofial .make-up, perhaps genetic in origin, which predisposes certain ?! ^
\ ■ individuals'to lung cancer and also makes them dgarette smokere.. '' '£s}
•	‘ The second.'hypothesis was advanced by Fisher (66), apparently for. .-tag
the eake of logical completeness, and it is not dear whether it is.intended -'mI . ^ to be regarded as a;£erious possibility. Since we know of no evidence' ,.|||
'	to. support the view-that the bronchogenic carcinoma diagnosed after
'age (0 began before age 18, the median age at which dgarette smokers '
’ . begin smoking,-we ehall not discuss it further.. -	■ ■
. .	.. ''TThe Constitutional Hypothesis	.
■	’	Hie first hypothesis may be referred to as the causal hypothesis and \.
.	tka tklrd co fliA	liTmritVinBtn	j*.t a futfiAe aI 1
BUOJSING ANP MJKG CA.KCER	191 * ..
independently conducted, controlled, experiments on human subjects, continued for 30 to 60 years, oould provide & dear-cut and unequivocal ' choice between them. We nevertheless argue that evidence, in addition to that associating an increased mortality from lung cancer with cigarette smoking, is entirely consistent with the causal hypothesis but inconsistent, in many respects, with the constitutional hypothesis, bo that even in the absence of controlled experimentation on human beings the weight of the evidence is for the one and against the other.	.
The difficulties with the constitutional hypothesis include the following considerations: (a) changes in lung-cancer mortality over the last half century; (6) the c&rcmogbnicity of tobacco tats for experimental animals;
-■ (cj .the existence of & large effect from pipe and cigar tobacco on cancer *
_ of the buccal cavity and larynx but not on cancer of the lung; (i) the A reduced lung-cancer mortality among discontinued cigarette
No one of these considerations is perhaps sufficient by itself to counter T the constitutional hypothesis cd hoe modification of which can accommo- *f date each additional piece of evidence. A point is reached, however, ‘ when a continuously modified hypothesis becomes difficult to entertain [	seriously.	■	■	.
'Changes in Mortality
Mortality from lung cancer has increased continuously in the last 50 years, ’and considerably more for males than females. Such an increase can be explained either as thet result of an environmental change (to' which males are more exposed or more sensitive than females,, if both are equally exposed) or as the result of a sex-linked mutation. The constitutional hypothesis must be modified in the light of increase, since an unchanging constitutional make-up cannot by itself explain an increase in mortality. Proponents of the constitutional hypothesis have not indicated the tjpe of modification they would consider. Three suggest themselves to us: 1) differences in constitutional make-up are genetio in origin, but rather than predisposing onB to lung cancer, they make one sensitive to some new environmental agent (other than tobacco), which does induce lung cancer; 2) differences in constitutional-make-up are not genetio but are the result of differential exposure to some new environmental agent, which both predisposes to lung cancer and creates a craving for cigarette smoke; 3) the mutation has led to a greater susceptibility to lung cancer and a preference for cigarette smoke;' •
&l	the first two situations the effect of the postulated constitutional make-up would be mediated through an environmental agent. The • modified hypothesis thus requires the existence of an environmental	'
agent other than tobacco,-exposure to which would be at least as highly correlated with lung-cancer mortality as exposure to cigarettes, and	’
which also would be highly correlated with cigarette consumption. ■ No , such agent has yet been found or even suggested. In view of the magnitude of the increase in mortality from lung cancer, the third situation would require a mutation rate exceeding anything previously observed.
Vat. tv W. % . .... \
Experimental Carcinogenesis With Tobacco Tar ivVqpMiB8	6
Condensed tobacco smoke contains substances that ere carclnogenio^^® .	®
for mouse and rabbit skin. It does not necessarily follow that tbesa'^^K	e
substances are also carcinogenic lor human lungs nor does it Mow	1
they ate not. However, the constitutional hypothesis asserts they art||||| •	* not; and that it is amply a coincidence that these materials which are'£j|j|* ' carcinogenic for experimental animals are also associated with a higher .'^m^
lung-cancer mortality in man. ’ ^raa|	]
Types of Tobacco and Cancer Site	.:isj|| •
’ A greatly increased lun^cancer risk is associated with increased ciga-’ rette consumption but not with increased consumption of pipe and cigar is||| tobacco. - Studies on cancer of the buccal cavity and laiynx, however, f have demonstrated a considerably higher risk among smokers, irrespective ^||||| ' of the form of tobacco used. Only two ways of modifjing the constitu- ij&ra tlonal hypothesis' to take account of this evidence occur to us: 1) There ;rajSs are two different constitutional make-ups, one of which predisposes to -Easa cigarettes but not to pipe and cigar consumption and to cancer of tho >|||| lusg, and the other predisposes to cancer of the buccal cavity and laiym :J§ | “ ' but not of the lung and to tobacco consumption in any form. 2) Consti- :|| | ■ tutional make-up predisposes to cigarette consumption and long cancer j-Sa | ’ only, but tobacco smoke, whether from cigarettes, cigars, or pipes, is carcinogenic for the mucosa of the buccal cavity and the lsxynx but not 5^ for the bronchial epithelium.	...
Mortality Among Discontinued Smokers
‘ -Mortality from lung cancer among discontinued cigarette smokers is less than that among those continuing to smoke (18, 38); the magnitude. ' of the reduction depending on amount previously smoked and the length of the discontinuance. The hypothetical constitutional factor which
■	predisposes to lung cancer and dgarette smoking'cannot therefore be a $||| ' constant characteristic of an individual over his lifetime but must decrease. :j£gs| in force at some time in life, thus resulting in the cessation of cigarette i\j&ga ' smoking and a concomitant, but not causally related, reduction in the lung-cancer risk. Furthermore, since cigarette smoking is rarely begun v after age 35 (86), it must be inferred that the constitutional factor cannot
•	increase in force with the passage of time, even though it may deorease.
: In summary, the constitutional hypothesis does not provide a satisfac- j&M '
’ tory explanation of all the evidence. It is natural, therefore, to inquire - 'tfwm about the positive findings which eupport it. Even those who regard this *;|j| ■ hypothesis with favor would agree, we believe, that supporting evidence is ; j|ii quite scanty.	•	’
s '. There are a number of characteristics in which cigarette smokers are known to differ from nonsmokers and presumably more will be discovered.
Thus, dgarette smokers consume more alcohol, more black coffee, change '
•	jobs more often, engage morejn athletics, and are more likely to have had	r
-	SHOEING AND LUNG CiNCBB	183
at least one parent with hypertension or coronary artery disease ($ft SI,■	•
SS). Discontinued cigarette smokers are weaned at a later age than those ■ continuing to smoke (66). Recently, Fisher ($7) reported that 61 monozygotic twins resembled each other more in their smoking habits than 33 dizygotic twins, thus suggesting a genetio determinant.	.
Two somewhat obvious, but necessary, comments on results of this type are in order: 1) The demonstration that a characteristic is related to smoking status does not by itself create a presumption that it is a common cause. It must also be shown to be related to the development of . lung cancer among subgroups of individuals with the eame smoking status. ' ’
-	Alcohol and coffee fail to meet this test, while none ol the other character*
_ istics related to smoking status have been investigated from this point of •
' view. 2) There is a quantitative question. Cigarette smokers have a —
, ninefold greater risk of developing lung cancer than nonsmokers, while *, over-two-pack-a-day smokers have at least a 60-fold greater risk. * Any .
. characteristic proposed as a measure of the postulated cause common to both smoldng status and lung-cancer risk miist therefore be at least ninefold more prevalent among cigarette smokers than among nonsmokers and at least 60-fold more prevalent among two-paok-a-day smokers. No such characteristic has yet been produced despite diligent search.	' "
These comments on the quantitative aspects of association apply also ; to the relationship of certain characteristics with lung cancer. Thus, a possible genetic basis to lung cancer has been suggested to some by the association between gastric cancer and blood group. Tbe difference, in • risk of developing gtstnc cancer, between blood groups A and 0, however, is 20 percent, while the only study of lung cancer and blood groups (9) with which we are familiar shows a difference of 27 percent (and is" not'
■	quite significant at the P=0,01 level).* Such differences are suggestive for further work, but cannot be considered as casting much light on differences of magnitude, ninefold to 60-fold.	'
*	,, ‘
1 Measures of Deferences	' •
. % ■
: • •,
The comments in the last two paragraphs have utilized a relative measure of differences in lung-cancer risk. Since Berkson (4) has argued-.,, that a relative measure is inappropriate in the investigation of smoking' ■■ and mortality, we now discuss the use of relative and absolute measures* .. of differences in risk. When an agent has an apparent effect on several diseases, the ranking of the diseases by the magnitude of the effect will ■ , depend on whether an absolute or a relative measure is used. Thus in , * Dorn’s study (10) of American veterans there were 187 lung-cancer deaths among cigarette smokera compared with an expectation of 20 deaths, based on the rates for nonsmokers. This yields a mortality ratio' of 8,35 as a relative measure and an excess of 167 deaths as an absolute, measure. For cardiovascular diseases there were 1,780 deaths among
t Jm'i *tt“Uon bu 011,1110 *	el Eddulau*] jhrfla, vbfcb rt[ort DO »s»el»tien txtrieil" "
iDO blood roBpa tnd luoi tuecr, bj: RoUrti, J. L T.: Blood pwpiad nuaptlbtllty te dluue. SriCJ,:
rhT. JrSodiJ\f J Hi m.itt ietf
■	p	. - AfeWSSrril
* * ' ^
194	CORNFIELD cl ot.	-
*	* cigarette smokere compared to an expectation of 1,165. This gires a *
■	relative measure of 1.53 and an absolute measure of 615 deaths. Rela- I tively, cigarettes have a much larger effect on lung cancer than on cardio-' vascular disease, while the reverse is true if an absolute measure is used, ■
Both the absolute and the relative measures serve a purpose. Tfce relative measure is helpful in 1) appraising the possible noncausal nature ,ra||l of an agent having an apparent effect; 2) appraising the importance of an agent with respect to other possible agents inducing the same effect; ' :A®I and 3) properly reflecting the effects of disease mis classification or further vij&j ‘ . refinement of classification. The absolute measure would be important -$|§' in appraising the public health significance of an effect known to be causal. &Sf, "	The first justification for use of the relative measure can he stated more
-	’ precisely, as follows:	Jt£|
■'	^ Hb"’
-	' If an agent, A, "with, no causal effect upon the risk of a disuse, nevertheless,	• ,«f.
. because of a positive correlation with some other causal agent, B, shows an . '$$• j
■	apparent riifc, r, for .those exposed to A, relative to those not go exposed,	/i$
then the prevalence of B, among those exposed to A, relative to the preva- ^
■	lence among those not to exposed, must be greater than r.
'	Thus, if cigarette emokera hare 9 times the risk of nonsmokers for develop-
mg lung cancer, and this is not because cigarette smoke is a causal agent, * but only because cigarette smokers produce hormone X, then the propor- ■*['.. tion of hormoae-X-producers among cigarette smokers must be at least 6 ' times’ greater than that of nonsmokers. If the relative prevalence of 'V hormone-S-produceis is considerably less than ninefold, then hormone X cannot account for the magnitude of the apparent effect (Appendix A}. i-V The second’reason for using a relative measure may be phrased as ,	follows:	■£»
. If two uneomlated agents, A and B, each increase the risk of a disease, and	.'■/
. If tbe rift of the disease In tbe absence of either agent Is small (in a seme to be	■*-/
defined), then the apparent relative risk for A, r, is less than the risk for A In	‘
•	the absence of B.	V -'
,	The presence of other real causes thus reduces the apparent relative risk. .}
•	If, for example, the relative risk of developing either disease I or disease II • !$ on exposure to A is the same in the absence of other causes, and if disease I,
1 but not disease II, also has agent B present, then the apparent relative	:*]
■. _ ' risk of developing disease I on exposure to A will be less than that for	i-
disease H (Appendix B). 1 . * _	;•£
\ The third reason for using a relative measure is;	". y
.	If a causal agent A increase) the risk for disease I and has no effect on the	1
\ .	rislc for disease Q, then the relative risk of developing disease I, alone, Is	v
greater than the relative risk of developing disease I and II combined, while ,
'	■ the absolute measure is unaffected.	"4
*	__________*	*v
Thus, in the Hammond-Hom study, the association of cigarette smoking
. • and lung cancer, was higher when only patients with a well-substantiated	- >!
diagnosis of lung cancer were considered, and was lower when the group	1
included questionable diagnoses. Using the relative risk reveals the	. ■
*	stronger association of cigarette smoking for epidermoid-undifferentiated	...
H	BHOXINO AND UJHQ CAKOEtt	195
H	carcinoma than for adenocarcinoma. The absolute measure would not
S	.differentiate between the risk for these subgroups,
S	The Causal Hypothesis
H	We turn now to a consideration of some of the contradictions in the
|	causal hypothesis, alleged by various authors. Fisher (S5) has stated:
f-=	TOwn the sexes «* compared It U found that lung c&nccr bu been Increasing
U	rapidly In men relatively to women. ... But It b notorious, and eon.
g	splcuous In the memory of the most of us, that over the last SO yaan the
j? '	Increase of smoking among women has been peat, sad that among men (even
ti	.if. positive) certainly email. The theory that Increasing smoking J* 'the
I; ’	cause’ of the change in ‘apparent Incidence of lung cancer Is not even tenable
J	In the of this couttttt*
f; *	■ .
I 1 The available statistics do not confirm Fisher’s statement. According toT 3	the Tobacco Manufacturer's Standing Committee (76) male per capita ■*
|	consumption of cigarette tobacco in Great Britain increased from 1.9 ■
i	pounds in <1906 to 8 pounds in 195S. Female per capita consumption
i	increased from essentially zero, in. 1006, to 3.1 pounds in 1656. Far
from mating the causal hypothesis untenable, these results are entirely consistent with it, and constitute, in fact, one of the links in the chain of “ ’ ‘ evidence implicating cigarettes.
The fact that cigarette smoking was associated with a higher mortality * not only from lung cancer hut from many other causes of death was . originally considered as a contradiction by Arldn (/). Commenting on the firet Hammond-Hora report, he wrote:
It would thus appear that dgarette amoHng is one of the causes of all Ills and contributes to the over-all death rate, remembering that this rate includes such causes as accident, homicide, etc. It seems quite clear that cigarette smoking is a symptom, not a cause. It fa possible-even though this fa a conjecture—that the type of person who Is careful of his health Is less likely to be a cigarette smoker and that the cigarette smoker Is likely to be the person vrho generally takes greater health risks.
Both the later Hammond-Horn (33) report and the study of American veterans (SO) chow no difference between cigarette and noncigarette •
(	smokers in mortality from accidents, violence, and Buicide. If non-
smokers are biologically self-protective, it is only with respect to hoik accidental causes of death.	,
Berkson (f) also has pointed to the multiple findings in both the Ham* ’ mond-Horn and the Doll-HUl results and concluded that the observed associations may have some other explanation than a causal one. He	•
suggests three: 1) "The observed associations are ‘spurious*.,.
2) The observed associations have a constitutional bass, Persons who are nonsmokers, or relatively light smokers, are the kind of people who sxe biologically self-protective, and biologically this is correlated ‘with robustness in meeting mortal stress from disease generally. 3) Smoking increases the 'rate of living1 (Pearl), and smokers at a given age are, lologrcally, at an ago older than their chronologic age." t
Val. ** M. * .	_ _
106	. COHNJTEU) e( cl;
■ •
One might ask why the finding of an association with a number of ;$|i ' diseases, rather than Just one, is necessarily contradictory and must be t|||| regarded as supporting (he constitutional hypothesis. Atkin {/) supplied ' pgjjf no answer, while the relevant statements of Berkson (I) on this point were:	'**|||
For myself, I find It quite Incredible thtt smoldng should esns* ell these	*£§5
' diseases- ■ • ■	'•*'$£
When an* investigation set up to test the thwty, suggested by tvldtaee	jgSi
previously obtained, that smoking c»usw lung ceuoer, turns out to ladlc&te	‘'JsB
•	fhat smoking causes or provokes a whole gamut of diseases, IneviUbly It	/c’Sj
-	raises tie suspicion that something, is amis. •	,r,*f " It b not logical to take such a set of results [i,g., an association cf smoking
_ with a *wlda variety of diseases']« eoDfiralng the th&ory that tobtcco tmoVe'	132
*	contains carcinogenic substances which, by contaet with the pulmonary tis-	'T’t'w!
sues, Initiate cancerous changes at the site of contact	:■$!
We see nothing inherently contradictoiy nor inconsistent in the eugges-	' ^
tion that one agent can be responsible for more than one disease, nor are '	‘|s| we lacking in precedents. The Great Fog of London in 1952 increased
the death rate for a number of causes, particularly respiratory and coronary	-4|
disease, but no one has given this as a reason for doubting the causal role	■"% ' ■
of the Fog. Tobacco smoke, too, & a 'complex substance end consists of	M many different combustion products, -It would be more "incredible” to
find that these hundreds of chemical products all had the same effect than	■' ^ to find the contrary. A universe in which cause and effect always hare a ' .&a
one-to-one correspondence with each other would be easier to understand,	^
' but it obviously is not the kind we inhabit.	; M
The apparent multiple effects of tobacco do raise a question with respect	‘
to the mode of action, however, and since this question is related to another	jSg$
. alleged contradiction—the apparent luk of an inhalation effect—we shall	. discuss them together.. What mode of action, it has been asked, can one
' postulate to explain these diverse effects? Two remarks are in order:	--Ml .
1)	The evidence that tobacco is a causal agent in the development of	' £
, other diseases seems weaker than the evidence for lung cancer simply	■ ,-M
because the effects are smaller. While we would not exclude the possi- t 'f*; bQity that cigarettes play a causal role in, for instance, the development of arteriosclerotic-coronary heart disease, the possibility that a common . ‘4|jj ' third factor will be.discoyered, which explains a 70 percent elevation in risk . '■
\ from coronary heart disease among cigarette smokers, is less remote than
the possibility that the ninefold risk for lung cancer will he so explained.	.
2)	Accepting, for thB sake of discussion, the causal role of cigarettes for 'ffm any disease showing .an dav&ted mortality ratio, no matter how small, .^||
1 the .presence of other causes will be manifested in & lowered mortality ratio. Thus, even if. dgarette consumption causes an elevation of 70 . percent in mortality from coronary heart disease, other causes of great L'||j importance must alsobe. present, as is manifested by the high mortality from this disease among nonsmokers, The existence of a small number of nonsmokers who develop lung cancer is a definite indication, by the same token, that cigarettes ars'aot an absolutely necessary condition and that £$3 ■, there are other causes of lung cancer.	'
If tobacco smoke does have multiple effects, each of these effects must k|	be studied separately because of the complex nature of the agent. To
H	postulate in. advance that a angle mode of action will be found to charae*
®	terize them all is an unwarranted oversimplification. It is generally
accepted, for example, (hat tobacco smoke causes thromboangiitis oblit-||	erans in susceptible humans by interfering with the peripheral circulation, ,
and that it causes tumors when, painted on the backs of susceptible mice H?	because of the presence of carcinogens in the tars. The ay non postulation
|j|	of a single mode of action for these two effects is no substitute for detailed
|§	.study of each, , , .
As to the possible mode of action of tobacco smoke in inducing lung '
!||	cancer, the’evidence at this uniting suggests direct fiction of substances b*
fobaeoo smoke on susceptible tissues with which they are in contactv ^	Aside from background knowledge derived from ejqperimental carcino-'
&	genesis which suggests this explanation, the following evidence favors it:
1) Cigarette smoke, which is usually drawn into the lungs, is associated H	with mortality from lung cancer, while smoke from pipes and cigars,
which is usually not inhaled, is not. 2) For sites with which smoke is in ... . direct fcontact, whether or cot inhaled, particularly buccal cavity and larynx, the type of tobacco used makes less difference in incidence. 3) In . experimental carcinogenesis, which uses tobacco tars, tumors have, ap- ' peared at the site of application, and their incidence has not been seriously ^	dependent on the type of tobacco used. 4) The relative risk of lung cancer
jsj	is higher among cigarette smokers who inhale than among those smoking
I	the same number of cigarettes per day, but who do not inhale.
||	Several critics (8$, Jfi, 64) have stressed the failure of Doll and Hill (17),
in their preliminary report, to find a difference in risk between inhalers and
&	nomnhalers, but* this finding was contradicted in three other studies
'1	C®» Mi Farther work on this point is desirable, but would be more
J	convincing if a more objective measure were found o! the amount of smoke
s|	to which human bronchial epithelium is exposed in the course of smoking
‘J	a dgarette,	1
&	TVhy, it is sometimes asked; do most heavy dgarette smokers fail to
|	develop lung cancer if cigarettes are in fact a causal agent? We have no
answer to this question. But neither can we say why most of the Ltibeck I	babies who were exposed- to massive doses of virulent tuberde bacilli'
1 _ Med to develop tuberculosis. This is not a reason, however, for doubting |	the causal role of the bacilli in the development of the disease.
I	One cannot discuss the mode of action of tobacco without, becoming
|	aware of the necessity of vastly expanded research in the field, The idea
|,	that the subject of tobacco and mortality is a dosed one requiring no
i	further study is not one we share. As in other fields of science, new
|	findings lead to new questions, and new experimental techniques will con-
tinue to cast further light on old ones. This does not imply that judgment ■ must be suspended until all the evidence is in, or that there are hierarchies of evidence, only some types of which are acceptable. The doctrine that
#5r	*
S'	198	COHKFIEIiD el fll.
£ ■ .
one most never assess what has already been learned until the last possible piece of evidence would be a novel one for science.	' HMf?
’	It would be desirable to have a set of findings on the subject of smoking
,'	end lung cancer 60 clear-cut end unequlrocal that they were self-mterpret-
*.	ing. The findings now available on tobacco, as in most other fields of
science, particularly biologic science, do not meet this ideal. Nevertheless, if the findings had been made on a new agent, to which hundreds of millions >£ ' >	of adults were not already addicted, and on one which did not support a ' '*•
.	laige inAusfay, stilled in the arts of mass persuasion, the evidence for the .;?j
•	{ . ‘ hazardous nature of the agent would be generally regarded as beyond ..-'-j?
dispute. In the light of all tbe evidence on tobacco, and after careful 'v
-	consideration of all the criticisms of this evidence that hare been made^e 6,	• .find ourselves unable to agree with the proposition that cigarette smoking ■ ^
)v .	is a harmless habit with no important effects on health or longevity The ^
concern shown'by medical and public health authorities with the in- ;r
&	... creisbg diffusion to ever younger groups of an agent that is a health '
if-	' hazwd seems to us.to be well founded.
$ ...... ' ' i
ffi.	.	' Appendix A	. /
{?•	We fed obliged to give proof of the rather obvious statement on the '
magnitudes of relative risk because it has been suggested that the use of	‘
f- a relative measurement is merely '^nstuicUve,J and lacking in rational	'
fp justification, Let the disease rate for those exposed to the causal agent,	'■
® B, be r, and for those not exposed, r,, each rate being unaffected by ex-	<
jp posure or nonexposure to the noncausal agent, A. Let rt>rj. Of those	/
exposed to A, let the proportion exposed to B bo ytj and of those not	j
M ■ exposed to Aj.-let the proportion .exposed to B be ft. Because of the	v
assumed positive correlation between A and B, j,>a. Then	• '•
iRi =* rate for those exposed to A f,rt + (1 —	•
*= rate for those not exposed to A *=« Wt + (1 ft)rt ' •
■	. •	• (1) £i „ fiTi 4- (l - ft)f»	v.
.15 m + (i~ii)ri	-
Hj'v-' SinceiJi>ft8ndri>ri,itfollowsthatBj/ft>l.	• .
M	From (1) we obtain	. .
|\ . ' :S-|+S * [«-*»!-<>-»»]•• :
'	Since p£>pi and	the second term on the right is positive and '
• ............. . g>| ... 0
5jj.	Since p,lp} ia the ratio of the prevalence of B among those exposed to A-
%m	relative to that among those not so exposed, nod BjRt is the apparent •'
I	SMOKING AND LUNG CAHCBR	199
On the other hand, if the absolute difference	- Rt, is used, the relationship,
\ ■ (ft- ft) « (r, - r,) (pi - pj)	.. .
leads to no useful conclusion about	.
Appendix B _
The proof again is simple. Let r,i denote the risk of tbe disease In the presence of both A and B, rtt, the risk in the presence of A and absence ■
_ of B, r», the risk in the absence of A and presence of B, and r« the ri^;
~ in the absence of both A and B. It is reasonable to assume ■= 0, bti$ the less restrictire specification rB ^rufii/ru is sufficient for irhat follows.
■The proportion of the population esposed to B.is denoted by#, and this, by hypothesis, is the same whether A is jjrgsent or absent. Then
i?i «=! rate for those esposed to A *» 3>rii + (1 - f)ru	'
I	Jfj = rate for those not exposed to A = pr« + (1 - p)r«
and
•h1 =» apparent relative risk *=> —1 --
R*	* r” p r» ■ - •
Since rK/rj^ru/rj!, the second factor is less than unity and
35 ■*'. • . which proves the proposition.	■ .
References	‘ \
{1} Assiy, E.: Relationship between human smoking habits and death rates. * -Cunent Med. Digest 22: 37-4i, 1955.	-
(!) Afekbacb, 0., Gem, J. B., Fobuam, J, B., Petmci, T, G, Evcoum, H. J., • Mceesiu, 0, E., Kxmount, D, Y,, and Btout, A. P.s Changes In tbe bronchial epithelium In relation to smoking and cancer of the lung; ,& report of progress. New England J. Med. 256:07-104, 1857.	_
(S) Beeesom, J.- Tbs statistical study of association between amoWng and lung cancer. Pros, Staff Meet. Mayo Clin. SO: 319-Si8, M55.	•
W --: Smoldng aod lung cancer: Come observations on two recent reports.
J-*“• Stat. A*»o. 53: 28-38,1858. .	. ■
(J) Bucr, H., and Acocrma^ L* V.? The bporUuce of epidermoid carcinoma la sttu ,n tbe histogeouts of carcinoma of the lung. Ann. Surg. 136: 44-55,1952.
I®) Blackloos, J, W, S.; The production of lung tumoun la rata by 3:4 benipyraie, netbylcbolsnthnbe end tb* condensate from cigarette. smote, Brit. J.
.	:S|igg§SI
200	COKNrrELD tl el,
(?) Bocx, P. O., end Moore, 0. E.: Carcinogenic activity of clgarette-smoke eon-dtnjite. I. Effect of trauma and remote X Irradiation. 3. Wat, Cancer Znst, In press, 1939.	.	’	.-fojajlill
(fl) Bbesloit, L., Hoaolih, L., Basuussen, 0,, and Abba*s, H. K.; Occupations . and cigarette smoking u factots in lung cancer. Am. J. Pub. Health 44: • ^£ga|gj ' 171-3S1, 1954.	■	- •v^p|
(B) Btracwjuraa, J. A., TTerowm, E, B., Coltm, D. C., Tie rice, H. T., and
Knowleb, L. A.: ABO blood groups and disease, J. A, M. A. 162: 121&- yssfgl
-	* ‘ 1214,1956. .
-	(10) Cass, It, A, M.:'&mold0g habits and mortality among vrorlc'em In cigarette r;S£gjj . factories. Nature^ London 181! 84^88,1958.	.
C11) Cm, R. A. M, and Lea, A. J,: Mustard gas poisoning, chronic bronchitis and , ;ivMi . long cancer. Brit. J, Pnv. & Social Med, 9:62-72,1955.	.
’ • (l£) Chang, £. C.: Microscoplo properties of whole mount* and sections of human ,f?SRl ' bronchial epithelium, of smokers ud nonsmokeri. Cancer 10: 124&-12S2,
•"	• 1957. '	#Mj
(IS) Oiusesj H., and T/atson, J, A.: Bronehogenlo carcinoma from radioactive -,jl§3|4 barium sulfate. A, M. A. Arch. Indust. Health 17:230-235,1958.	vgi?|
’ *’■' (f-f) CiemmeseHj J., Njslmn, A,, tttd Jeksik, B.: Mortality and incidence of oancer
of the lung in Denmark and some other countries. Acta Unio Intemat. contra : .ra&il csncnun 9; 603-635, 1953.
(IS) Co hart, B. M.: Sodoeconomle distribution of cancer of the lung In New Haven. . «§&]. Cancer 8:1128-1129, 1955.	;|||]
'■'{IS) Doll, R.*. Etiology of Ion; *»noer. ^Advances Cancer Res. 3:1-50,1955.	,
(17) Doix> R., and Hill, A. B.: A study of tbe aetiology of carcinoma of the lung.
Brit. M. J. 2:1271-1288,1632.	-fMl
(W) •—■ ■: Lung eancer and other cause* of death In relation tosmoldng; a second ' 7®jl '	, report on the mortality of British doctors.* Brit. M, J. 2:1071-1081, 1958.
. (t0) Dou, R., Hill, A. B., and EranKBO, L,: The significance of cell type In ,	relation to the aetiology of lung cancer, Brit, J. Cancer 11:43-18,1957. vM j
(tty Dobh, H.: Tobacco consumption and mortality from cancer and other diseases. '"Mil Acta tTnlo internet. contra cannum. In press,
(St) Dam, E. F., and Cutler, 6. J.; Morbidity from Cancer in the United States.
‘ •"' '■ Pub. Health Monogr. No. 29, Bub, Health Ser. Publ. No. 590. In press. * ''$>H (B£) Duxjf, H, L.: Long cancer In the twentieth century. J. Internat. Coll. Surgeons 23: 326-842, 1955.
' (tS) Esoelieetb-Holu, S., am) AauuHK, J.: Production of carcinoma In ST/Eh .
.	* mice with cigarette tar. Acta. path, et mfcrobloL acandinav. 41: 267-272,
' ' (if) PtscnsB, A. L., Hoktih, D. G., Fo»ai>om, Q. T., Pjuiischeb, J., and Mossoe,
•	■ J.: An Investigation os the measurement of current smoldng by Individuals.
'.	TTnJv. North Carolina Inst. Statistics, Mlmeo Series No. 177, Chapel Hill, .
■	*' ’ North Carolina, 1957.	■	. '-itSl
' ' (£5).Pisbzb, E. A.: Dangers of elgarttte-sraokJog, Brit, K, J. 2; 297-298, 1957, ’ '•rylj . \ (SS)-; Cigarettes, cancer and statistics. Centennial Bev. Arts and Sciences .
•	1 2: 151, Mlohigen State University, 1958.
. (f7)-: Lung cancer and cigarettes? Nature, London 182: 108, 1958.
' (S8) Giixbok.v, A.: The ueardnogenle aotivity of cigarette tobacco tar. Cancer Res. 18: 510-517,1958,
(BS) Gttmii, A. 0.: Treads of mortality attributed to carcinoma of the lung:
possible effects of faulty certification of deaths due to other respiratory dls- .’fey, eases. Cancer 8: 1130-1136,1955.
(*?) Obibxji, E. A,, Cbomkoer, A. B., and Wilder, E. L,: Experimental produc- ' vfc tlon of carcinoma' with cigarette tar. IV. Successful experiments irith ^
■	rabbits. Cancer Rea. 17: 1058-1066,1957.	,'M
(30’Gexcxi, H. 8. N.: Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee on	r
*	GoVeniffl6Ilt	¥Tnil«Jl ni	flXfTi fiAltDTtt#. First	'iV*
|a	Hixo, E. B., and Hahkeb, S. R.: Smoking tablU and mortality among workers
jj§3	is cigarette fastories, Indust. Med. 26: 559-552, 1957.
§|9	EnsN'sni^ W., and Bkihxih, M. B,: Smoking patterns and epidemiology of
H®!	lung cancer iix the United States: sue they compatible? J. Nat. Cancer Inat,
|U	16: 1417-1441, 195a.	.
p	(54) HiEMSffiL, W., Sbiukin, M., and	N.: A retroactive study of long
^	cancer la women. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 21; 825-342,1958. ,
ji]	(Jj) Eaznuel, W., Shiuxih, M, B., and Ifiuxs, S. P.: Tobacco smoking patterns
jfi|j	Is the United States. Pub. Health Monogr, Ho, 45, Pub, Health Ser. Publ
j||j	Ho. 4^6. Washington, D, 0., XT, 8. Gov't. Print. Office, 1956, 111 pp.
Hf	(M) HuiuoKn, E. C.i Smoking In relation to lung cancer. Connecticut M. j, IE:
Id -	' .'3-9,1954.
%}	(J7) •--: InlaUlioi in relation to type and amount of smoking. In press.
«l	(W) Hiustoxn, E. C., and Hork, D,: Smoking and death rates—report on forty-
gO '	four months o[ follow-up of 187,783 men. J. A. M. A. 166:1159-1172 udp
|S| ■	1294-1308, 1058.	*.
si	{39) Hjjjtkett, T.: Tobacco Industry scoffs at survey. New York Times, p. 44,
I]	col. 3, July 6, 1958.	'
H|	(40) HniwOj h, C,; On cigarette smoking, bronchial carcinoma and ciliary action.
HI	II. Experimental study on the filtering action of coVs longs, the deposition
|S|	of tar in tbe bronchial tree and removal by ciliary action. New England J.
m	Med. 254: 1115-1160,'’1668.	■	_
|||	00-: On cigarette smoking, bronchial carcinoma and ciliary action, HLAccum-
£||	vlatlon oE cigarette tar upon artificially produced decllleted islands In the
pi	respiratory epithelium. Ann. OtoL, Rhln. and Laiyng. 6E: 116-130,’1956. ' 1
®I	(45) Htiriogs before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, '
Si	Souse of Representatives, 85th Congress, Pfcsfc Session. 1957t 765 pp.
xy	(I?) HuEfEi, W. C.; A Quest Into the Environmental Causes of Cancer of the Long,
gg	Pub. Health Monogr. No. 86, Pub. Health Ser. Publ, No. 452. Washington,
ffl	D. C., U. S. Gov't. Print. Office, 1956,64 pp.
(44) Kotdt, P.: The rote of atmospheric pollution In the pathogenesis of pulmonary |j	cancer, o nmu. Caneer ReM6:375-393,1956.
81	(45) Kotim, P., and Fait, H.; The deposition of carcinogen-bearing particulate matter
in the tracheobronchial tree In relation to particle size and effect of air pollutant* 1 nl	and tobacco smoke on ciliary activity and mucus secretion of the respiratory
|]	epithelium. (Abstract.) Pro®, Am. Assoc. Cancer Res. 2: 127-128/'1956.
||	Mi Kbetbebo, L.; The significance of histological typing In the study of the epl*
3	demlology of primary epithelial lung tumours: a study of 460 cases. Brit. J.
a	Cancer 8: 199-208,1954.	. ‘ .
gf	(4?) KuscayiB, M., Ljukw, B., Crjstofano, E., and Nelsok, N.i Experimental
S|	carcinoma of the lung. In Proe. Third Nat. Cancer Conf. ; PhSideljiils, J. B.
j3	Llpplneott Co., 1956, pp. 485-495.	.. ■ -	-
9	(4*) Leucstekbebgeb, C., Doolok, P. P., and Leuchtehseboes, B.: A correlated
histological, cytological, and eytochemtcal study of the tracheobronchial tree’ and lungs of mice exposed to cigarette smoke. I. BrmchUU vtih cJyjnVal cpiOuUalchansninmiMttpimHtitisarttU'tmoke. Caaoer 2:490-506,1958. ‘ , MS) ivETw, m. L.: Etiology of lung cancer: present status. New York J. Med. 54:
769-777, 1954.	, ■
W) Licxdti, P.; Atlologle und Pnphylaxe des Lungenkrebses. Dresden, T.-
*	wuisi-ELb, A M.: A study of emotional and other selected characteristics of cigarette smokers and nonsmoken as related to epidemiological studies of E cMter and other diseases. J. Nat. Cancer lost. 22: 1959, In press.
-J Lvtnx, C. C.: Hearings before a Subcommittee or the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, 85th Congress, First Session.
a	ios7, pp. 3M1.'
■	■ :vwll
*	'I &aMsaSra.
202	CORNFIELD et al, '	'.:J‘S5W
'Mi'
(M) Ltoits, M. J., and Johnstcx, H.: Chemical Investigation of the neutral fraction of cigarette amoke tar. Brit. J. Cancer 11; 654-562,1957.	■
(SQ Macuohald, I, O.t Hearings before a Subcommittee el the Committee on Gorem'.’
Dent Operations, House of Representatives, 85th OoBgtesj, Rut 8*»lon^
■	• 1957, pp. 224-240.	■	; 'jA&'t (55) Masclanb, D., and Herrera, L.: The rtslc of blued sdeotion In fonratd-gob'g rO^S'v•
_ surveys yrtth noEprofesrionij interviews, 1. Chron. DIj, 4: 2^0-244,1S56. .
_ • (Si) McAmbub, 0., Waldsok, E., and Dicrmsotf, J.: The psychology of i mo Wag. ' ' -V,
’■ J, jLb&orm, & Social Psychol. «6: 267-275, 1B53.	. •
’ (57) Medical Research Cornell: Tobacco smoking and oucer of the luag. SHI M> *•'
•	J. 1; I523-1B24,1657,	'p.
' „ . (SB) Jfciiis, C. A., sad Porter, M. M.: Tobacco smoking, motor eihatufc fume*, and " general air pollution fa relation to lung cancer incidence. Cancer RtJ. 17:
_ ‘ 081-80,0,1057.	’	■	V
*	v (69) IStmtowe, B. &, and Conotcb, A, 0.: Tobacco consumption fa the Unlteii
’ States, jBSO-1955- Pub. Health Monogr. Wo. 45. Washington, T>, 0., V. 8.
■	Gov't. Print. Office, 1958, pp. 107-111.	.
' (60) Netwan, J.: Statistics—servant of all sciences. Science 122: 401-408,1055. . ?/$
(81) Otojs, L.t Yak JDudbeh, S. L., Kosak, A. L, Nelson, N., and SoainTT, F, Iui '.vS# The fcaidnogenlclty for mouse akin and the aromatic hydrocarbon -content of /.. w;
■	■ clg«ette-smoko condensate. J. Nat, Cancer Inst. 21: 557'551,1858. _	_
‘ (S£) Passet, R. D., xr juj.:’ Cigarette smoking and cancer of the long. Brit. Empire • '
'	Cancer Campaign. Thirty-third Annual Report 1655, pp. 60-61. *
(6g) Pabsbt, E, J>.: Carcinogenicity of cigarette tat*. Brit. Empire Cancer Cam- -IjVi '	palgn. Thlrty*fifth Annual Report 1957, pp. 65-68,	' ' |:$v
__. (64) Riqdon, R. H.: Hearings before a Subcommittee or the Committee on Govern. ’ , ment Operations, House of Representatives, 85th Congress, Pint Session.
1057, pp. 114-181.
(6S) Higdon, R. H., and KmcHorr, H.s Cancer of the lung from 1600 to 1930.
■	Intemat. Abstr. Surg. 107: 105-118, 1958.	.	• 1
(68) Rocrar, S. K, KwcHraa, M., Kosai, A. I., and Mater, £.; The effect of ‘ :':;V . .	tobacco tar onthe bronchial mucosa of dogs. Cancer 11: 465-472/1958. ‘ >-^V
” ' (57) RoHijnsu.iT, M. B.: letter to Surgeon General, United States Public Health •
Service, Hearings before a Subcomolttee of the Committee on Government ■ Operations, House of Representatives, 85th Congress, Flrtt Session. 1957, : i pp. 753-754.	. •	,
, , (SQ Scwash, D, and X>bkodc, P,; 1/enquette francalse aur l’etlologle du usc«r ;
•	•	bfoncho-pulmoaalre: role due tabae. La Semalne d« Hopltaux de Pails 85: *
&4ri37,1957.	,
. . (63) Bror, M, Fuxuebdu, I., Fogisaxv, S., Kubibaba, M., &aito, S., Asako, K., ' $Q-i
■	and Kawoi, M.; An epidemiological study on oucer In Japan. Gann 48:
■	Bupp. 1957,63 pp.	.
' .(7fl) Esoraw, M. B.: Pulmonaiy tumors In experimental animals. Advances Cancer ' v(, Ree.S: 223-287,1055.	.[fc
'	(7J) Society of Actuaries, Transactions, vol. 8, meeting 20,1955 Reports of Mortality ■
.	and Morbidity Experience, April, 1655.
(7t) Bteihbh, P. E.: Symposium on cndemlology of cancer of the lung; etiological ■,	' implications of the geographical distribution of lung cancer. Acta Unto
‘	intemat. contra cancrum 9: 450-475,1953.	' ?$■ 1
(7S) Stock, P.: Report on cancer In North'Wales and Livtrposl Kgion. Brit. '-V^ Empire Cancer Campaign. Thirty-fifth Annual Report 1657, Supp. to Part . ■^
‘ '	n.	.
{?4) Stock*, P., and Cuifseli, J. M.: Lung cancer death retrs among non-smokers :, and pi pa and clgmretto imoken, Brit. M, J, S: J23-92J, 1&S5,
(7S)	Smoking and Health. Joint Report of the Study Group on SmoUog ud Health.
Science 125: 1129-1133, 1057.	'.!*& >
(76)	Statistic* of Smoking, Tobacco Jlannlacturer’s Btending Committee. Paper No. 1, London (Todd, Q. P., ed j. 1958.	'
/m Van Dctraxw, B. L.: Identification of tome polynudear aromatic hydrocarbon* in cigarette-amok* oondMwate. 3. Nat. Cancer Inst, 21: MG, 1958. f7S) VoawitD, i- J.(	P. 0, and Vbbiw, E. J,s The production of pulmonary,
cancer In albino rat* exposed by Inhalation to an aerosol of beryllium sulfate. ■ Acta TTuio internat, contra cancmrn 11: 785,1955.	.
(») W*si»», B. L., Bbobs, I. J., Ooftsmi®, J(| and O’Dohhei*, W. E.: Lung ' cancer la wotnea. New England J. Med. 226: 1111-11S1, 1856. .
(iO) WtsbEB, E. L„ Bsoes, I. J, and Dat, B.: A rtudy of environmental factors In cancer of the larynx. Cuctt Si 86—110j 1955.
(Si) Wtnpb*. B. L., Bboss, I. J, and ftratuur, B. M<: A rtudy of the etiological "	■' factors In cancer of the mouth, Cancer 10; 1300-1323,195T. ■ ‘ ■ ••
' _ (ff£) Yfrnnzii, B. X>.| and Co*Hni:i,Dj Jj Canoer of the lung la phyjlcJaw. New England J. Med. 248:441-444,1653.	y
' (S3) Wtmdez, S. L., OntHAWi B. A., and Obohingsb, A. B,j Experimental produo- «t tion o( carcinoma with cigarette tar. Cancer Ret. 13: 855-864,1953. .
. (£4) Wthbeb, B. L, and Weight, G.: A rtudy of tobacco carcinogenesis. L The primary fractions. Canoer 10: 255-271,1967.
(S5) Wyxtob, B. L., Wbicht, Q,, and Liu, J.: A atudy of tobacco carcinogenesis.
*	7. The role of pyrolysis. Cancer. In press.
*
; *
fT)
Htfrnrt) *.’fl n+	I tj
(’afrcirt	: Fi<N. Marlri	I ifr (l> 41: •"»
(-‘4 trim Hr	F^ppc tn=;t,-r Ftlw^rtl
llin U :	htOWJV'iVAj	ITCH M: _ . i 1 ?<; (
11111-':	»ltmr-n*l fiT 1 hf» ftiwwi r«n
IMr'UIMl i	r:!i»»:«rjn ; flmuf i r^m	r« I flssnciatinn
«\F1 Fl'.IFn:
y,fs,r i a I — DIM	— v. 1 17'.i ■•■■ (>M JjllHl-.t*
. ' ' f
■	t !
; * t
•	, t ‘V
, * . ‘ ’
+ ‘ it * .
'■ ‘ ■ Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/toba
LviiriioiD TISSUE • ■ ■ : ' \ • '	'on IntravenotB ijytctuuu:^! ■mino Kid producu'<«nq dexfrote
lymphoid ti«M eav* or cficct? ■ '	(2 liter* i» t™ty-fourhours)only,for cue to.’twj dayi.jTlie '■
me the questioner h» in mlud whether it	diet is.lhep iiiwatrf io ,ihe point ^calorie sJtqujcyl-Ailde •
relation to the asthinn. That is debatable.	from symptomatic • measure^,, treatment tliould .be directed
i	is considered by .umie as'being, part of.	,*S»iiut	, \ nd therefore probibiy nuyrbc causll. If	abovt’all i »r^«rSii^itr^^ftnyTic(6rt”niJy"be responsible ' i* .Urge ciioqch to'-nusc obflcuetipn, it	for the asthma: Inh*Ui{ts, food*,, drugs tnd infection ma/ act rtficxly," »nd under ■these cirri) mitilitet	-alone nr iu eombinalteiv1 believe that-food « not’as frequepf ‘ ' , jr mom. of radon,-' reentgeti rayt'W wr*	*** .wiwmt »i‘intul^iiti'or. jqftction, but If there "are^tood • ■ ' tthfcr the cffctL of radon' ii.specific or	allcrjenvthe^.should'bf dcltrmiiKd-tnd eliminated. Whether ‘ to wiiwer. Tht current belief "is that if it	or not inTectionVcti - w i-pnmaiy. excitant, it >iV pertain'iha^ ■
it asthma, itd«j so lliroiigli its-non-	Infection ii im^lLnjVia^pr^udnj.-asttviia. -.For.-that-.reason.
roentgen .treatment gf’uthnia given over	the antibiotia -aiid jhe^suHonamlde .drug* by ,iheir;'efTtctt on ■ t
the thorax, the spleen or the lone bonet	*™** ^	. • .
y helps the aUhiiutic paiicnt, prcsutiul)]/	important rolfVin^WtrojJing^ailh^tt.iKucitidii -and ,tfie. icb;‘ '
protein effect- J.' ' - - ' ‘ . '■	operation of:the'paben^ are; riectiiir^.' Emphasis -^Koiild _be' me m. rnXs^Vwiimc tons it s»v« ^	'‘j1’? ?1f?rowlfbu,.M’ ^ ■■ :
disom/stupea!>r'chcmlcal'section of	'V'T*'T
irisyjnpatlieiic dorsit nerves in arthna.	^ **!ler t e	[ •' '■!■*;.	'
h any. chronic intractable disease, asthma . ' 't fjt' •'?•'" •■*VVi I*"	Vy*.
gamut of many suggested remedies. One	'	' ’■ V .Vii* J1*-.'.:✓; ■ '	"...
' ?f *!* P»r»i.™palhetics either'by means	•	' CrjECf a/‘ J
JK3I rcscction of the puhnonirY plexus.	1 , “	tun \
ledure fraufiht «Mi considerable danger.	. .’
tly, perhaps IS per cent or more of thoie	’ PRIMARY CARCINOMA OF,. THE ..tMMtt ’... /,
ii	tne time of the operation or not long ./	u ■ • m-- v.* -v remember tl« exact perccntase, but it a	' ^AM D. CHURCHItU M.D. .
•	lh»^ it it a radical and iaujerous pro-	’	'*	. ■ .. . .
M be prescribed for the*average patient.	' '
'.would probtWy agree that it should be Thtt crltelt it tht totlfth cl o ttritt It bt fubliihri by the ' ■
sort and tliaj the patient should be nirued	Amtriecn Medical Attccialhn-wjcooptratiifn teftA the Amerj-
ssibilltics of cwilual cur* or remission,	cat fn.ifrr Socictj. Tht ttntt it'dtitsueS liquid Jnjht (flriy
er, did eft rcmtsiiojii (or periods varying	ifaguijii cl tweer ani thtrtby (o fein more cfittitvt resullt	1
evcral jean,	fc irtclment.	• '
■O* PAT(EM WITH AUttGY	_— '• .	■'' ■	'
lict hi6h in carb'ohvdrau *tuj |0,v In pro-	that « usually not difficult to tlctKt even m its early
in treatiiiRSuch a patient?	■	stages, fhe constructive results of surgical extirpation
01 sure what this questioner has in mind,	are lavo'rable when conijjared with other visceral nialig-
if a pnticnt is tllergic to one food, should	nant tumors, and, more iiiii>ortantt steady improvement .
stein foods from the diet? 1 do not think	js being recorded. In the past decade the medical profes-.
a rule, if there is rpcdfie »enfiti»tioii. it	sjou has made real lirogress toward earlier diagnosis of
i member of ■ food grouii. r»ili« than to	this disease and there sre many rtasons t0 believe that '
a n • m J T tm>am *	the time lag between onset and recognition will be ttill
further reduced. During the same ^rlod many of the .
w. Kcw Vort: I shall try to sum up	technical obstacles to the successful surgical nianage-
le treatment of antiim*. There are two	mcnt of pulmonarj- cancer have been- surmounted. The
nciiL One is ivmpioiiutic, the other is	operative mortality rate at first appeared formidable be-
tirc cause iudf. Symptomatic tlierapy is	cause advanced'and oFtentimes hopeless cafes were being
lopic procedures of selling air into the	approached with technics that were inadequate at the
ic bmnchi, One nicilwl is lo loosin the	best. As technical problems were solved and more favor-
»the brtmcK The drus par esccllenee for	flb|e sta.„ of ^ disease rec0gni«d( the oiierattve haz- ■
.IT1/"1	,hc wtl,un! M,t	ards liave been reduced correspondingly.	:
iwiwy. A'liinfjphillme, m my tKpcnetice.	,, , .	. ; , , .
psiiemf with se«rc afihma. The rectal The problem of primary carcinoma of the lung is now
w 10 sriiiiu {0.5 to 0.6 Gm.) cither in	that encountered in all efforts for cancer control—earlier
osilnry ohm flsfurcs a night’s res). Given	diagnosis. It is doubtful that more radical surgical
sre jirem|itl,v effective. Eiihedrine (orally)	treatment can be devised that can materially improve ’
the drugs o( choice. Epinephrine (aque-	results, although further perfection of technics ana sup-
i a j|jr*y or for injection,-For prolonged	portivtmeasures may gain even better immediate results •puicplinne in wi or sclaUi.s art r«om- ,he Hsk pat;clUs llwt 1I0VV lml(e llp the snlal|
1'ossiblv the nrei:,ni,iirv treatment and	«'«' Pat!en s "™ » «« «*« 0 reasonable chance .
in » uiiutimKCiu; '	- , . ■
f aspects of pulmonary cancer that are rifcorded	cough habits. It Is the COugh that "hangs .on", .in
ast literature on the subject are of interest only to	unaccustomed manner that should alert 'the physic
s of this particular lesion. I shall consider only	He should not be misled by the pa'tient who “di
practical aspects of diagnosis and management	by" to ask for a cough medicine. An acute infectioi
: vital to further progress in the control of the	the respiratory tract oftentimes (10 per ceiif) prove
They should be of interest to every doctor, if	the first signs and symptoms ol bronchial obstruct
>ther reason than that he himself is a likely candi-	The event may pass clinically as mild pneumonia ■
r cancer of the lung. PulmonaQ' cancer, is almost	responds promptly to chemotherapy br subsides sf
Tion as cancer of the stomach, and its greatest in-	taneously. Whether or not * roentgen examimtlo:
is in men (80 to 85 per cent) between the ages of	deimed necessary during the acute phjise, it is essei
70. .	that localized pulmonary infections be followed by ro
■	EREVENTiow ---	6en examinations until the lung fields have clea »ng is known about the cause of the disease that\ A persisting shadow, or one that shows collapse <
translated into effective preventive measures. It	segment of lung, indicate; further efforts toward d
ible that aij actual increase in the incidence of pul*	nostk investigation. . ■
! cancer has.taken place during the first half of this	Hemoptysis,—Hemoptysis, when it occurs (5
Several statistical studies support such an in-	cent as' a first symptom, and sooner or later in 4
atlon. On theother hand, Boyd,1 who is in a po-	50 per cent of cases) is always an indication for thorc
:o speak freely of the shortcomings of pathologists,	diagnostic study. Blood In the sputum in the early st
the disease was not recognized twenty years ago	of pulmonary cancer usually does not take the fori
e it was not looked for. At any rate, evidence that	a brisk or profuse hemorrhage. It is more compar
nary cancer was on the increase led to several spec-	to the small trickle of blood that is detected as ' o«
is about causative agents, and among other things,	in lesions of the gastrointestinal tract. In the spu
tte smoking was incrimifiated. Further knowledge	the amount of blood seems insignificant; the regiili
the nature and the mode of action of carcinogenic	and persistence of its appearance are highly signific
, and a careful recording of the smoking habits of	Hemoptysis is likely to be ‘the symptom that br
numbers of patients with the disease, provide no	the patient toUe physician (30 per cent). _
I evidence on which advice to cive up smoking foj/ Loss of Weight.—Loss of weight is surprisingly c
ason can be based^/Exposure '?o 'radioactive ores	mon and many times seems out of proportion to
cn correlated witu a nigh incidence of tlie disease in	size and nature of a tumor that is still localized. I
al study^On "European mine workers. It may be	of weight need not be interpreted as a sign that
> bear flii? in mind, ! ' .	tumor has disseminated but, of course, becomes ac
section in apparently well population	tuated as the disease progresses. . . ■
ie present time there is Only One practical way to	Pout.- Pain • (50 to 60 per cent) when sevei
at detecting early pulmonary cancer in the appar-	“dually a synjptom of extension to the parietal or tr
■ell population, and that is by roentgen screening.	sstina> pleura.‘ It suggests invasion of the mtere.
ethod will disclose silent neoplasms in the periph-	nerves or the first dorsal root of the brachial pld
the lung. The increasing use of roentgen screen-	A constant dull pain referred to the back is presum]
a public health measure for tuberculosis case	evidence °f_ mediastinal invasion and as such p
' is bringing a few of these asymptomatic cases to	toward an inoperable stage of the disease. Discon
It will not disclose the early endobronchial	*ml 0*cr sensations ansmg in the chest for., n
u that have not as yet encroached on the lumen	the patient cannot always find adequate verbal .tXj
bronchus. When bronchial obstruction occurs,	^ are often described as pain, but not of real sev<
jms usually bring the patient to the doctor.	They may arise front an inflammatory reaction, the
vever, the age and sex group of meri between the	tortion produced by partial atelectasis or from n
f 40 and CO, wherein lies the greatest incidence of	astinal involvement.. -
nary cancer, is probably the most difficult to st*	Wheese,—The noting of a wheeze (10 Jo 15 per c
l	routine tuberculosis screening. Also, the repeti-	niay be an early; symptoni that is oftentimes trans
: the examination at intervals, a precaution neces*	It differs from the wheeze of asthma by being local
rt an effective cancer control program, is beyond	as unilateral botl) by the patient and the examiner
nge oE necessity in checking for active tuberculo-	puimnary Osteoarthropathy. — Pulmonary o;
\bout^U a physician can do to exclude cancer ot	ar[hr0nathv with clubbing of the fingers and joint
ng in a periodic health examination i$ to inquire	*g us'uai|y ^ Jate manifestation, but may be the presen
symptoms that may be pertinent ana secure a ro*	symptom of a slowly growing and otherwise s
t examination of the chest, preferably by fluoro*	m ■■ .■ - , / . -v
.___ . ■ ____ ‘	Pleural Effusion.—Cancers that originate in th<
fCTlON BV EASLY SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS	. " f f , arc ofttntimes aromatic"
: early symptoms of.pulmonary carcmol.ia are	P * , * , ^
nmonptace that they may_ not be tak? >Ser,ously	. , , V V manilLted by pi.
y usually contraindicate -operation,	experiented. and ifamiliai' with the,therapeutic,manage* ■
Ltry K)R early diackosis '■ ■ ■	ment of the disease as .well as ifcith diagnosis. This .state- •
of responsibility for the early diag-	»««* may ^challenged by those, who would extend mmonly pictured 85 resting on the •. '.■general j.nicdical .adviser-fo v
'this is by no means* always tjie	Pietin? together fragmentary bits of. technical data de-r ' '
5 today have" no regular ‘medical	rived from several different, sources.:The reason for the....
imes place tiiemselves. directly in	statement'is;thaUurther diagnostic measures, almost
[lists in one field or another. The	without exception, provide information that bears direct-
asis on secondaty manifestations of	lV <?n therapy.-If .these measures are.pursued solely, to ;
esc him to be directed to specialists	establish a diagnosis, their contribution to the,.ultimate'.. * an to lose precious time if the false , problem of; therapy is hkely to be missed and, lead to
ough from any.ca.use may focus the	unnecessary .repetition. ' There is no better example of .
ticnt bn an inguinal hernia he- has	tl,i4.t^n bronch.oscopje, examination,• •	. .
or'aggfavate a prol?psus uteri, the	' Broncheicopy.^-Tfa ''purpose of • bronchoscopy in - - • •
lich .have .long been accepted with	cancer of. the'Jung extends beyond the .removal of.a/rag./.
is a danger .that surgical treatment,	went of, tissue to confirm'the histologic- diagnosis; ■Thei'-";'
irrelevant to. the real issue, may be	bronchoscoptst notes": integrity or paralysis of tlievocat
’heere may lead the patient to the	cords; the exact position of the growth with reference to ■ or hemoptysis send him to the tuber- level .at'which the bronchus must be sectioned if • *
ho has been.known to undertake a	surgical ablation is undertaken; any widening of the search .to exclude phthisis by bac- of the carina formed by the two primary bronchi '
or prescribe a trial period of bed	that, may .suggest involvement .of the subcarinal lyraph '
i pulmonary osteoarthropathy .based	^ I fixation of the region of. the growth, and the gross.
)f the lung has been known to follow	characteristics of any presenting tumor or ulceration. An1
rotn the expert on arthritis via the	“pert appraisal of these and other bronehoscopic find-
pectalist in physical medicine. Even	inSs is essential to the final decision regarding treatment. " ' '■
lay come into the picture and confuse	Unless the examination is carried out by an operator-
is with a primary, brain tumor.	who is accustomed to make his observations in terms of
whatever their field oE concentration	the feasibility of a surgical pttack oiftfielesion/ the
nust be alert to the early signs of	bronchoscopy may have to be repeated by one who is, material progress is to be made in Bronchoscopy tan be expected to yield a biopsy that
disease. This is particularly true of	provides microscopic confirmation of the diagnosis in
of the 'lung with' its varied mani-	60‘to 70'per cent of cases. In other words, 30 to 40 per '
.	cent of primary cancers of the lung are so situated that-
rY of the ROENTGENOLOGIST	they cannot be reached by the biopsy forceps. These pro-'
e occurrence to arrive at a diagnosis	portions are based on series of eases heavily weighted
[ the lung in the absence of abnormal-	with advanced and inoperable cases, and so are not
roentgen examination. Precision in	applicable to the disease in early and surgically; favor-
of these abnormalities thus runs a	able stages. Negative findings on bronchoscopy may be
portance to an alertness on the part	of no significance if it is recognized by preliminary
in recognizing early symptoms. A	roentgen localization that the lesion is inaccessible; for
examination in the presence of signs	example, in certain segments of the upper lobe. On the
s not mean simply taking a roent-	other hand, negative findings may be extremely impor-
jirehensive roentgenographic exami-	tant jfthe area under question is readily accessible, Im-
:ral films and fluoroscopy in addition	provements in the optical system of bronchoscopic
roposterior exposures. Oblique ex-	instrument's have made visualization of the segmental
, grid films and tomography may be	bronchi of the upper lobes feasible, ter comprehensive study and after Cytologic ifcthodt.—-Increased precision in the diag-
to the clinical manifestations in con-	nosis’of the disease is provided by methods for recogniz- ' ,
erring physician, should one measure	Jn£ malignant cells in the .sputum. In 1935 Dudgeon
ainst the pursuit of further diagnostic	8nc* Wrigley1 showed that this method was reliable, and
many subsequent observers have confirmed the practical 1
i competence to discuss the details	usefulness of the technic
osis of pulmonary cancer While a The method has been .modified and its effectiveness
st may develop considerable skill in	increased by examining a specimen of secretion secured
thologic lesions displayed on roent-	directly f«>m the region of the lesion at the time of
se diagnostic examination is a matter	bronchoscopy. This requires accurate localization ot the
ft in the hands of the highly skilled	suspected lesion to a bronchial segment by preliminary enology. However, in order to main- roentgen examination and insertion of an aspirating
i&I .secretions obtained by this procedure bv the	nanc ceils in tne sputum ana positive oroncno icolaou technic in 30 consecutive cases of primary	findings. No one of these is commonly preseril iary carcinoma. Cancer cclls were demonstrated	peripheral pulmonary metastases, although hetflc ases, but biopsy specimens of (issue showed cancer	is not as rare as it was formerly thought to be,-
-	11 cases. Bronchoscopy failed t6 disclose canccr	. Differentiation cf Primary Cancer, of the Lw, ases in which cancer cells were present in the	Tuberculosis,-—A round and apparently “stabi ed secretions.'	focus of the adult type of postprimary tuberculosi atfve results of cytologic studies are of question*	closely resemble an early peripheral neoplasm. S 'gnifieance, and positive result's are valiiJ only	may the rare ,pc>stprimary nodule of hemic origi: the interpretation is made by an experienced	is characterised by dense fibrosis and in many ins cr, A positive finding by the cytologic method is	by a retarded tendency toward -roentgenograp vet given the weight accorded a direct tissue	demonstrable calcification. An intensive searc , It is one additional link in the chain of evidence	tubercle bacilli may provide an answer in the firsl iquires clinical 'or roentgenographic, support.,	tjoned form of the disease, but will not produce p ■tchcg^hy.—Instillation of iodized oil is rarely	evidence in the latter.	. il aid to the diagnosis or localization of pulmonary Depending on the collateral. lines of evident and should be used only to answer some highly	giral exploration of the lesion may be requirec raj question.'-^he ill advised use of iodized oil as	operator should not commit himself to total pneui :ral diagnostic measure or simply to demonstrate	tomy, ^however, until further .evidence is obtai lial obstruction' may obscure or complicate subse-	operation. Taking of a biopsy specimen of the roentgenographic studies. There ts little to be	fibrotic nodule of hemic origin may be accomplisl d from instillation of iodized oil that cannot be	resection en bloc for immediate pathologic |diaj ed with spot films, grid f^riis or tomography.	Tak-'mg of a biopsy specimen of a circumscribed s true, not only for pulmonary cancer^ but in other	of adult type postprimary tuberculosis should ta ts of the chest as well, 'the notable exception being	form of a lobectomy, because these lesions ar( liectasis. Even here the chief value of the broncho-	with caseous material heavily loaded with ti lies in the planning of a surgical program, not	bacilli. When carried out with technical finesse, t in arriving at a diagnosis that usually can be	''biopsy" oftentimes proves to have been a rema ’shed bv other means. • - -	effective method of treating the tuberculosis crcntio’tlon oj Primary and Mrtastatic Neoplasms,	frank cavitation is established. .	■ ause the lung is so commonly a site for the de- Summary,—This review of the responsibilities nent of-metastases from primary growths in other	expert consultant makes it obvious that he shod s,'this diagnostic question is one that is raised his command a number of diagnostic techni edly. When a primary or recurrent autonomous	«nge from cartful case history taking and t
■	is'actually present elsewhere, the likelihood	examination to thoracotomy for biopsy of a^d he pulmonary lesion is a secondary deposit is,	lesion. These responsibilities must be faced, in i.rse, great. Multiplicity of pulmonary lesions is	sequence and carried through without delay! ( trong evidence of metastatic disease. Merely the	other hand, the consultant may indulge in cert v of the surgical ablation of a malignant growth	sumptions relative to his responsibility that a past, if a reasonable period of time has elapsed	altogether warranted. Attention is called to th> ut evidence of recurrence of the disease and the	cause *hey may. retard the development .of tha .in the tung is a solitary one, should not close the	relationship'' between practitioner and specialist' lo’a consideration of surgical therapy, -	desired to promote progress in canter control : roentgenologist is likely to raise the question of	aI?<> directly influence the extent to which the' astatic origin; when the abnormal shadow lies in	■ V'F|^ respond to the educational efforts that urge :riphery of the lung and is spherical. When such	consult a physician in.regard to early symptom >n is encountered, and it will commonly be found One of these assumptions is that the .expert h latlcnt With few, 'if any, clinical manifestations, A	variably exclude any possibility of cancer, how< aVmg physical examination must be carried1 out	mote, by resorting to major diagnostic technics^ ily to detect a primary source but to be certain that regard to whether the_clinical problem under 'coi nodules dp not exist from which a biopsy can be f'ou indicates their use. Another false assumptiot led jnore readily than from the one in the lung. In a presumptive clinical diagnosis always must of the’frequency with which renal cell carcinoma	.tended to histologic confinnatio.it despite the'fi a solitary metastasis to the lung, pyelography ^'e course-of management is obviously not goit cl be carried out. The'ultimate decision as to altered by the reading of the microscopic slide.. itr the pulmonary lesion should be approached sur- *** deciding on the course that the roanagfiintii y is based on a careful weighing of'many variables advanced case is to take, surgical exploration i lever take the same pattern in two different cases, times proposed as the onlycharice .and as si utder* has assembled the experience of several that cannot be denied the patient.'In,their ons with the removal of metastatic neoplasms in scientific exactitude the members of the professi
;s the entire growth can be.extir-	sulcus. A cancer that'produces .this syndrome U beyond *
rapy appears to halt the progress of	the bounds of surgical extirpation, and the severe pain ‘ .:
the lung temporarily. Occasionally	cannot be relieved by local resection, .or division of the
ikes place for a period o£ several	intercostal rierk^.^Thtipain^is.oftentimts excruaating ‘ .
idiscriminately to’ Advanced ''cases, ’’	and the'cours^ofilie'’^isMSe agftmzingly :slo'w! ’Relief 1";,‘
ontnbutes little ■ either to survival	should be sought by'tractotomy or high. chordoto'mj'.
fsical suffering.'The nitrogen mus-	, Histologic Type oj thc Tirmtfr.-^The, prognosis fol-* ' ’ ■
oduce transient and incomplete re-	lowing surgical extirpation has.notbeeit fullj; correlated ‘
ie half-the patients treated.*,Castra-	with the predominant.cytologic^cliaraclcristic^oF cancers ' '
strogenically active substances have	of the lung. The evldwce-thafexists, however, confirms"' , 1
e basis of the unequalsex- incidence	the reasonable hypoUiesis’that growths with highly titi1
110	indication of. effectiveness has	differentiated. cells';are .rapidly.'invasive and {tend:to .
:ial decision therefore lies ,m the	metastasize early.The sam,e maybe said for the'so-called
’ the.applicability of surgical'pro*	oat cell type. Signjpcaiit.jresults'achieved by-the:surgical *
' : ,	extirpation of t^ncers-of.'these" :morpho1ogIc:tj‘peV afe.- •
'HE cancer cannot be extirpated ’	rare. A biopsy1 th^demonstrates a highly undifferentL;:^--'''
ciira,—A pleural effusion,', usually	' ated or oat cell cancer is'presumptive'evidence that com-' '
igcancer cells, can be‘interpreted as.	plete surgical6\tirpatiqii ’is a remote ,possibility^r->....‘.. ■ at the cancer has extended beyond Nerve Paralysis—Ptrsipis of the recurrent laryngeal'...'
cal extirpation. While patients with	nerve is evidence of mediastinal invasion at a level that’
;ase suffer from shortness of breath,	precludes complete surgical ablation. -Cancers that haVe and cachexia, they usually are not	produced phrenic nerve palsy may be resectable grossly. .. • tin or distressing cough. Aspiration	. It'is significant, however, that Ochsjier, DeBakey and eplacement with air afford partial"-	'"Dixon ’ analyzed the survival period in Jtheir'cases from _ • • ' .	the standpoint of whether the growth was limited to the s in doubt because cancer cells can- ‘	lung or had extended .beyond it by encroachment on-sd, .the replacement of the pleural	contiguous stra'ctures'-or'.by regional lymph node me- ■ lay bring pleural nodules into view	tastases and found that only 2 of 27 patients with such ation. A biftpsy can be obtained with	extension demonstrated at operation survived .beyond a coscope or by a limited thoracotomy	three year period, and none tjeyond six years, nde'r 'local anesthesia. A pathologic _ surgical tmatkekt *	'.diagnosis is desirable in this type of	. OperabUity.—Thc experience of many different .siir-ition therapy may be helpful and as	geons in the United States and clsewlierf; lias been.sur-y dosage should not be administered,	prisingly uniform in the results achieved by surgical. knowledge that the disease being	extirpation. Apparent differences in the statistical tables
that record this experience are usually artifacts de-
ntph Nodes.—An exacting palpation	veloped by the terminology employed, the calendar
ilar fossae, neck and a>iillas should	years covered by the report, the selection of cases end
rery case. The removal of a-palpable	other variable factors.
Mt under local anesthesia may con- An analysis of the results of .surgical therapy cus- ‘
: clinical diagnosis and at the same	tomarily starts with those patients that are referred to
hat the cancer has extended beyond	? surgeon for consideration of operation. This base line
al extirpation: This is a less trying	ignores the large number of patients in whom a diag-
itient than bronchoscopy and can be	nosis is never made or whose disease is judged so far
iot infrequently.	advanced that surgical consultation is superfluous. It diastinal, lymph nodes is difficult to thus impossible to determine with" exactitude the
:en examination alone. Presumptive	extent to which surgical-procedures can be an effective
may beconic determinative when	control measure in the population at large. Surgical
ichoscopic fixation of the growth and	efforts have rarely been measured against the magni- - *
e back.	tude of the problem as a whole, Few surgeons, panic- 1
cmimtioii.^Diffuse spread in the	u'arly those whose cases are assembled from a private I
of one or both lungs with the de-	clientele, appear to be aware of the selection that has ,
11	nodules immediately beneath the	taken place before.their own "series" was assembled. • Y be dejected on roentgen .examina- In 996 cases with the clinical diagnosis of bronchio-
can be an adequate substitute for a	£en'c carcinoma at The Brompton Hospital forDiseases -
y.	of the Chesty in London,’ frini 1937 to and including osiasis.-Spread to the liver may 1^. only 1^-3 per cent (152 casts) were judged suit* '
: increased size or palpable nodular-	^le for a thoracotomy. In cases in which thoracotomy ’critoneoscopy is a sirpple procedure was done, extirpation of the growth was performed in
apnosis. Houl.wtac ftr ftfhpr	" 7”	'____n ._____t
»»»*.• iiviu in i7^j/ lu t’.w |/vt	Vf k o—* ’y;"7 .v*-vr^ I"** v
1944, Furthermore, resectability increased from	Mayo Clinic, 1945). 1 he resectability rate for maligi
cent in 1937 to 13.5 per cent in 1944. These'	fes[0n$ of the stomach, r.e„ the ratio of patients 1
jures from the Brompton Hospital are significant	undergo resection to the total patients.in whom
: during this period a vigorous siirgical program	ui&gnosjs is made, is somewhat higher (38 per cent
ng pressed by Edwards, Roberts, Price Thomas	Survival Expectancy.-— Cartful follow-up. stati:
ock. Their importance lies in the base line pro-	^iat measure the survival expectancy in pulnioi
jy the population of a large hospital admitting	malignancy treated liy surgical resection have no
s with medical and surgical diseases of the chest.	?et leveled off to even an approximation of accuracj
range of applicability of surgical procedures pro-	15 probably more informative to consider that Grahi
>y reports from surgeons in the United States is	patient, in whom a total pneumonectomy was perfor
avorable, but these reports are heavily weighted	for squamous cell carcinoma in 1933, Is still alive
ecting 'of patients from a wide area because they	'™l ^ian is to attempt to interpret the prelimii
udged favorable for operation. They do not ac-	0lwVses that have been placed on record,' :
y represent the state of affairs relative to the	There are several variables to be considered, riot
: as a-whole. Nine reports (Adams,' Burnett,*	least of-which is whether the growth appeared tc
hill,10 Clagfett and Brmdley,llGrah'am,i: Jones,1*	jowlized to the lung at the tiine of resection or whe
{og,“ Ochs'ner, DeBakey and Dixon,1 Over-	'leave evidence of having extended to the mediastin
) published since 1940, record 1950 cases. In	either by regional metastases or encroachment on i
10 per cent) ot these thoracotomy was done, and	t‘2'L'ous .structures. .Ochsner, DeBakey and Dix
cases resection was performed (22 per cent).	performed resection in 43 cases in which the growth
hould be recalled that the first total pneumonee-	considered to have extended beyond the lung and
that launched the surgical attack on pulmonary	whic!' sufficient tune had elapsed so that the three;
■	was performed in 1933 (Graham)" and that	!!.l,mvaI rale co^ be computed. Five of these' 43
I of the series of cases referred to date back to	ticnts were surviving at the end of three years..O
ear or. shortly thereafter. There is an.encouraging	Patients lor whom a, five year survival rate' couli
toward a higher proportion of operable cases in	computed, only 1 was alive. Not a single instance of
ore recent reports and in current experience,	vival as longas^one year is recorded for 244 untre
en an attempt is made to estimate the proportion	Pstienfs" II s'enis reasonable to, suppose, there:
ients- who cl/e in hospitals as an immediate result	'iat ^ l»ngbear,ngthepnmarygrowth
operation or its attending complications, the	:?f «**"![wnipiationi of the. disease
ng Gackjroimd provided bv technical improve-	a«e!erate his death. The relentless progress of the
chemotherapy, blood transfusion and other ad-	Jemmated cancer continues. ■ ... ■ .
s to surgical management necessitates yearly cor-	This concept that the local primary growth not
s. In‘addition, the removal of growths that are	«“ses **««« symptoms, as_m cancer of the tec
aliped to the lung lias carried a higher mortality	bu acccIcratcs V m °b,strt,ctin" ca,ncer of
ian is'encountered when'dealing'with the more	K™uf or « «*« known to surgeons
l)le localized growths that are coming to the sur-	5 . eitlfp s clstwhere ,|n the Pr°f.es
,vith increasing frequency. The 194? report o(	Surgpl treatment of,cancer is oo often harshly jin
3 based on the experience of the preceding four	fs .e 'J!1 ' grounds that it fails to prodi
gives a better index of what is going on now	‘ait'nf curt* rith" ,ba" 0,1 ^ fact .that it makes
summation of earlier experience. A total of fifty-	btst ,Urnls. ^is,b!s witlv a disease, that is air
i.eumonectomies with but 2 hospital deaths yielded	■- it,*' ,
uat operative mortality'of less than 4 per cent.	.^tLTrTv TT “"if.
was' accomplished on the basis of performing	t\palhologic classification of the pecul.ar tumor kr
otomy in 33 per cent of the cases diagnosed and	as b;onclu.al ^enoma Arguments as to whether
ig out pneumonectomy in 20 per cent of the total	fne<*,a?m 's ^ **ve -obscured .certain .cl,
Similarly, in 1946, Adams* eSithe-basis of a 31.4	ft1’"1™1 the« 1,0 d,?ercncc of W
nt rate of resection recorded a hospital mortality	^,bronch,al ade!10m? Pursu{s aJkls
f 3.3 per cent in his most recent thirty consecu-	and Protric cd TOU™: ^' when ; reeled r, ■sections ‘ ' •' '"" 'rei,ce or subsequent dissemination is practically
se figures are startling, as they show that the	The tumor js rare in companion with the.’f l« .toUt, rale o? total p^ctom, for
n.,, R.! Primary tAine Tv^orf. j, a. M> A. rn: J4J-SJJ	following operation is being tabulated will affor
rVov. e'. In c<ta.«. p. w.: DiFrintiiiiun	opJimistid interpretation ^:r«ults.v:- '
thiogtnlc, CiKinomj. J, Thoracic Suit. JO: J^-(M (April!	/Sff/lifflMr OUrC/tCM Measures,—ExtenS10(l.. to
hurchm. e. D.! BtKtUt* of iKe w fiuti-wt	parietal chcst wall is likely to occur witli perip
M o. T.. Brindley, c. v., Tr.: Brtn^c o.ir.n,,	fquaniot-.s cell cancers. The pain caused by this exte
North Ansfrica, tf.jp flso fAtif.) i9H. v	in inoperable cases may be alleviated by section c
i Joannes, me Droncnus isaiviaed	« - - ;	.
jpted sutures.' Some operators place	*'cn^and wv apprehensive fanrtlty to speak of surgical
of stainless steel wire sutures, but	operation as oniVof .several "methods of managemfiit cal precaution appears lo lie in the' t>uy.have-to’ he/pursued:.It cap,, explained rto<1
iing clamps and sutures’ Tht Closed	the patient thafcertain .forms of his.dtsease can.best .
:overcd by a ftaS'iTf pieb^V/a'mobil-"	be managed b/£urgical>rocedure and, ofhers by jadia- •
icle and pleura'6r a'free'graft of	*’on th'erapy^pjtrogcn.niustarjl, .and so on; that some-' • _
; .	times it is .necessary, actually, to-look, at the diseased " -
d without drainage, leaving th* dead	area and detemiini its position and naturetyffioracoV .
e'd partly by organizing exudate and	tomy before tRe decision'^ to'iHe most effective method.. - .
leht’of the mediastinum, rise of the'	of management.for his part'cular'.case can be made.-. .
■action of the!chest wall. Some sur-	' When surgial procedures.are found ijnpossibli^great ■■; ,
a'coplasty is advisable in many cases'	comfort is denveajfrom ther^nowIed£e thatiome.co.nT^ .. ... 1
mt of time has elapsed. Others rarely	5tructive‘fcpUrse;-«n be'Uten,.even though th$ cfjancM... .
carry out this procedure. Certainly-	?f sucass ^btrslight.The Mtient.will rarelyxoi}V_:_...
Or-good'reason if at'all '■ ■ cern himself about the .magnitude of this chance jt he is. patients concerned brings a substan- led 10 fet! tbat eveVything, possible is being done,; ". ird.iovascular .complications:.Cardiac• There, is no shorty cut_ that.can-teach a surgeon what jlarly aurliuiar 'flutter, may occur to say^and'how-.'to^y it when he is laced oy JMtients .
: period. For this reason preoperative mth .moperable -mahgnant disease.' He, majr deet to umidine is recommended.’	' remain*'on tht purely technical level,, a. posifiort that
ie’operation should be' replaced in ccrtaln'y 15 th^-least troublesome and..time consuming, iseof the dingers of edema in the' It "tiybe found .that this -is the only positiotj that .can iditional fluids are administered in ** tattn ,n ”rt4'n st,u,at'orts; 0l} othtr ^caSions, ™
:n therapy is usually employed dur- .surEeon. may 1» the ;on1y person iri a position to guide y-four hours.’The'total hospital “stay th^ «*'“* antJ >s mimed late family hrough a trying i has been greatly reduced and now. Pen“- This takes hme; W hile the exploratory thoraco-wee IsS,. Early ambulation is beneficial tomy that reveals an inoperable growthmay^be com-
ger of incisional dchiscence or hernia.	P,eled ,n tl?r“ teof!hoer'tseve.^1 W(s must
ered anesthetic is vita! to the patient	** sPent with the family, the patient and in conference
teps of the operation. A few anesthet-	with tI)e physician who is to take'over the daily manage-gnify the technics .and complicate the of the cale ^ dis^ar?e the hospital,
nbersome appl iances, but as a general	. Surgeons today, struggling to keep abreast o[ a heavy
■	major intrathoracic procedures has	hii technologic detail, unfortunately find little time
mdardized intratracheal technics that	for these matters.-If. they'are to maintain their position
lent. The important qualities demand-	as 4?c*01* m"ntr“t to &rt!SanS' the r«ponsibi!iLes
c agent are, first, that it have as wide	ent muSt faced. • y as possible and, second, that full "	‘ ,	’
^maintained with a high percentage	CJ,nJcaj Notes, Suggestions and
table, incision, instruments and other New Instruments s that are best left to the operating	•	—- •	• -
»S!£ ^ ‘“"CM	FLU It REPLACEMENT UIT8 HALF. STKI6M
cision of cancer of other organs began	. SODIUH CHLORIDE SOLUTION . ,
tion and extended to radical resection.	.
;urgery of cancer of the lung, except	kahUEL e. LICKTEKSTEIV, H. D.
ic attemptSj started .with tota( pneu*	Chlc*j*	'
in part accounts for the uniformity	. ‘
ve been achieved. It is customaiy for	Loss' of fluid in iniesiinal obstruciion rtsults from two He- -
:he.. position that total pneumonectomy	velopmtnts.following pns« of the fon<Ution. First, frank loss of •
able form of operation. If the mortal-	secretions occur* as a result of (a) vomiting, (b) si*£n»tion of _
leumonectomy is the same as that of a	!HftliM5 above l1,c 1cv{1 of obstruction and (c) suction or '
rlinn ^T.lI. i;r! : :01 a	wbomt instituted vhen the patient is pU«<) unJtr manage-
ction, and the life expectancy rate or	n|ptm. Sccoo<1h |oss 0f ;nwl{ ;s ?usia;nrf as a result of at»!t<r.
ons with one lung equal .to that of	from (w, iI)(J i^sts. ,
bectomy, the matter can be closed, As	yj,e imount of loss in the first of tlie^e <Jeveloproents.vari.es
arlty in these values exists, however*	niili ttie volumes vomited, siagtvant in the intestinal lumen and
he place of less radical procedures in	aspirated ly suction or siphonac^ Whatever this volume may
cases must be kept nncn. • ■	be. it is compoml of M.tc.r 'v!.lh ?r«arl!c a, 1"1.°.rK^it-w
NSURGICaC TECA.TMEKT	' ' ’l*n«s ‘Kni^l important of v.lucl, is swlimn icjiloride. The -con-
**rnrd 47 nf s,
n',*:	•hM4yo7/.„	^ h„,r
V	T,,M-t>n of ,;hp	*itl049fW
.. •CiPr f^icj m ^	;* ‘ *dp*««y C7f H^ri
*■<' iNSf . .-	-‘•'tArt-cs . .	.
......r,-,v—' •'•”<>
1 - . _
*. " " ■ **
< ■* .
1 * ^ m	'	*	. *k
. * ♦! ^ *
' # ’< . . +
I	-	*
■	"	4
1 * * " * , '
■	■ ' '	1 -I	• ■ ■	I: ■ ■ ■ ;	' r ■
.	. > I'VI'V*	; -v .V.yJK ^/|fiSen«DBa
raHnaawimweni; -.r-ljM
•	■ irtomwiuitwhnuw ■ • :!m iilMBB
■	■—j——j,a,as aw
. •■•■'liMi
.	BULLETIN OF	: • : .■■'•Mji —
THE NEW YORK ACADEMY ’
*	OF MEDICINE	’
' ' " ' ^ '*** ' " :
. * ■■ ' .
R Y. CANCER OF THE LUNG WITH V'-S IIHBh SCIAL CONSIDERATION OF ITS	■ ''' « JlflBH
‘	ETIOLOGY*	i
Evarts Ambrose Graham	- - '*
. ' . . ■ v;. tor of Suntcy^”^ uKIriyion Univerjntjc Sc tool cf Medicfne, St. Leuitj Mtttturl	■, (
appreciate very much the high honor which you have W accorded me in inviting me to give this fifth James Ewing	; , .
S Memorial Lecture. Many years ago when Dr. Ewing ■ .
| first published his “Neoplastic Diseases” I was gready ' ■$ esH stimulated by it. I wish sincerely that he was still alive to . ... ome of the pathological problems concerned with the subject \ ■,-i; /J h I am going to speak to you tonight.	.	>
ogetiic carcinoma differs from other cancers in two Import-	j *
>, i) it has shown an enormous increase in the last thirty-five	.
) there has been a progressively larger incidence in the male	. [ , 4
-
•! ■> ifgafiBsBHflMSB
sn no longer be any reasonable doubt that the very great	j
the incidence of bronchiogenic carcinoma is real and not	;j
arent. Kcnnaway and Kennaway,1 in a study of death certi- '
.	; I
b«	Memorial Lcciure detivtrcd at Tht New Yeti Acidvtijr of Mtdidne,	j vj,
iruncal »r Surccrr. WuhliKton Unirtriity Mcdicil Sctuol and iKt Birnti Hnpilil,	, . j
I,	ficates in England and Wales, found evidence of a great increase from
*>'	1918 to 1 p45, and more recently Doll and Hill5 .quote a British govern-
b	men:.report which shows that for the twenty-five year period from
v’ *.	1911 to 1947 the incidence of the condition found in autopsies in Eng-
*■/ . •	land and Wales'increased fifteen times over what it had been previously.
M. H,-	Actual figures on the increased incidence In the United States during
||	the same period are not available but it is noteworthy thaciJ5lthough
| .	Adler3 in 1911 could collect only 374 eases from the world’s literature,
jj j •	individual experiences in this .country greatly exceed that total of re-
j ,	ported cases from the whole world.For example, at the Barnes Hospital
I ^	we have had 1375 proven cases in the last thirty years, or nearly four
£ J ' •	times as many as Adler could collect from the world’s literature. In the
.	United .States statistical studies at the Charity Hospital of New Orleans
^"	by Ochsner and TDeBakey,* at the St. Louis City Hospital by Wheeler1
■" •	. and at the Hines Veterans Hospital by Ariel, Avery, et al.* have all
j .	. shown that in recent years bronchiogenic carcinoma has become the
»5>V■	mos!c frequent visceral cancer of the male patient. Cancer of the stomach
! j -	which formerly occupied first place has been relegated, at least in those
: ‘ ’''	institutions, to second place. ' • •
i	No one can deny that there were excellent pathologists in the last
1- ’	ccntuiy who certainly knew cancer when they saw it. It seems hardly . I Vv:';.likely that those of the caliber of Virchow, Cohnheim and Rokitansky
I • J H**? gV;. ■	could have missed recognizing the condition at autopsy as frequently as
5	\ j j&A/ V. ' •	would have been necessary to account for the pronounced difference in
I	.incidence then as compared with now. Moreover, the argument ad:
-r *■	1 vanced by some tfiat the increase is only apparent because more people
*	.- .ve reaching the cancer age now loses value when one realizes that not
rty ;..	‘ only is the number of cases increasing but, more striking, this cancer has
*	.changed its relative position in frequency. The fact that more people
l;Vl	' axe now'reaching the cancer age would not explain how. it has happened
■t-A."'	that bronchiogenic carcinoma has advanced to a position of first place
’	in men from one of about eighth place in frequency-and this all within
j-^V.	. the last thirty-five or forty years.
!>; ‘ ' ' *	Along with the increased incidence of the condition there has also
. * \. •	been a progressive distribution in favor of the male Sex. For example,
; ;y; •'	• when Adler compiled his statistics the ratio of males to females was
-i_____—___ r_______:_____,— Jo -
1938 and 1943 he found the ratio 4,5 to t biit in another series
id 1948 it had become twenty-four to one.	-
preponderance of incidence in males raises the question of ‘	: 1§
sexual factors play a role in conferring a relative immunity	fig |g
female sex. In other words, does the state of femininity make •	- §&§ ||j
sible to develop a bronchiogenic carcinoma?	; «|ll|
lin information on this question Kemler and the writer1 used	; Ksim
method of transplantation of small fragments of human bron-	^ §||S1I|
: carcinoma from a male subject into the anterior chamber of	rajgij
gs* eyes. Our experiments showed that the transplantation was	, 1 Sjl|lj
uccessful in.,both female and male animals. Likewise Gum- '	WuM
1 assaying tEe male sex hormones in ten cases of bronchiogenic	Bgllpw
a in men found that there was no essential difference between	tHht
:r subjects and normal controls of the same ages. Therefore it .	rapplj t the state of masculinity or femininity has no inherent quality
iponslble for the marked preponderance of incidence of bron- * •	- jgraf
carcinoma, in men.	lllll
all of this it seems reasonable to assume that there has been	; j I in our culture or methods of living in the last thirty or forty ■ • ? |||||
ich has been responsible for the remarkable increase of this	\ g|||j
id that men have been more exposed to this carcinogenic in- ' ■	g|f|||
lan women. Occupational factors would seem to be relatively	' ‘ . ||j||
ant since all economic classes and men engaged in all kinds of - -	| |||f ]
ins seem to be affected. The butcher, the baker and candle- ■	1 ||||
ter all are prone to have the condition. Moreover both urban	' ;■ g
dwellers seem to be subject to it about equally. ’ *	'i llpi 1 one speculates on what factors we are exposed to now dif- .
om those in existence formerly, various possibilities suggest	;
:i. One of these of course is the great increase in the use of *	■' jj! |||||
1	products since this is the automobile age. Preliminary observa- . ^ jj j |||j| this point, however, fail to show that oil field workers, garage ■’ y ’j: uMM
s and others particularly exposed to petroleum products or to	j |j
1	of exhaust funies from automobiles have a significantly greater	j: I Bjjlig
: of the disease than others. Without mentioning other possi-	. j ] Kg|j|
>t which there is no striking incriminating evidence at the pres- '	;! i j||||
ive can take up for consideration immediately one factor which	Sgjjfji
be very important. That factor is tobacco smoking, especially	v Warn
^ *	'*<>4 ■ .	THE B.VLI-ET1N	'
; ■' '.““l .
!' -!	. a w0‘
|k;.> ■ • [. • , • •
my. •. |«o.	.
I[ I	' , M-4' _ PI I III I . GS X
1| #$•■■• V ■ . E8L. ISfik Ufa lira W fHffl •. *
f M	- ‘	MnC. l»6*lT XfretOTU* *UVT dCHSfft OWH
a k \ j.«* v> '	, *	■ .	«cwnr
| F 1 ’fiJSV.v* * .	. •	ahqukt of **ocmo
SB '$W*L'*V •	. ntciin BED (ENfiu. rtWMit ftHlftVrtOH
ur JjptJE" n . ,t \ *	119 ewe* (MUi)
it	‘ :	... HI KIX wwcft -	■	.	'
I £	‘ ’ ‘ * \ „r . . ■ ■-■ ws cue* (wus)
f | S	: '■ ■’•■	Fijr. 1—In this chwt * comparison Is made between the
I r	• ■ *™unt of HnoktoK done bv 60S mile patent) with
Iff	' * "•	"' ■;' bronchiogtolc carcinoma, and 780 mea without lung
Jg i;v£K- .., ■	cabccr of wpro^itelj-the wme age poupi, economic ■
® J J	■ ' ’ ■•' .v :. ■ •'■ states end percentage of nrban and rural residence,
H ]	- fcXJAt’smoUts have vised from 1 to 9 dprettei per .
I i 5®^i\Ar-V-1; £i - S*.a.y”or note than SO years. "Moderately W J*
S'	. JL io to IS dgareltes per day for more than 20
a® li	>' -\;.r .waft. “Heavv” nnoktB we those who hare wed from
I	\	V K 20 cigarettes per day for wore than 30 years. .
&	bt "emissive1' .Is Indicated the we of from SI to Si •
Si t	'■ • ■ ‘cigarettes per <3tv for £0 years, and by “chain’' mokert
Eg M	H”' is meant those vho have used SJ dfwetiH or more	.
Eg: I	■.■■'' -r' ' '• '■ , ■■' ■■ 1	per <jav for ftt least20 ye*r$
It! J	! ■'■'•■* • •', .... ‘	.
B	■ ■ ■' ■■.••■ ■ ■ ■ ‘'
■' '■■ ■ ' ■ ^
II	smo^n2 may bt 611 imPt>rtant factor in the edalog I N&^^10^#i^.cardnoina has been suggested bjr
I	OTggwdcA in his monogwgh. Tylecott, Hoffman,. M< P | f “ iicHct,11 Arkin and Wagner,15 Roffo1' and Muller1 were add
II	j Ipf ^tio^ikers who prior to 1940 thought that coking, espedally < 1 in this respect. In 1941 Ochsner and DeBakey ® 11	a^doQ to the sinularity of. the cuive of increased sales of ciga
cotoov to die greater prevalence of primary cancer of tl
1 1 ' • • . ... g|1 j ^^^A;i«?»<V^Rccfcidy-Wynder and the miter1.* made the largest statistical stut
% !	>1 of this question reported up to that time. A survey of the smoking hab.
$1	"’ C.was made in .684 proven cases of bronchiogeoic carcinoma. Ths.infc
®" i $&^v -..' CvmaaonAVas obtained by means of a personal interview with each panei
questionnaire was used and most of the interviews were made	.
n-medical women who were ignorant of the diagnosis at the	1 • pa|
questioned the patients. The subjects of the interviews were . ' g| ||| cial and economic classes and from widely scattered parts of	- Kg §fflj
y. It was found that of <$05 males with bronchiogenic car- *	. jS |J||E
;her thati adenocarcinoma, 95.5' per cent had smoked more	■ . 11||||
: pack of. cigarettes daily for more than twenty years as com-	ij jS
l 73.7 per.cent of 780 males without lung cancer who had	* |||
much and who were of a comparable age group. Even more	j|P|s ||
was the fact that among the lung cancer group 5 i.i per cent	• 3Sb|1 ||
d more than a pack a day for at least twenty years as com- ■ ■
1 only 19.1 per cent who had smoked that much in the group, r ng cancer. In only 1 per cent of these cases did the patient not	' .. jjlpap
all or less than one-half pack of cigarettes daily. The most	’
atures revealed from the srudy were that in the correlation	Basra
ns to exist between cigarette smoking and bronchiogenic car-	. jpjafj
parendy it is ne^essaiy that the man be a heavy smoker (at	} S|Pi|5
f pack of cigarettes per day) and that he has smoked for a	;
d of time (usually 'twenty years or more). (Fig. 1).	•< f |
>mmonly held belief that women smoke as much as men and	' "' ||||||
ore they should show as great an incidence of bronchiogenic	. ^
as men is not bome out by a statistical study. In order to	.
this point two groups of hospital patients without lung can-	|||||| j
nterviewed. All of them were more than thirty years, of age	|||||
were comparable as regards economic status. One of these nsistedrof 552 women and the other of 780 men. Of the wo-5 found that 7p.fi per cent were nonsmokers and only 1.1 per	■! . |||||f
moked more than a pack of cigarettes a day for at least twenty	' ■ . t jggffiggj
contrast this percentage of 1.1 is to be compared with one of	' ?;! |||j||
l'in the males who did not have lung cancer. It is an interesting	. ’(i e||||j|
:e that this ratio of 19.1 to 1.2 compares closely with the sex	ji
cidence 0/ bronchiogenic carcinoma, which was 18 males toj	■; .j |||||||
>ur last 150 cases. It is chiefly the girls and young women who	;;
male heavy smokers and they have not yet had time to smoke	■ 1||||
y years or more. Perhaps in another decade or so there will	j ffi§||||
larked increase in the incidence of bronchiogenic carcinoma in	i;
At present, and presumably during the time that the disease	. J ®1|||||
showing its great increase, it secriis clear that men have been	t ||||g|s
■■ • • ' • • -bt;?;-/ 1 ■ * . , ■ ■ ■
J 6 6	the bulletin
. ---- . 1
. . ---------- .
f . — -
" 100-0 -
w-; ..
s*°'° H	'
y*^cao.■ ’ •( .	1	. .
,	Vi	S
■■ ' !<«• I . ■ • .■■
JV ‘i . •	.5	[S3	mi	••
£<? -■ .. . '	v>/>. §	'	*j
|y; .	McJjiB fe Ifc **» liU_ ifi»L
s'rSf'". * **	• * *' I**8 U'inT KHCUUlT *UVT WUtKL t**m
««*
’	Atfft/HT 6f *hCWW
Sf.*V ‘ *	'
11/.VS* ■ ' '	IbMt traa tCKWL	WUUTW
5J*r Vi i‘ v	■	*	?M WU (KMil)	,
•' ■., .	ea uhom. hwita kmhhn
•'	■ Ml (rotiut) .	■ •
-	. ' ■ .
5v -* •	Fig, 2—Chart which thm the enror In tht belief that	.
women In the cancer ajt (more than 40 years old) have	.
ssS"'‘"'v ' ■ ‘	imabtd m much for « long (20 years) k« men of the 1	■
.	same nf< grotip. The desigu&tfont “light’’, “moderately	. * . •
wr;?» ■ - ■	heavy", “hfir/’, “exwsslre’ tnd “diilo” have the some	,	_
Sv.r til-'..' , ■ .	■ meanings os In Fig. 1. ,	' ' 1
■...._	. . ■ ■
■	• ■■■■... . j$\:: ; • • • - • . ' * ■ *
&, r-: .. . much more exposed to the consequences of smoking than have v/omia. • . c^v.y . ' Thus the greater preponderance of lung cancer in men may perhaps be . .
' -explained-(Fig, ?). ’ .	■ ■	. ’ ■
;^K; . ■ 0£ importance in considering a possible relationship between cigar-, ■ ...
f ttte smoking and bronchiogenic carcinoma is the" iiitercsdrig article, .of •' :; ^:£1;‘;V'7..Dungal,!0 the Professor of Pathology at the University of Iceland; tie • •:
•	finds that in that country primary cancer of .the lungisstilfa’compara*; vv.:.V tively rare disease, being ninth in. frequency among carcinomas'of van-.. ’! %\'y.ous organs.^At the same time the amount of cigarette smoking is very , .
7' nwch less than in other counuics. For example, in 1931 the per capita ' ■ yf,:-,'’..., " .consumption of cigarettes in Iceland was only one-eighth ofthatin the - ‘ ' United Kingdom. Since World War II, however, the amount of cigar- ' , tfv'f;.■ ,. ctte smoking has gready increased, but presumably an insufficient period . . v V of time has elapsed to have an effect on the incidence of btonchipgenic i,’-• ‘ carcinoma. . . ' '	' ■*-
*	__ * _ __ ___— ;
r■“ T he evidence, thereiore, seems at least suggestive that escessiveagdr- . ctte smoking earned out for a Ions period of time (nventy'years of I'
»j	! fl HRH
carcinoma daring the last thirty-five years. The proof I ■"> ■
31 remain absent untif it becomes possible to produce \ • 1
ttaitv from'some nr all of the products contained inJ £	■ ;[|
.Various possibilities as to the source and nature of the '' . \ II
stances come to mind. Of importance could be tars - f’1'‘j- j; :ll .MhSS^H
smoke and inhaled into the lungs, substances contained 9 Y'	III
:h as arsensic, insecticides used in the growth of the	'Il
■	’	Ml
t brought out by the study of Wynder and the writer11	;! ill <
.'as an excessive smoker a few years ago the fact that he	|j ;j j j
;d smoking recently does not preclude the possibility	!' I I |
may still have been an important factor in the develop-	j;. II ■
mtly acquired bronchiogenic carcinoma. This pheno-	ji II
ous to the lag which is well known to occur experi- '	j; II
notise between the application of a carcinogenic agent	|j II
ce of the tumor,	l II
is realized that excessive cigarette smoking is not the	j| II ■
Factor. After all in i per cent of our cases the patients	| III
:d. Similarly it is well known that not every man who	.. ■ j|L \
:hain smoker for many years develops a primary cancer	jj II
Fhere are no data available at present to indicate just	j! ill
eloping such a cancer a man takes when he indulges in	jj ill
g over a long period of time. 1	jlll n variety of bronchiogenic carcinoma, and the .one . -II HBSS3H 1 the remarkable increase, is the epidermoid or squamous ■; ;|1
others the pathological diagnosis is “undifferentfated" ’	Mil
itological varieties have been described by different	.111,
e most common designated types, other than those just	’J II-1' |Bn|s|U^|
the adenocarcinoma, the round cell and the oat cell	j||'
rc is considerable doubt, however, about the correctness	\ j|S KgHjraHj
: these so-called morphological differences noted in cell	| jfll .j BRhSIH id types really represent different varieties of cancer. ‘ ' ,, || Hm1B|
n examination of different parts of the same tumor will '	'■ |I' ■HgSrajfiH >glcal variations which could easily lead to different ' ' ,1- MMkH : should adhere too closely to rigid classifications. For . ■ Tp Is
recognizes a round cell or an oat cell carcinoma as a	|l BfflfflgBfl
>m an adenocarcinoma he may have difficulty in support-	11 , HrawH
: will examine other parts of the same tumor. In general, .	■1 I ■H8H9|
IbH Ely '-1'	'T'.’ ' ■ •- 1
?he BULLETly	'
S ■ js^-'	however, ic seems to the writer that perhaps two common types occi
wt j sj>A :	of which one is the epidermoid or squamous variety and the other t
raj' j j;£i	adenocarcinoma. Most of those tumors which are designated as und
H S .	ferentiated seem to be less differentiated variants of the epidermoid tyj
| _ J	. The importance of considering the morphological varieties here
h j ] fcv- '*'	that perhaps one can think of the epidermoid carcinoma of die bronch
1 * I fcst"'	85 8 ^un^amenta^7 different disease from the adenocarcinoma, j Ji j Ki% [least in so far as its etiology and pathogenesis are concerned,'^* any r<
§ j v	^at is a concept which the writer would like to suggest with the f
jf ' *	realization of the danger of placing too much reliance on morphologi<
IXI •,	classification. To some pathologists it may seem an error even to reec
j jj! ’	uize the existence of adenocarcinoma of the bronchus. Yet unquesac
‘	r^tre ®*e bronchial carcinomas which present microscopically'
!	adenoid arrangement of the cells suggestive of an attempt to foi
! f j	. glands. In our experience one finds such tumors about equally distribuc
IIS	between the two sexes and they are far less common than the epidemic
*	' or squamous variety which is the .ordinaiy tumor occurring predon
f; Mf’ji-' ■■	nandy in males, . ■ ' .
i • |§^i v.	According to the suggested concept one can think of the cpidermc
j i	or squamous carcinoma as being caused by a transmutation or metapbu
( < IlMvC	adult bronchial epithelium due to the action of carcinogenic influeric
■	of which'cigarette smoking seems to be an important one. On the oth
jhlil '	■ hand there is some evidence that the group of tumors, commonly call
Eii	. by various names such as bronchial adenoma; cylindroma, carcinoid, c
i \	• ce^ round cell br adenocircmoma in many instances may arise fro
|i H :	fetal bronchial buds which have remained dormant until adult life. T]
\	evidence for this idei will be presented later. Here, however, it may I
t ff '*1 ' ■	• stated.that if this concept is true those tumors just mentioned; which a
If » ‘’	1 eit'ier P0Knd% or acruall7 malignant, may be thought of as a conve ' «/ 1 'Jv- ■ s'on embryonic epithelium rather than adult epithelium into canc
i ;	• cells. This group of cancers thea should be regarded as representing i
’ ^ • .	entirely different condition from the ordinary common variety of ej
\ || ■ '	dermoid or squamous bronchiogenic carcinoma,
f ” :	' ■ ■^r*ed!-1 i11 1934 proposed that the.bronchial adenoma originates
; ’.	the bronchial mucous glands. Previously Relsner55 in 191S and Wessl
■	■ ■:' ' ■ an<* ^a^ni3 “ *93* had postulated more specifically that the origin w
\	the epithelium of the ducts of the mucous glands. In 1941 Goldman ar
it ducts or the glands. Stout55 like\vise in 1943 considered the " ■	• 1	I. Mg ||lj
:t glands to be the origin. In 1950, in an excellent review of the	['	1 |h| I|£|J
)f adenomatous tumors of the bronchi, Goldman and Conner34 ' 1	^ Bass
that the epithelial cells of the serous fttid mucous glands’ of the -	j
and bronchi, or die ducts- of these glands, form the origin of '	.
ailed bronchial adenomas, the cylindromas, the carcinoids, the	\:	fipjPP
1 mL\ed tumors and the carcinomas which may arise from any '	t.	I
. Therp is no good reason to doubt the correctness of any of	i	|
potheses. None of rhem really is opposed to the idea advanced	| ;	j J ||
nack and the writer1 in 1938, that the so-called bronchial ade-	;	' i ! Ill 11
derived from a fetal bronchial bud which has remained dormant.	j I |lj jl
y disagreement that can be said to exist is that according to our	j I |j|f |g
nany of the varieties of tumor just mentioned arise in latent em-	jPflyi m
bronchial buds which contain the bronchial glands, whereas the	:	|jj
just quoted apparently assume that die tumors arise from -adult	j 1	|jji§§jffif|
y formed glands and ducts, Harris'*, after a study of human	\,	]wj|il||
ind newly boms, points out the similarity of infantile types of	I:	|&&||j||
cs, especially the bronchial mucous glands and die peribronchial .	{j	\ wjpj||l|
itracheal lymphadenoid tissue, to the histologic findings in bron-	_!	.. * jagM
lenoma. Since, in the material studied, the bronchial mucous	| j	||j areas
ipcurrcd not only just beneath the mucosa but more deeply .	j |	lfi |||Sj
1 the cartilaginous rings, and since the lymphadenoid tissue was	| i	||11|||
tot only peribronchially and peritracheally but within the walls	i 1	gra 11||
chi and trachea as well, Harris states that it can be deduced that j	|§g|| | m
arising from such tissues may be intramural or extramural or may i	g|
into the bronchial or tracheal lumen. He also mentions the well- ,	jBBpf | |
fact that adenomatous tumors have been found in childhood and :	■j BjP^ |
) the article by himself and Schattenberg5* in which several such	g
in children, one only seven days old, were reported. Finally he i	j- |ftplrjp f
lat his observations are compatible with the observations and	1 j	, i|
Womack and the writer.*1 ’	; •	;
: reason for regarding the group of tumors commonly designated ’ ’ •!	i; wpaKi
jcarcinoma, as welt as oat cell, round cell carcinoma, cylindroma 1	! aagpagHB
cinoid*as essentially a different condition from the epidermoid or	ra|||||
us cancer of the bronchus is the fact that there is no convincing	;j
e that cigarette smoking has any etiological influence in the pro-	> j	<j
. of the former group of cancers. -In fact when a bronchiogenic	j ']	j Bre|5|j|
I	, »70	' THE BVLLETIN *
:&■' ' • ‘ smoker it is more Hktly to be one which is diagnosed as an adtnocarc ’c"v ‘ • noma or pne:of its variants (oat cell, round cell carcinoma, ecc.) chan ‘ '• an epidermoid carcinoma. Moreover there is no evidence that the aderi -'J'' - carcinoma has partiripated in the striking increase in bronchiogenic ca cinoma'in general. Although apparently there are actually more cas ^ '• of adenocarcinoma found than formerly, the small increase in this typ ■ji' '' in conttaclistincnon to the large number of cases of epidermoid carcu 01m, Can probably be accounted for by such factors as the greater nun *■_ ber of .people in the cancer age nowadays, better means of recogniuo: gftt .. etc."-- '.■■■• ‘	• '	■
1';^:	According to the concept mentioned above it seems tempting 1
||W:-	assuine'that those carcinomas designated as adenocarcinoma, oat cell ar
. round cell carcinoma arise from an.embtyomc bronchial bud which h-Spf'/ ’■ > failed tq develop into normal tissue and has remained dormant for man SjjSk’i ’• years before being transformed into a carcinoma. The fact is of coun [£•?*'; ■■ ' well established that in the growth of the embryo the lungs are form* ' by a process of budding from the trachea which in turn is formed fro: the Embryonic foregut.	■ •
'Indevclopiogtiib concept the so-called bronchial adenoma furnisht ,•. the first suggestion, , Often the microscopic appearance of this nttni I- . ./resenibies' ipjal-lujiaf so closely that it is practically impossible to di 'ungulsh it frdm'the lung of, for example, a i 6 weeks old human embiy
■	So far as I knowthe first: one to note this similarity was Bremer30 of tl ;,-.Deparwittit.of A^totny « Harvard who reported it to Churchill.*1 F< ■;tht'ni(Kt'pit thVceils contain very little cytoplasm so that they give tl appearance of -consLsdng chiefly of nuclei Moreover they arc usuall ^ '--rouid orbats^apeiv'-; ' V ' . ■ •
... Thcncit point to'tstablish was whether .or not these so-called adcm mas ever . become' malignant by developing into carcinomas, When ; 'ioVS.Womack and; I” offered evidence that this tumor is potential ;,' V malignant as demonstrated by the invasion of neighboring lymph' gland |gmi{ j:‘" . -.'wie found rio.supporters of the'idea. For example, in 19^1 Foster-Carret . the Brompton Hospital, London, from a study of twtnty-two cast
Ipp ;, 'stated that he had found noe vidence of malignancy except perhaps sligl i.:., invayon of'^e'broncfei wall in a few instances. Strangely also in I^fV- ' - Engelbreth-HoLm13 of the University Insdtute of Pathological Anatorr .■'.of Copenhagen in an article which carried the title of “Benign Bronchi j£v^V '■ V . Adenomas”,concluded that there was little evidence that those tumo
*	* ' "■ ■ ’ * • '' ' * * * *	'* ' 'BHBEi Km
* ‘t 4	RtB
Primary Cancer of the Lung	17 1
:come malignant although In all of his twelve cases he reported	mm 5®
,vas marked invasive growth. Now, however, many cases of on- •	' mm M
d malignancy have been reported in which metastascs were found .	111111
>psy not only In the regional lymph glands but in the liver and	• . “1 afpra
distant organs as well. (See, for example, Adams,'Steiner and '	rrmi
** Anderson,*4 Stowell,1* Bigger,47- Alexander*1 and Chamberlain	■ • flggaBiB
ordon**.) In 1945 Womack and I," in a paper presented to the	1 ’ , I
can Association for Thoracic Surgery, reported two cases in	• r.| IPPP
autopsy was performed after bronchoscopic biopsies had estab-	. ' ^ |jfsp|§|
the diagnosis of so-called adenoma. In both cases metastases were	.i
In the liver. In one case the bronchoscopic(bi&psy had been made	j |l||j
eats prior to the death of the patient. In the carcinomas which	, j j|| |1§
1 the so-called adenomas the cellular structure corresponds closely	’ j ||S gSS
lat of die latter tumors. In other words the prevailing type of cell	R| yjjm
which has very] little cytoplasm and therefore seems to consist	‘i |§|
’ of nucleus. It has the morphological characteristics of the oat .	|3jS|
■	round cell seerj in those carcinomas which are designated by	v
ethologists by those names. Often also the cells are arranged in	. j|
; which are strongly -suggestive of an adenoid structure and be-	.. ■ ■ gjggjgg
of that arrangement many pathologists would use for the tumor	||11|
me of adenocarcinoma. • ’ ' ■ •	‘ ■ {Sgl IB
deism against the concept that the so-called adenoma and the	. ; <
oma which is derived from it may represent an embryonic bron-	. gg§| f|
)ud which has remained dormant without forming normal long	^ own
las been made on the ground that if this conception is correct then	- < ||i|»
ould expect often to find such buds during the routine examination	:
js. It should be understood, however, that they are of microscopic	1 : ||||||
dess they have become enlarged sufficiently to be recognized as	-!■
^ ■ r . ■ .	■ tH
1904'Albrecht11 coined the term "hamartoma11 for a peculiar	:j: ags pa
of the liver. By this term he meant to imply that it was an expres-	■■ ||| gsjj
f an abnormal growth of the normal structures of the organ. The	•: ||i ||j
is derived from the Greek word, “hamartia," which means failure	[ ||| i|
:h the goal. The idea of Womack and the writer that some of the	A :!
s of the bronchi and lungs result from the failure of embryonic	", sgll§|a
tial buds to develop into normal adult structures is in line with	jj ||||||
:ht’s conception of “hamartoma*1 concerning his tumor of the	.1 IPPPjj
gs?#?/-'.'. ■ ' . 272	THE BULtETIN	-	■
■KwftW' J ’ ' ...I...--- 1 - . 1	_„______
gp^o;.	.... ...............
■	■ of our own conception of the origin of these tumors to that of Albrecht M^V-	for the tumor of the liver described by him. Probably also of a similar
fpj^f ‘ • nature ar4 fhe carcinomas which we4*- reported arising in congenital m	' cysdc disease of the lung and in association v/ith other developmental
;J| : " 'abnormalities of the lung. Although some of the recent writers have applied the term “hamartoma’1 to the tumors which seem to us to arise i|r I ■' V ^ fetal bronchial buds, most authors still designate'them as bronchial adenomas. Perhaps it is fair enough to state that even the use £f the term I A hamartoma implies that the tumor has arisen in an embryonic rest. Those wp I	‘ who use that term therefore seem unconsciously to agree with our con-
||| fivJ'" ' cepdoa of its origin.	. ' .
Sft ! - ■ ' ?•'’ oxir fi*® article in 1938 Womack and I*T noted a resemblance of BBi f	. ■' these tumors to the raised, tumors of the salivary glands and therefore
proposed the name of mixed tumors of the bronchus! The reason for Hi [f	' lh’s suggestion was that in some of the cases we found cartilage and even
HP f ' • ^one’ an^ ^ some ^erc W4S atl arrangement of the epithelium |j| I	t^lit °^ten seen m Sfl^vary gland tumors. Names, however, are
BSf-M'f'- ■ ■ °f little importance. . - '• .	; ■ V'-V
||| i	Of passing; interest is the'possibility that some of the .tnmors of
Srife&:',,S ■ ^'bronchus, other than those of predominantly epithelial type, also |||>	■ may arise from embryonic buds. For example, a chondroma, a fibroma or
Hlfs ifiS-iv'''-!- .' V a hpoma may have such an origin. The embryonic bud is composed not HI i ' on]y en^°^enn but of course of mesoderm as well. The latter is des-Pfi I . j '.r-0»ed to form connective tissue, smooth muscle,-bronchial cartilage,‘and W& 1	• any other tissue of mesoblasdc origin. If, therefore,Tthernes6bkstid tissue
fHi H	' reacts abnormally to some unto:d\yn growth'stimulus atiiinor may arise
t in which mesoblasrfc tissue will predominate..The chondroma,.fibrdina HI I] f&Bf-'-'.'' • andh'poma could perhaps be explained on that basis. •/ Although ‘those tumors &re'rare we have had several examples of each kind.' Possibly-a llr n fflr*j -•' ^	evidence that such tumors arise from bronchial buds
Hr t Wb' ■ ■ ^ ^act ^at epithelial elements have been reported -in chondroma of ||j|- ||	the bronchus by McDonald, Harrington and Gagett,4* a' finding which
a®! [i ’■' have confirmed io some of our own cases. Since the buds contain 111' jf ^'1	hoth endodemal and mesoblasdc elements it might- .be • ejected that
|||£ ifi ' • tumiirs arising from’ them would be composed of both elements. Just aj Isir- If j	the epithelial elements may give rise to a carcinoma, so malignant tvunon
lit I]* '0: ^ ' may also, arise from the mesoblastic components. Thus a fibrosarcoma fli !.c;v.' . may develop. Examples of that tumor have been reported recently bv
•wrj |\'I, 1/ .** ' I ■ * ■ 1	* , -	"tl T > %	*■:'-■ .■ -■>'	,• - ’■ * *	II '' iif WflKMB
' * 'i • ’ ' 1	•	■ *	’ ' * ' ill *'• ^4" ■WwflrJiMft
' '	- -'M
■■ >-. J '-HhKCTV *£w
' ‘ ■	' I •'
Yimmy Cancer of the Lung 273	-1
---- - _________________________ ________________ 1	- ‘-i '' ■ MfiwB fig
\ r’ '. ■SSC™S (sS
rom our clinic, by Carswell and Kraeft" and by Curry and	v Ig|||l|j
iven more striking, however, is the occurrence of a combina-	' | |j
trcoma and carcinoma .in the same tumor, We have had nvo	' *-j Bg$m i &
of the latter combination which will be reported by Bergman,	i |a
1 andKeroler.4T •	• v-||§ti|j
ugh not arising in a bronchus there is another variety of prim-	. I ||||jg |||
noma of the lung which should be mentioned briefly. It has	. '"\ |«§|PI
gnized only recently. It has been given various names of which '	• • ''I ftra&l
commonly'used are perhaps alveolar carcinoma, multiple ade-'	• .■ ''jj&ra||re
; and carcinoma mucocellulare. One of the most striking fea-	, ■/, , j s|s||5®
fie condition is that it has a multiple origin. However, when the	f Ipnpi
first recognized the multiple origins may all be confined to one	■ :• jjlipfw
le lung.The tumor arises in the parenchyma of the lurig appar-	' ■ ■ ’’
Jie cells lining the alveoli. The name “multiple adenomatosis”	' -1' 1
applied to the condidon because sometimes one can recognize	| g&||||||
pie sites of-origin as several nodules'.-The few cases which up	I
esent have been reported have either been uniformly fatal or	■ 1 - jjiPPPI
yon the way to becoming so, with perhaps one exception. That	;'si | \ ||»|§||^
is a case designated as a carcinoma mucocellulare and reported. ■	y% B... \-
nan arid Neuhof.4® After a lobectomy the patient was alive and	\ I SIIIIIIeI
years later. In three cases of my own one of the patients died	'"• I |j
ree years after lobectomy and another one sligh'dy more than ■	I■* Ii|§| |
rs after a pneumonectomy. In the third case, although the pari-	. '* I j| i a
!1 livmg, Jess than a year has elapsed since a lobectomy was	’ , ||||| g
i.	■ _ |||||
rondidon is somedmes, but not always, characterized by the.	. ’ w ,
of a large amount of mucus which may be coughed up by the	(. |j
id apparent also in the specimen of the tumor itself. Several	11 §11®
rts will be found in an article by Delarue and the writer.49.	• . pjj | yjs&M
ill be found in articles by Drymalski, Thompson snd Sweany,50	.-‘'Vi /j- i
I	and Pierson51 by Stephens and Shipman” by Swan,53 and by	' ‘■HI i|!||||
tnd Fisher.*1 ‘ '	V j ,L ||||pj|p
narkable fact about this recently discovered rumor is that it ■	*{'
be identical in both gross and microscopic appearance, as well	* ;l ||||||||
ical course, to a disease of sheep known generally as “jagziekte,"	.
ie, a South African word, which means “driving sickness," has	'
1* j ■ j1 * § * 1 a 1 i / * 1 1	i' "
H J# M£,;'^‘h'. ,I •	' ‘ "’ *’ ,/'•'♦*?/,„ ■".'	^	t ■ r . k .*
® It m>h' 1* •	* * ■ » 1	’ ‘ ■■
g	. • .
J5 n .»	* " i	*
f I	* , '	'
if I?'■ ~’L	■ 2?4_THE BULLETtM
a j y*^'-	many parts of the, world. In Iceland it occurs in epidemic form and is
ft f iiS'l	responsible for enormous losses of sheep. In recent years k has been
ifl •+£''	. recognized in the Western pan of the United States, There seems to be
f:t.	rather general consent among pathologists who have studied this disease
.	in the sheep that it is due to a virus which has not yet been found.
I	Cow-dry" was one of the pioneers in the investigation of the disease.
§ i	Summary
1	-• ... ’ . . . .
B | £*.	, Bronchiogenic carcinoma has shown an amazingly increased inci-
| |	' dence within the last thirty-five years and the increase seems to be
I : E	progressive. ‘
I ’if. i.	At the present rime it is overwhelmingly a male disorder. ----
i | fiX-	More arid more evidence has been accumulated that excessive ctgar-
|	• ene smoking is an important etiologic factor, although not the only one.
1 :1; :£■; -	^JtTbie great preponderance of the disease in thesis sex js not due v
| { i fsli ■ ■	to any *Pec*al immunity of females. Rather it seems due to the fact that,
| \ = ■-	contrary to popular belief, many fewer women of the cancer age smoke
I : j jgjfof	do men. A statistical study of this question'demonstrates the tnith
1 ’	of this statement. _
1 ’ ' JS&f.'.	’ marked increase in bronchiogenic carcinoma has been in the
I f	. ■ type usually designated as epidermoid or squamous, or a variant recog-
|	nized as a undifferentiated type. •
1 ;	. A corresponding increase has not been noted in the adenocarcinoma
I	' j	" or in those types which some pathologists call round cell or oat cell
§ j;	carcinoma.' *	. .
Ill	Evidence is presented which seems to indicate that epidermoid car-
II	' ig^.4. f ■ ciaoma of the bronchus presents an entirely different etiology from that m w&::‘ r of adenocarcinoma, oat cell or round cell carcinoma. The suggestion is |j| ;	■ V; made that the former type of cancer is due to the metaplasia of adult to S:	, carcinomatous .epithelium under the influence of one or'more carcrno-
' Be“c agents kut ^hat the adenocarcinoma, including the oat^cell and.
H '' " ™und cell carcinoma, arises in a latent embryonic bronchial bud.	' ’
m i	;The recently recognized alveolar carcinoma, sometimes called multi-
M	’’ ' pie adenomatous, which closely resembles the disease of sheep known as
»l 3%:"'	“jigziektc," is briefly discussed.
K	• ■
1 ■;	... ‘ ■
S	IREFERENCES ON FOLLOWING PAG£J
'	1 KiffllgfS™
. KEFEHENCEB	' ' . |
N. M. and Xennaway, £. L.	16. Itoffo, A. H. Der Tabak als Krehser-	.	\
: the Incidence of cancer of	seugende Agens, Ditch. mti. TPacftr.	,
id laryia, 7. Bug. S622W1,	fiJ:l*ST-71, 1937. ■ ’	;
1?. MlUler, P. K.t Tabakmlssbrauch nod	j
E.	L, and Keonaw«.y, K. M.	Lungenca rein oin, Z. Krtbtfortch. p:S1-	| ‘fijHffipBffia idy pf the incidence of c$n-	85, 1939.’ . V j
lung and JarjM, Brit. J.	18. Ochsner, A. and DeBatey, H, Card* -	g j
)0-98, 1917, ‘	noma of the Jung, Arch Burg. ^f.^OS-	R !
>d HlQ( a: B. SmoUn* and	*8*1941. j |
of the. long, Brit. tk$i. J,	19. Wynder, B. and Graham, E. A. Tobecco *	. 1 |
>50. ' -	tmoHnf as a possible etiologlc factor	n ;
Primary malignant grvsthj	in bronchiogenic carcinoma, J, Amir.	. H [
gi and bronchi. New York,	mti.Aitoe, Ijli&ii-36, 1950, .	II |
Green and Co, 1912.	.SO. Dungal, K. Lung carcinoma In Iceland,	I
. and DeBaVey, M, Surgical	Lance tj £.•245-47, 1950. j
mj of primary carcinoma of	SI. Fried, B, M, Adenoma of bronchial	I fHjEgBaip
’■Urgiry, S.-992-1023, 1W0.	mucous glands, Arch. Otokryng, £0;S75-	I
. UnpuiUthid ftrtQnol com-	El, lSJi. • . '	j
"	£2. .Relsner, D. Intrabrtinchlal polypoid	1 .
L, Avery, E. E., Kanter, L.,	adenoma, Arch. Burg. J5;120I-I8, 1928.	I •
U and Laogstoa, H. 't. PrI-	23. Wester, H. aod Rabin, & B. Benign	I ■
nom» of the luogi s 'clinical	tumors of the bronchos, Arfitr. J. tntd.	| s BBsipapajKBl
ISOS cases, Cancer 3:229-89,	Sei. jW;lM-80, 1982. j ;
24. Goldman, A. and Stephens, H. B. Poly*	I .*• ■
G. F. Bronchiogenic card-	poto-bronchlal tumors vitK special ref-
n. Sitrp. .1^:667-74, 1916.	erence to bronchial adenoma, J. Thor,	■	1 Hpffiferepia
G. lv and Bloomer, W. E.	'Svrf. W:32T-iS, 19*1.
sic carcinoma, tianeir JAU~	2$. Stout, A, .P. Cellular origin of bron-	||gggg||jg|
ehlal adenoma, Arch, Path, W.-803-D7,
L 1a and Graham, E, A.	1919. «	.
i the Influence of <ex h’or-	55. Goldman, A. and Conner, C. L, Benign	_
;uccesiful heterologous trans-	tumsrj of the lung* with special refer-	''
of human bronchogenic car-.	ence to adenomatous bronchial tumors,	1
nar J.’78S-39, 1950.	Dlt. ChSil J7.-644-B0, 3950. ,.
. £. N. Heterologous trans-	£7. Womack, N. A, and Graham, E. A.	1 ! ',
of hiunatt and other mam-	Mixed tumors of the lung, eo-ealled	. '
joh, Science es:357-$8, 193S.	bronchial or'pulmonary adenoma, Arch.	1
11. G. Work In. progress.	Path, ££.'165-206, 1838. .
P. iE. Cancer of the iung,	28. Hsrrls, W. H, Jr, Histologic analogy	,
5S-57, 1927.	of bronchial adenoma’ to late preoatal	i;
F.	L. Cancer of the lungs,	and early postnatal structures, Arch.	- ^ v. Tvberc, J9:SS540fl, 1929.	Path. SS:S5-$2, 1913. ' '
VV. D. The tar In cigarette	29. Harris, V. H. and Schattenberjr, H. J.	i
Its possible effects, Avar. /.	Anlagen and rest tumors of lung In-	:
15M-H, 'iS32.	clusirt of "mixed tumors,” Amir, J.	‘
\ Der Bronchiatfcrebs der	Path, /5.'955-67, 19*2. | !■
UGnch. tntd. TVitht. £7:123’-	30. Bremer, quoted by Churchill, nftwet	I [I
n.	E
and M'agner, D, H. Primary	SI. Chuklilll, E, D. In Discussion OQ syn-	• 1 1
321 Foster-Carter, A. F. Bronchial adtn-	45. Carswell, J., Jr. and Krteft, N. H.
j 3 . omn, Quart. J, jlltd, J0:189-74, 18+1,	Fibrosarcoma of the bronchus, J. Thor.
, 83. Engelbreth-Holm, JT.. Benign bronchial	£ur$. J9;117-£>, 1950.	, •
jg Jjv;" . adenomas, Ada elur, teand. 50:383409,	<G. Curry, J. J. and Fuchs, J, E. Expte-
. if ;, 13-W.	. towtion of a fibrosarcoma, J. Thor,
f j Si. Adams, W. E., Steiner, P. E. and Blodi,	Snr$. 75:135-17, 1050..
j.',‘ R. G. Malignant adenoma' of the lung,	47, Berjrtftn, M, Aektnrmh, L., and Kew-
\ jjl }y; Surgtry 11:503-26, 1942. '	ler, R, L. In
>	fl| S .’ 35. Anderson, W. M. Bronchial adenoma	IS. OsSermr.n, ICE. aad Neuho/,‘H. Mueo-
[• !}; •' ' with metastasis to the liver, J. Thor,	cellular papillary adenocacinoraa of the
J . Stirg, It:351-60, MS, .	lone, /, Thor, Surg, JS.-87MS, 1550.
S A ’ Stouell, K. E. Ftnonal communication.	49. DeUrue, N. & and Graham,'E, A.
j 87. Bigger, I, A. Discussion of p riper bv	Alveolar cell carcinoma of the lung
;; Grahnm and Womack, Tiftrena f0.	(pulmonary adenomatosis, jsgilekte!),
' \ 1 ’ ®S. Alexander,. J. Discussion of paper, by	. J. Thor. 5ury. IS.■237-51,1545,
' rj'- > Grahnm and IVomael:, riftrtnct 40.	iO. Drjmalsld, G. W„ Thooipson^R, J. »md
; ;?.v t 39. Chamberlain, J. M. and Gordon, J,	Sweaticy, H> C. Pulmonary /.denomnto-
. ■’, 1 BroncWal adenoma treated by pulmon-	’ sis; report of three cases, ''Amir. J,
- .> ®V resection, J. Thsr. Surg.	Path. £^:10S3-M, 1S4S. '. ■'
. Ktf. ' - 104J, ' - .	Jl, Wood, D. A. and Pierson, P, H. Pul*
, 40. Grfilmtii, A. and Womack, K. .A,	monnry alreolor adenomatosis In man;
. y Problem of the so-called bronchial Aden-	' is this the same disease as Jagiiekte
, ". oma, /. Thor, Surg, JftiOS-H, J945,	Jri sheep? ftmtr, _Rrn. Tvbtrc. W."20J^
•	• . 41. Albrecht, Ii. Ueber Hamartomej Vtrh.	. 2i, 1945. .■	’
•• dtich, path. Qtt, 7:153-57, 1904.” ■	52. Stephens, H. B.' end Sliipman, S. J.
1 [Si 1 . 42. Womack, N. A, and Graham, E, A.	Pulmonary alveolar adenomatosis, J,
'• • Developmental abnormalities of the Jung	Thor, Surg. JS.-S89-60J, 19J5. ‘ • •
f]brondilogente carcinoma, Arch.	53. Swan, L. L. Pulmonary adenomatosis
. ■ Path. If:801-18, J942. '.	of man, Arch. Path. 4~:517-44, 1549.
' i*3’ McDonald, J, R„ Htrrington, S, W.	54. Laipplv, T. C. end Fisher, a I, PH-
E'^Va ' an^ Ctagett, O. T. Hamartoma (often	msry alveolar cell tumors of the lung-,
,rt'--"- ■ '■ . ‘ called diondroma) of the lung, J. Thtr. •	Arch. Patk, 4S: 107-1B, 1549.
) ‘ . ■ Burg. If; 125-42,194J. .	iJ. CJowdry, E. V. Studies on the etiology
; vy'.-" - 44.'BJacIr, H. Fibrosnrcoma. of the bron-	of jagiiekte, /, erj). iltd.
“ , , . cfius, J. 1'har. _Su.rg.is:113TZi, ]M0.	1935. '
> kfe'V; ' ' ' ‘	’
:!l;r :■■■ ' . : .........• . .
r ^ ■	, .
•...	■ - ---
y‘V ■» *<■ . ... , , .	,	, ‘ ,
......!'*..*■'* . .	■ • ' 1
. .. .	- • :. •
’	' . . ■
: . ..... ■
■■ ■ ■ • ■ :	.....
'&<•. \ ■	. ..
: . * ■ 1 % ■ . . *	'
i/.Vi--V. . •* ^ . , i* • -	-■ .
. • {
*
*	m
^	'	TSCAI
Y‘ '	■ .
eeeobt at tea to t?.sa. akb cimm.
17th tBSIL -ty
B. K. BMttt
p.c.t. mam
W. V. ZEB?	’
*	f
*	. . _
‘	.	CD
<-n
,	c=>
Oo
A
•	Vo
■	<5>
BATCO I TO - FI OPm* Aft TORArm i mr, A-nnv
I EnflkK_
¥ — ' ....... * "
* *	1WMT
..... -JwlllTtii iuilctt Tttao* Co.,	lbs E» k> Etner
br. tr. t-i RitUa ISr. I, t. XtrUr
*	Ut IMlal Wqi tf	titf. r. I/Urns
UtsSalt,	fit.', K. I. Ku(
*	Z2al Ut UnntVi	Mi Tt hatoli . Patna
*	Or*	J$r«r*j	Sr. J. t. DtlUa
Mu	tr. 7. 7. Sti*
*	JUb ttOUi. torrU,	Rr. 1. X. O'Utft
iitbmasi,	to. t. *. f«U|a*a
I
*	l.B.UMi,Xau	T*H«
Cu^rUjt*	tv> C. J. liuUr
*	Utt !.u,e., Knlct.
.	Ur. £ul ftww
(SUIAKuAtaa)
■	Utfc->Ota tmll Krt koxlil	tr. J. C. tide
InitttaU, *uttU®'
*	IC» tM-nwlty, ■*•', •’ nr, 1.1.F, Cnent
KnEtra	*
*	jotti	kiwi*	to. r, txbvna
lumtaU, Ins.,
Vy Irt-tai tttcse Jadcw)	IV( Ti 8. Iluntr
UKntety,	pr. Q37V
Ur Eutar	Sr. Ojrr
«
*	JUi	IMattfr T««5i»1eiV	'	Euan,
Ooakltt** t£ I,UC.|	.
Kr. f. T, or. *, c.
■ •
•	* <tb, KtUs«a Ciuir	Jr. S. >, tifaf
XutitiV,	Dr, K. 9, tarn
.	Pr. I. B. Aatcmst
•	tr. *. e. Bcfytr
Jr. E. I>. Itotri
•
*	7ch	Ithst tcftiu Ih^UI,	tr.	Cir
Vlttom
*	Bill Kt* Tedc tolrtnHy,	tr, 1, leak
VffXefc.
•	t
*	!th	I.XJUC.	‘ tr. e. 0. UVZt
>« link.	tr. t. C. (cefcm
*	JtS ' floo-S»ttcri*(	tr. X. t, tinier
Xutllut*, He* tod.	Be. 3.
■	Wtfc	.	Belmti'l* IMmjj
KcvTwk.	tartdl.ULC.
*	Utt taitowl	Hr. C.
■	• O
Terorrtaj	Cn
..... .
..............C>
BATCO LTD • FLORIDA AG TOBACCO LITIGATION
s ! ] I I 5 ft	-3 "^Jf
111! | j J H	W,bf)i ii{ I S J !?{ . j ,H i	ilnkjl ill
■	'! f t ill s Mu i.	ihM its
i if j 5! | hi || J	|-i
•	5 rill I hi fp?	iJrOtHI 111
i IJ J?j i ii j iig I	41
s I l-fil if ! Mi!}	ifHfpliit-fs}
' • |j “■1 I ti ji1 iH l	W>1-*h III
11! !}2111 k l|li 15f| if	a i flags i||
1 u s* i5 al alii * *13	i SnrffJIfl lrf
1 ri 1 .3 .sll I	I illlillil If
»*■-'*	. .
*	*
«/	^ * -t
I
#
t
§ r * •" ■	0 ' K C-3Sfil
i' pp m m n ife	ili I fe iP«i
a «tf-r;K lit ill -! Pi	I -?!« sffii
? *Si ill l! Pkl	* f?| 'tifi
! iil« f I s ii	si! if i|
0	■ £££?!«£ “3 ft* I* !?£?	S-^43 1$ fM|!
-i ft Z*Z |3fl	E <9663;
w If HI I* Ifcl	pbl ■ -g 1W|
1	!lfi 11 i I	[P=! I ®
3 su„i?| «I “J* Jrl f £*	§.§?-? *3- =5g|!
O H: fcff Jg Hi	IfEffS 8 2 a||l»
g U £i e* h II	jljpi Sj*fc
§ *• 1 i t fl iff	? I j nfl
£6fr8QK0f	..
*	*
I i|]f IIII ©111!
? ef $1 Ijj^b 9 mlhvs'wiisl i
i |11! | i sliglf I
is l! %pitin
I p a r iife i ?: !pp r
1 Iffl rf I m ififMH*ips p!
1 :! S « k »9k
t - r'i wftwsl
maatsoi
- ‘ t	*
*1 * - *
*	•
^ fflHap l*i{lj«^f**S a	f[i
§ \u si t milliSt i isiflMm £	IH
? Hlffei# alll'lflpflt! 1	si
i fel l i MMi ‘ ti p.	m
5 I|fkt| jHllUffllrS #|illliivg||5 1	*H
3 :|i”p •e|fll:i?|»|r ||h|ul|trf|	!|
I km IliSfe	If
s sj* st* \rp **' ini*	-*
S6fr80frsoi •	•
*
•	*
g. u iiiiitqfihjripIL Ok sfrfcr III. I
! Ililili^fllii!
i3 |:{!M'!>||ll!fl II Kill! Si
I »E f3f?fe*kLi! Ift IlfSll IK
I ;• SfelhlB ffe M I® Ml
i a II W{»P tepi^fei | " ill #pfSfi I* fi!|l 111!
" .
96*ao>s0l-	'	■
. * ?
*	. *
. „ t Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/tobE
*! Mil f M
if mil 1140 # fe fell illliM Hf PP m | El
^!i|l|l !pjl ll |fclllfi i*lll!^! I ft Mi
MfetfNM ill1 ni i !p
iKttteffia® 111 "dsp lisi 1 ‘B •la
* m "
4 • * ■
*
•	• ■ . t
*
t '
/ ■
•	*.
. • . • ... » .
1
-8.
nek slu tort ef »tr truiftrl, IVjr uttctti #«t tSJ* mU >• ewuttmbly Itu Waa the mi to e* ef trwling eur «e« trial* *M rajuriig pjrltjr ef itjlio,
*
If sbmiiut TXI.C, ««il( contowt eot UQf minuT btolOficU ttftiot es *. emtfUaUtl oumbl bull la V.l.U toturner ef Km Si digit*! lUoueh Ini tt tut* Ire., OsfbrUgt, i* ilretij dolf* thli ■art of wrt for Rvopnn ipanon uA tptti to ttni far our . eo»J4t«tlas l t-ilt prpjul ctrinj i®< iiu of tlie UiV.j ccit of *
■uiUbl* pojcct,
mM.WTOCT!
RtiuMfc cb *ackl®g ul hulth ftuta ti« Jut fc» furi Lu cwUUlr ctarlsetd thr wjortt^ ef Kltttifie cpjdat Ji MA , thit rijintt* nb It o*ftil* ef c*ndni Jang ctmr Is tun, feithcut
WMu ctrctljf «tt It mit V 'uoulW uajt thtt dphtll male* lt»K it u ItdlipcmuUt llsk la tl* efcila ef ertfltl twJlag to CiM«r,
It Is tli) xcunliy itiipM Bat U* etrdtenrdo efftct ef eiprttt* ncki, farfcir*k*V« 1» wj «** and th* crtnU tff«t ea ■*» tlunfert mrflMl. Wjnilr ui civ ethtrj, thrdei, taka tK« »ln tint * jTtstteU neijj- U to Wd finding iltcvrirj of nttlf tint th* wtivwli* of 'tuuUM' aif k«, nfclci My tot la up tut I* fsiiiil*
In the P»IK‘. lUti ef bgtlriji of outser,
O* riw it tint itec* frgftfud* tpSr.it Da cnAlm hilt It DsUktly to bt tfftutivi, fruduili utni iwU b* feuni of rtlacing tfai orcnU «ount of *»3i« fradunl f«r mdt night of eljirtttr,
Tjtitt uli If el|*»tt*« iu h ilhrtl to ti*t os inn|i th* tcdcc?
•iistt 1*1* oak* y° elpnth tta U lil «r firo ytttt tp thu a jlplficut nAictt* of lug war narttUty rill btecex tjfmot la V.S.J. rituo tbo uzt tro
JMloijh T.XJt.C. ctthOOii ttUl Ufcw thi Tf«* tbit 'mnUu'
>	la «*rt juorut, la frutlc* th* Uita*b7 In V.S.1, hi] f«sS hm * good
io4 tf txnacxa frcurd rith th* oppoiitise. ffoforbLmtelr, hjwrtr, tUi h»i tOcfa th» fora ef a hict-Jy unSednkle cafiUUn *cniil« for a -ciprttt* riti (Hi mlhit iseunt of uAt naiitint *ith good flnour (™»i fllS*Won for th* ia6oUi*it nob)’) u) ilnrtlilu *ltb jqlid tiiiti tliUi l* is full 07,
If mr fem of WW, diTMt or ludlrtet It unjtrf tbta th*
I>«!ier ufucat etkii (Cla*. Otrt i* l out f« th* t.t thluitrr eaUtrtiTOlj, tewth TXf .0., aUrtiu a pepw ef nuiiti to AUeonr to *b*t mart tha ermll jratectlu of «ste p«r suit rtlght ef tclieco l> icT2uc««d bj *ucb fnion u tfittleU ta^otttlM Mi ,' . phj*ie*l	of l<tf, ul to dltcevw th* mt ItMpUl) nut
17 rideb u» **wnt of cok* fro* * ciantt* cu ki ntotd (cauiiUct rith pd tJnoir) by Ctudnl or fbfuMl tnibtl ef tie lc*f Airlag ■uufastm or V of 4 filter jSaf. *
emcuBiBW
1. jaticujh tbsri nr*iot mo* loult tr to th*
projertio# of tb totil lung ttxecr nsrtclitr *Mcb cu flirty bt ttMhM to egUif, toltsUf le
cfitfwi in V.liJU 1«« eel Lev itiiaiil/ dortt th*t	^
tlw lUtlitled corrtlitlan it r«l tPi rtfluti *
«W 1*4 rffttt idltimAlt.
1. Ttrrt retlu IB Utt for diUtt li to Tint it	§
»urt tj ’cniutton'i CfWso dtfftri ti to	^
CO
. BATCO LTD - FLORIDA AG TOR Arm r.mrsvrrnw
^ #
#
l*f *
1 ® s l^-i frl f al	«,*	ji* 1
' * 4 IPl! iiiii I II f %Js fi} 111* {?! I
til ifili uu i ti. si'*!! ji llifi ill i
% ME m m$\
* pfii IfiJfif liiiifi ini ij |||}
■	Iflf fcfe feitHffl fe 0 jfe} f
in J life imf m S li Iff! I
« U ■ * I .	4P si
■	| - filjj *\
. '	a- M s
M
" % *
* . \ .
I
*
I	■

February	'	■
1971
aecial Executive Report	‘
prepared for)
Thomas P. Ahxensfeld	’ Horae® R. Kornegay
John V. Blalock	Kenneth McAllister
Janes C. Bowling	Ross R. Hillhiser
John Sresnahan	John F, Kills
DeBaun Bryant	Dan Provost, III
i
Sarle C. Clements	H. C. Roemer
*	*
Joseph F» Cullman, 3rd	Paul Dt Smith
Franklin 8. Dryden	William S, Smith
J. C. B. Ehringhaus, Jr.	.Arthur J. Stevens
Edwin P. Finch	Richard Stinnette
H. Galloway	Frank L. Sundetrora
Frederick*?• Baas	P« Robert Tisch
.Milton E. Harrington	Charles B. Wade, Jr.
Robert K, Hein Ann	Robert B. Walker
qyril F» Hetsko	Frarik J. Welch
Curtis H« judge	Addison Y. Yeaman
TJ28467
February	,
i-fcjauc nt u«e-i	1971	*
Special Executive Report
On December X, 1970, The Tobacco Institute	'
published an advertisement in the New York Daily
i * t
Newa, the Sew York Times, and the Washington Post,	.
entitled, "The question about smoking and health Is still a question.14
The copy was prepared by an advertising agency, and edited and approved by the Communications committee and the Institute staff. It set forth £)\e cigarette industry's attitude toward smoking and health and described the industry's research support.
Mr. Kornegay sent a reprint to each member of Congress in mid-Decenber, with a personal letter.
Included in this report are a copy o£ his
»
-	letter, a copy of the advertisement, and excerpts from the acknowledgements by menbers of Congress in which you will be especially interested.
We believe this project achieved a high and favorable impact.
T28468 William Kloepfer, Jr.1
SAMPLE
KqukCW	,	1	•
Deceniber 15, 1970
Honorable George D. Aiken United States Senate Washington, D. C.
, » *
Dear Senator Aikeni	•
I hope you had a chance to read this statement which we published in several newspapers the first of this month.
We mean what we say about our contnitment to honest scientific research to help answer the questions about tobacco, and vould welcome your opinions, X can assure you that no amount of carelessness about the facts, for which some of the anti-tobacco forces are responsible, is going to put us off course in seeking the truth, -• which is the only way to resolve the continuing smoking and health controversy.	'
We hope that our industry's voluntary discontinuation of broadcast cigarette advertising, as formalised by the Congress to be effective January 2, will help to provide a climate beginning' in 1971 for the kind of objective approach to the tobacco question which the public deserves.	.
Kindest regards, I am,
•	Sincerely,
Horace R. Komeg&y
TZ8469
After millions of dollars and over 20 years <
The question	about smoking and	health 1 is still a question.
For Iho past two decades. hundreds of aclentlfts	elforfa with comptototy notvnslrlcllv
tuivo patlotmodlhoatondaof oxportmentg and writ-	In 1W4. flu Industry established
lenmralomofwWdiln a dodtcalotf effort (p explore	known as CTFt, UjeCotmdl for Tobac<
tho <tuist!oft al «wkK) and health.	USA. to protkta financial support to
fUnun. So far, in splta ol this mrtnfte cnotl. thora	Independent lots all phasi
«a omliwnt actontlsl* who quuOon wtwlftar any	tmmdfMWi Comptetalyautonom
ccmn) relationship has twn proved between clqn-	nxch acflvfly b dbacted by a boon
rtlte smoklrtc and human dfieasa—Including lung	Msts and physWlane who retain their*
cancer, coronary heart draw, or emphysema,	their respective unkerslttes and bw
They batlova ttxt yurua rnora <A eKtwi»ttv« WfttU-	board has fell aathorlty and respofislb
satlon w» ba rwpitmt to cfacr up wttat Is Indeed	development and dncdoo of the n
M* a muddy picture.	Each researcher noMw ■ cant
«Vhilhi>bHiil«mwll*lhlKettatillj))t)ipeiiiM-	freedom to publish the results of hfsv
and-etleet retoHomMpj, whldi have bean claimed	the results may 1m. As of Itits year, C
lo ex tat br government agendas and nlttor groups.	granls tatatlng om 17 minion doluti
la much mom COtnpfm then «tgln«>r IhoitgM. to	In 1«M, Iho tobacco (nduntty n
fact. vmiKIiom who claim a cansa-and-etfscf tele-	ancnf for additional independent i«m
I HofBhlp has been proved admit that n® particular	amowli to IS tnlfflon dollar*, TWs Cm
IntfrecKont. an U occnfi In tiparatto tmolw, has been	mada lo AMArERF. Iha Education i
demornwWfld on ttv# cnuce of any pnrtlcvtnr disease.	Fonod-nUon. wWrf> h • reseatch arm
CD	can Medical Association. Tt» ERF,
who mpon*arm<t (I* retearch	mnkes grants tor tdmUle tesearch '
•sj There nro those who balfove lhat voluntary health	freedom and autonomy.
Q nsMClntfon* have pcovWod the money for flwsl ol	'
I	Ms research. Others Ihln* tl wna strtdhf B project	Wtitf (nj dtd
ol	the various U.S. Government doparlmanls.	Aa of Nova rob or 1070, the Counet
II	Is live that both hove boon... and continue lo	Resoarel> Mine has awarded 39$ tc
bo... acilva in iMt field. B«t—n mnjor portion ol	to wlonlllli In 10# mectteot school*,
this scientific tnqutiy Itaa boon financed by In poo-	InallUilkxia In IhU country and five ol
pic who Know tho most about cigarettes and hov» a	The Education and Research Fd
great tfoelio fo learn the (ruth ... the tobacco In-	awardod 16S gimH to scten'lita In
dustrf.	medical and (qmch htlltullani
And the Industry has commuted llsetl to (Ms las*	. Tha combined commitment by the li
In the most objective and scientific way possible.	try for those projects presently amou
a wooeooo.,™,™	mltttoo dollars. In llscat tf»9, for «»
A 135,000,000 program	bncco Industry*!) commthnont In Kite o
In Iha Inlorost of absolute ob(octtvHy. iho tobacco	limn any government department , ,
(itduitiy has supported totally Independent research	mote (hoe tho research expenditure
n	«.
Statement o£ Edward A. Horrigan, Jr.
1	on S. 1929 before the Senate Committee
on Labor and Human Resources ,	(March 16, 1982)
My name is Edvard A. Horrigan, Jr. I am Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, R, J, Reynolds Tobacco Company.
X am also the Chairman of the Executive Committee*of The Tobacco Institute, an association of tobacco manufacturers with headquarters in Washington, D. C.
We are here to express our industry's position on S. 1929, the Comprehensive Smoking Prevention Eduction Act.
We are firmly opposed to this legislation because we feel it is bad legislation for the American public and our industry, .■ Ne feel it is unnecessary and ineffective, and that the scientific findings cited in the bill in support of its proposals are unsubstantiated and incorrect. From this committee's perspective, this bill may well be counterproductive because
there is significant evidence from the standpoint of behavioral science that its actual result may well be to lessen awareness of cigarette health warnings.
A 1981 Gallup survey, reported by Secretary Schweiker to a large assembly of voluntary health organizations in November of that year, found that ’'Ninety percent of the population agrees that cigarette smoking is harmful."	‘	'
-1-
r , , ">	T50291S
C.1fltiSh
AU	J, •> I W i	bp	wV^jyvUH	ri»4,U tudlr
'notable changes had taken place in public awareness of claimed * smoking hazards and expressed doubt that a higher level of awareness could have any effect on smoking behavior." We share this skepticism.
Indeed, the level of awareness about smoking and health far . exceeds public awareness of most, if not all, of the major contemporary issues facing this nation.	•
Let me provide some examples: A 1980 Gallup poll revealed that less than ZS percent of the public knows what tho First Amendment is or what it deals w4thi Other recent national
-v. ? '
surveys reveal that nearly 2S percent do not know what happened at Three Kile Island; 36 percent are not aware that the United States must import oil to meet its energy needs; 45 percent do not know that automobiles are the major source of air pollution; and one-third do not know whether the Federal budget is balanced.
By contrast, at least 90 percent of the public is aware of the allegations that smoking is dangerous to health. This level of awareness demonstrates the success of the current Congressionally mandated warning statement, as well as the efforts of public and private organizations.
The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act is
working. The facts clearly show that the public has been made
1 . * *
aware of the so-called health hazards of smoking, and that people are in a position to make a free and informed choice on whether or not to smoke.	*
Given this fact, why substitute a novel and unproven system
for the ,««« 1,„.	TS0Z319 ■
•	. . -2- .
I submit that this bill will have little* if any, impact following almost three decades of government and private warnings, the Surgeon General's statements on cigarette packages and advertising, and broad dissemination of aati-tobacco propaganda through the public media.
Tha fact that millions of people choose fo continue to smoke, despite the almost universal awareness of the allegations regarding smoking and health, is frustrating to anti-smoking activists and advocates. And it is our belief that this frustration has led them to conclude that those who reject anti-smoking arguments and continue to exercise their freedont o£ choice are uninformed. Therefore, they seek measures, such as this bill, designed to force smokers to conform, and to encourage prohibition of smoking,	■ '
Let me take a few minutes to review some of the premises used to support this bill and the charges leveled at the tobacco industry.
A number of very broad, sweeping statements relating to
smoking and disease are included in the particulars of the
*	* .
bill. Of courset there are questions raised by statistical associations relating to smoking and disease which must be answered. But the truth is.that all of, the statements that are presented as established fact in this bill have been challenget by the research findings of many eminent scientists, and I submit that their findings should be considered in your deliberations.
.	”3’	T50292:0
, \
as you Know, tJus biu is very similar to H.R. 5653, a House
«
Representatives bill which, although broader in its approach,
ks to achieve basically the same goals. Just last Friday I,
ag with expert witnesses from several disciplines, presented
industry's views in opposition to the House bill to a
committee headed by Representative Itoxman. Also, at that tine,
re vere some 30 highly qualified and respected scientists	.
dy to appear to challenge the scientific "findings" of the
se bill vhich are Yery similar to those in S. 1929. Only
andful of these scientists vere heard; the others were just
mitted to file statements. I request at this tine that the
missions to the House Subcommittee of all of these scientists
entered into the record of these proceedings.
I would also add that the tine you are devoting to hearing
1 industry's position is far too little in viev of the com* ttities of the issues. Far more time, rather than the brief
t we have been allowed today, would be required to cover only ! medical and scientific questions in regard to this bill, the House subcommittee hearings, we were allowed only a day
*
cover the issues, far short of the time needed. Today, will do our best in the time allotted.
In 1369, when the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising : was amended, the Commerce Committee of the House of iresentatives held extensive hearings over a period in excess two weeks, it heard testimony from Members of Congress, state ficials, government health and regulatory agency officials,
* T502921
oluntary health organizations, and numerous expert witnesses in he fields of medicine, biomedical research, statistics, and . ther scientific disciplines.
On the basis of these extensive hearings, the House Commerce ouunittee concluded that "nothing new has been determined with espect to the relationship between cigarette sooking and human ealth since its hearings in 1964 and 196S." '
The committee went on to say that "the argments pro and con ith respect to cigarettes are the same now as then, though upported by a larger statistical base," That conclusion is as ^ * * rue today a$~.it was in 1969.
After, three decades of investigation and millions of dollars nvested by the government, the tobacco industry and other rivate organizations, the smoking and health controversy remains nresolved. The net result of all of this effort has been that
o	causal link between smoking and disease has been established, hat is not merely the opinion of tobacco industry executives, hat is scientific fact readily available to anyone willing to ake an objective, unemotional study of the existing evidence.
" Yet, consider some of the broad, categorical statments on looking and disease in this bill. What credibility can such tatements have in view of the millions of people who have smoked hroughout their lifetimes and not incurred any of the ailments • entioned, and the millions who have never smoked and who have acurred these ailments?
*5-
■	'	750ZDZZ
i snoiua add that the tobacco industry is recognized as a eader in seeking the answers to the questions regarding smoking ad health. In the past three decades, the industry has wnmitted, without fanfare, over $100 million for unrestricted. adependent research into smoking and health issues. Our pending has been greater than the tobacco-related research xpenditures of all of the voluntary health agencies combined.
I submit that one of the effects of the bill would be to do ignificant harm to the scientific effort to resolve these
*
nestions. As worded, the bill purports to settle by ongressional edict medical and scientific controversies that are till evolving. Therefore, it may divert scientific talent and esources from the basic research necessary to solve the enigmas * f chronic disease. .
We’are aware that there have been some efforts to build upport for this bill with elfins that its provisions would serve s a deterrent to smoking among young people and that Industry dvertising and promotional practices are intended to encourage authful smoking.
Such charges are without foundation.
On torch S, two witnesses speaking in support of the House ill -• Mr. Keeshan and Mr. Forsyth both acknowledged that eer pressure, and not our advertising, provides the*impetus for noking among young people.
The written submissions of expert witnesses we are providing
o	this committee clearly point out that the provisions of this egislation can in no way be justified by the emotionally
’	TS0Z<)23
ncourages a youngster to smoke.
Smoking is an adult practice to be considered only by those ature enough to make an informed decision.
In 1963, for example, cigarette companies stopped all dvertising and promotional activities in school and college ublications and on campus. Ke also stopped using celebrities ad sports figures in advertising. ’
In 1964, we adopted a cigarette advertising code prohibiting
•	„
idvertising, marketing and sampling directed at young people, iven though the administrative provisions are no longer in ,
A '
sffect, each company still adheres to the principles of this'
:ode. .A summary of these principles and a copy of our Cigarette Sampling Code is being submitted with this document for the record.
In 1969, ve offered to cancel all radio and television advertising because of broadcast's unique reach to young people,
wd in 1971, pursuant to federal legislation, left the broadcast aedia.
Our advertising is targeted at smokers and is intended to encourage switching from competitive brands. The available evidence clearly shows that our advertising is not designed to attract new smokers of any age and is not having that effect, rhe same Gallup poll I mentioned earlier also reported that the -percentage of smokers found was the lowest ever recorded by that organization.
4
. .	-7-
•	*	■	T502034
the broader picture regarding cigarette	a
i	record clearly shows that our industry has been its practices.	-	j
to meet public demand, we began to advertise low Ine cigarettes.	^
after the FTC stated that it had determined that	a
I	could be construed as a health claim, we	ty
>ed to eliminate from cigarette advertising all	.
tar11 and nicotine.
when the FTC reversed its position, we agreed that	i on
tising would disclose "tar11 and nicotine content.	iced
we began a continuing program of scientific and	;
cation with the FTC with respect to "tar” and	r
g.	■	ae
we began to include in our brand advertising the icotine measurements,
we volunteered to depict the cigarette ‘package in	lie
in such a way as to display legibly the warning	ach
we entered into an agreement with the FTC on	s
f conspicuously displaying the warning label in
er
we reached an agreement with the FTC on Qtt .	,
: size of warnings.
TIMN 0119072' t
our industry has acted responsibly in the past and	FTC
>n anyone should feel that we will not continue to	j y
iture. Nor do we see why this bill is needed to	.
>r our advertising practices in any way.
system.cannot be measured, and Hr. tfaterson, an advertising expert, m March 5, presented persuasive testimony to the House subcommittee ;o the effect that this system is not working to reduce ;onsumption in Sweden. While the FTC staff concedes that the . ’effectiveness" of the Swedish system cannot be evaluated, the fact is, that according to the Swedish government, cigarette :onsumption has risen each year since the new system was Implemented in 1977. X also call your attention to the fact that the rotational warning system in Sweden was part of a total program designed to abolish smoking, which is the ultimate
goal -- despite denials — of many of the ,anti*smoking
i *
organizations which support this bill.
There is also .strong evidence from the standpoint of behavioral science, based upon the evidence available in the studies cited by the ETC in. support of rotating warnings, that such a system might, in fact, erode awareness.
In light of these facts, the obvious question arises: Is the proposed rotational system necessary or appropriate? We are convinced that the answer is that it is neither.
Also unwarranted, in our opinion, is the bill's requirement for disclosure of "tar," nicotine, and carbon monoxide levels on packages and in all advertising.
As indicated earlier, since 1970 cigarette manufacturers have' voluntarily disclosed the ''tar" and nicotine levels in cigarette • advertising. This information is widely available to the public. Smokers who choose their brand on the basis of "tar" and nicotine levels can readily obtain this information from cigarette ■ advertising.	TS02927	■