COUNTY OF DELAWARE CAUSE NO. 18D01-9305-CT-06 ” " -
CRAIG DUNN and PHILIP WILEY,	:
Co-Administrators of
THE ESTATE OF MILDRED WILEY,	:
Deceased, and PHILIP WILEY,
Individually,	:
Plaintiffs.
-against-	:
RJR NABISCO HOLDINGS CORPORATIONS,
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO., BAT	:
INDUSTRIES, PLC, BROWN & WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORP., PHILIP MORRIS	:
COMPANIES, INC., PHILIP MORRIS INCORPORATED, LIGGETT GROUP, INC.,	;
LIGGETT El MYERS, INC., BROOKE
GROUP, LTD. AMERICAN BRANDS, INC.,	:
AMERICAN TOBACCO CO., LOEWS CORP.,
LORILLARD TOBACCO COMPANY,	:
THE TOBACCO INSTITUTE INC., and
THE COUNSEL FOR TOBACCO RESEARCH	:
- - USA., INC.
Defendants.	:
DEPOSITION of JOAN HOFF, taken by Plaintiffs at the offices of Arnold & Porter, 399 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10022, pursuant to Notice, on Tuesday, December 30, 1997, commencing at 9:10 o'clock a.m., before John Phelps, a Certified Shorthand (Stenotype) Reporter and Notary Public within and for the State of New York.
Messrs. YOUNG, RILEY & DUDLEY Attorneys for Plaintiffs 277 East 12th Street Indianapolis, Indiana 46202
BY: WILL RILEY, Esq., of Counsel (Via telephone)
Messrs. JONES, DAY, REAVIS & POGUE Attorneys for R.J, Reynolds 901 Lakeside Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44114
BY: PAUL KOATHE, Esq., of Counsel (Via telephone)
Messrs. McHALE, COOK & WELCH
Attorneys for Council for Tobacco Research USA Inc.
320 N. Meridian Street Indianapolis, Indiana 46204
BY: DANIEL P. BYRON, Esq., of Counsel (Via telephone)
Messrs. SHOOK, HARDY & BACON, LLP Attorneys for Philip Morris, Lorillard, Brown & Williamson One Kansas City Place 1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105-2118
BY: WILLIAM S. OHLEMEYER, Esq., of Counsel
IT la.HbKKBY STIFUItA 1 hiD AND
AGREED that the filing and sealing of the within deposition be, and the same are hereby waived;
IT IS FURTHER STIPULATED AND AGREED that all objections, except as to the form of the question, be and the same are hereby reserved to the time of the trial;
IT IS FURTHER STIPULATED AND AGREED that the within deposition may be sworn to before any Notary Public with the same force and effect as if sworn to before a Judge of this Court;
IT IS FURTHER STIPULATED that the transcript is to be certified by the reporter.
u u m h n t t, caiiea as a witness, having been first duly sworn by John Phelps, a Notary Public within and for the State of New York, was examined and testified as follows:
DIRECT EXAMINATION BY MR. RILEY:
Q	Good morning Dr, Hoff. My name is
Will Riley and I represent the plaintiffs in this act ion.
Have you been deposed before?
A Actually, I have not.
Q If you don't understand any of my questions, feel free to tell me.
And you have to give a verbal response so the court reporter can take that down. A	Exactly.
Q Have you testified in court before? A	Yes.
Q How many times?
A Just once.
Q And that was in the Rogers' case?
A Yes, it was.	■
Q	Why don't you tell me a little about
your educational background?
A	I grew up in Montana and was
educated there until I left to go to graduate school.
I went to Cornell, and finally-obtained a Ph.D. in history at Berkley.
Q And I believe your undergraduate majors were history and journalism; is that correct?
A Yes, that's correct.
Q What particular concentration in history or area?
A	I was in European history as an
undergraduate. And at the master's level, I was in Slavic history, then I switched to U.S.
Foreign policy for my Ph.D.
Q That was your dissertation?
A	Yes.
Q And are you currently on a faculty?
A Yes, at Ohio University.
Q	So you left Indiana University?
A I have as of this year.
Q	How long were you at I.U.?
A A little over 15 years.
y Have you published any books?
A Yes, I have. I published about a dozen books, but the major ones have been in the area of U.S. foreign policy and modern presidents.
I'm kind of a political and foreign
policy expert.
Q	Can you give me the names of the
books you published?
A Yes. The early ones are on American business and foreign policy during the inter-war years.
I did one on ideology and economics, again, for those inter-war years, the 1920s,
1930s.
And then I published a couple of books on women's legal history.
And then most recently, I published a book on Herbert Hoover.
And more recently even than that, I published a history of the Nixon presidency.
Q Can you tell me what you mean by historography?
A What we tend to mean by that in the profession is the literature in a particular or on
a particular subject, so that what historians tend to do is build on the work of previous historians.
And sometimes we agree with that literature, that body of literature and sometimes those of us who are known as revisionists, as I am, disagree with that previous body of literature.
So in writing about Herbert Hoover, for example, I tried to counter his negative image by rising from the depression and consequently did not agree with the previous historography or body of historic work on him.
Q	Would I be correct that a revision
takes issue with a historical dogma that seems perpetrated by other historians?
A	Yes. And usually, you know,
revisionism arises at any given time period when the older body of literature sort of run its string, that is, run out of credibility for one reason or another.
History isn't totally relativistic, but you do have new facts or new interpretations come around maybe every generation.
Let's say, every 20 years there will
01
V-*
be some revisionism of older literature.
Q	Would it be correct that revision
can occur, say, when new information comes about, the opening up of the Soviet Union.
The collapse of it, actually produced a lot more information on all different aspects, too, that give rise to revisionism?
A Yes, it can. However, in the last 25 years when I've been in the profession, what is given greater rise to different interpretations has been innovations in methodology.
So it isn't always new information, but it is asking new questions of old data and then applying new methodologies, for example, what's called cliometrics was very popular in the 1970s where we began to apply statistical analysis to data.
And more recently the new social and cultural histories had come in and we begin to look at sources that were there all along, but hadn't been taken seriously or looked at in any detail.
For example, church records or early oral histories, court records. Music even.
Popular culture phenomena so that it doesn't always have to be new information, it can be simply looking back at a body of data asking new questions of it or applying new methodology.
The latest and most trendy methodology at the moment is to apply deconstructionist techniques or theories to old informat ion.
Q	Is that like, would that be like
Victenstein deconstructionalism?
A	When I started out, we were doing
functional culturalism starting from Lady Strauss.
There has been kind of a linguistic influence over the last 25 years going from instructional culturalism Victenstein to, as I say, now the trendy deconstruction post modern theories.
Q	Let's back up a little and I'm going
to generalize.
Was history, say, at the beginning of the century sort of the great man concept; in other words, great figures moved history; would that be correct?
A Certainly was, yes. You don't
have -- history is a profession really until after the turn of the century, but up to that point what people did, largely men who were writing it were to focus on prominent men and standard documents if they were doing for in policies, they did memos between heads of state.
So it was kind of the great man
theory.
At the turn of the century you have a perception of that as the progressive historians that began to look at economics for one thing and to look at documents, private documents, for example, diaries or letters and to come up with what was for that time a revisionist history.
Q Would you characterize the Marxist historians as progressive historians or would you consider that to be a school in and of itself?
A Any time you have a turn of the century, after you have Marxist theory, it can be a -- the Marxist interpretation is that it can be part of a revisionist approach to history, but you can have an economic interpretation that isn't Marxist that is also considered progressive or revisionist.
Some of the early progressive historians could be classified as Marxist, but most of them were simply economic historians like Charles Beard, who really wasn't a Marxist.
Q Now, as progressive historians would you consider historians whose concentration is in the area of ethnic history?
A The term progressive is kind of time bound for the early part of this century.
I'd say up through maybe the 1930s, but what the feminist interpretation would be today would be considered more, it would be called the new social or cultural history.
Obviously, it's revisionists in the sense it's coming up with new interpretations, but it tends to fall under the rubric of the new cultural and social history rather than out and out revisionism.
Q Would you consider that a subset and I'm going to use the term and I may be incorrect, but realism as history or popular history?
A That's not quite the term.
If you look at what I'm calling it the social or cultural history what you're talking
about as realist history what we called it initially when it began about 15, 20 years ago was that it was history from the bottom up, which meant there was an attempt going to be made to study people at the bottom of the -- a socioeconomic structure in any culture or any time period.
And in that degree you may be using the term realism correctly.
It's not a common one among
historians.
We tend to call that kind of history from the bottom up social and cultural history as opposed to the history you mentioned earlier, the great man history.
Q Now, if I were going to ask you to put yourself in a sort of ideological box and I don't mean that in the pejorative sense, but your methodology for approaching history, how would you characterize yourself?
A Well, I'm a revisionist historian in the sense that I look at U.S. foreign policy or I looked at foreign policy for the 1920s and 30s and tried to come up with a different interpretation
of especially of the decade of the 1920s.
And in terms of modern presidents, I did the sane with Herbert Hoover and Richard Nixon, so to that degree I am a revisionist.
It doesn't necessarily mean that I fall on the left or right of the political spectrum. It would depend on how you would interpret what I've done with Herbert Hoover, for example, in trying to give him credit both before during and after the depression for his policies and for his economic thinking. That could be considered a very conservative type of revisionism because I was a very conservative president.
On the other hand, with Richard Nixon, while I don't try to indicate at all that he wasn't guilty of obstruction of justice and I argue that he should have been impeached, on the other hand, I give him a good deal of credit for being very progressive, if not actually liberal, in domestic foreign policies.
So my work falls on both sides of the political spectrum depending on the subject matter.
I kind of let the data draw me in,
and it's not that I don't interpret the data.
Facts don't speak for themselves.
Historians always speak for the facts, but nonetheless in the case of both Herbert Hoover and Nixon, you'll see that some of my views can be considered quite conservative because their views happen to be on the other hand, in the case of Nixon, I try to give him some credit for advocating quite liberal policies in the domestic realm.
Q	Two Quaker presidents?
A	Yes, our only two Quaker presidents.
Thank God.
Q	Let me ask you a little about your
opinions in this case, can you tell me about them. In the Wiley case?
A	In the Wiley case, which is?
Q	The environmental tobacco smoke
case.
A	Yes. Quite frankly, I haven't
looked in detail at this case as, in terms of the depositions or in terms of the details of it.
I only have a general outline of what the case is about.
Q why don't you just give me your general outline of what the case is about?
A As I understand it, it involved a nurse in an administrative position working in the veterans hospital where she was in, I think what was known as a total care unit, but working primarily in her own office.
And the claim, as I understand it, is being made that she was subjected obviously involuntarily, I would assume, to smoke in that environment.
I'm quite hazy, to tell you the truth, on how much smoking would go on in a total care unit, but that's my general knowledge of the situation.
Q Have you reviewed any documents, legal documents, in particular, that relate to this case such as complaints, depositions, interrogatories?
A No, I have not, not in this case.
Q What opinions do you intend to offer at trial with regard to this case?
MR. OHLEMEYER: Well, I object to the form of that question. I think
nui i
the interrogatory response we served outlines the subject matter of her opinions and the bases thereof.
And I think if there are any specific questions or opinions you want to ask her about, you're certainly here to do that, but I'm not sure it's a fair question just to say what opinion are you going to offer in the case.
BY MR. RILEY:
Q Well, Doctor, with the objection counsel noted, can you tell me what opinions you intend to offer in this case?
A Well, pnly in the most general terms, because I haven't focused that much on this particular case.
My own research previously has been simply on the history of smoking and a common knowledge of smoking habits and smoking problems from around the turn of the century forward.
So that while I know about the recent developments, for example, in terms of
into environmental smoke situations, I quite frankly don't have a strong opinion one way or another on environmental smoke.
MR. OHLEMEYER: And actually -- for the record, I guess, I don't intend to offer Dr. Hoff as an expert or to opine as to any specific opinions relating to Mrs. Wiley or what she, you know, what she knew or what she -- you know, Dr. Hoff's testimony is generally nature as it relates to the community in which Plaintiffs Wiley and others lived, and the issues that are relevant to the lawsuit, but I don't intend to offer her as a"specific witness about Mrs. Wiley, per se, if that's the nature of your question.
MR. RILEY: No, no. I'm trying to get at her knowledge vis-a-vis the community's awareness of any dangers of environmental tobacco smoke.
BY MR. RILEY
Q And would I be correct, Doctor, you have no real opinion on that?
A At the moment, I really don't because I've had a research assistant looking into some popular literature on the subject, but it's much more difficult to ferret out direct references to secondary smoke in the literature for this century, but also since the 1950s, than it is on other kinds of information about direct smoking and it's impact or effect on people,
Q	Based on that, would it be fair to
say that it's difficult, if not impossible, to	■
find that kind of information.
MR. QHLEMEYER: Objected to, the form of that question.
Q You can go ahead and answer.
A I wouldn't say it's impossible I would say it's more difficult.
It isn't as self-evident using the kind of aggregate techniques that historians use to gather data.
You have to keep in mind that what we look for, unlike journalists or lawyers as far as that goes, we don't look for the smoking gun,
we don't look for the particular sensational piece of information.
In our type of research, we look for aggregate data, that's a bulk of information which we can begin to generalize to come up with some conclusions that would apply across the Board to people in general in terms of their knowledge of a particular subject, so I'm saying it's more difficult because the references simply don't jump out at you as easily as when you are researching the attitudes towards direct smoke.
By that, I mean individual smoking as opposed to the impact of secondary smoke.
Q	Now, let me ask you if it is more
difficult to find such references in popular literature?
Would it be fair to characterize it then that the common knowledge would be less prevalent than, say, what you testified in the Rogers' case with regards to direct smoking?
A Well, it's hard for me to answer yes or no to that question. I would think that since the common knowledge about the harmful affects of smoking is just legion, there's just no doubt
aoout it that trora the first time it was introduced there, I've never seen -- in a sense this is a perfect social history question or subject because I've never seen a subject that's been so widely vilified, and yet, so widely used.
So the common knowledge about the dangers of smoking, in general, as I say, is legion.
Therefore, one could surmise that there would be some assumption that exhaled smoke would not be good for one, but you would be surmising that, but given the evidence on the other side of the dangers and habit forming nature of smoking for the individual, one could probably make a fairly good case there was an assumption that it might be collectively unhealthy.
Q	Would it be fair to say that that's
speculation?
A Yes. You would be surmising at the moment from the literature and the information, I have a greater command of.
As I say, I would think that more information, perhaps, on secondary smoke will surface, except it isn't as easy to find.
You can find it in a few legal cases where there's been public intervention on public conveyances, public transportation, but it isn't as widespread out there in the popular literature as simply the danger of individual smoking.
Though, obviously, the Government from time to time, right now as well as at the turn of the century, State Governments and the Federal Government has from time to time -- they have from time to time taken action on behalf of public health.
Q You mentioned lawsuits or court documents, do you have an idea when those first arose with regard to environmental tobacco smoke?
A	I don't have that information in my
head as precisely as' I will in the future, but I know there was at least one turn of the century case where the police power was used.
And there was also the police power used, of course, to try to prohibit the sale of cigarettes at the turn of the century so you had a reform movement going on at the turn of the century, not like the one we're currently in, where you would have Government intervention on
behalf of public safety.
And in this case the product that was -- that suspect product was cigarettes.
Q And could you tell me was that a case or law?
A These are decisions.
Q	Decisions of legislative body or
judicial body?
A Well, there's case law at the state level, and then you also have for Indiana, for example, is actual legislation beginning in 1893.
Q Would that motivation perceive health consequences to direct smokers or was it with regard to environmental tobacco smoke?
A	The legislation in Indiana?
Q Yes. '
A	It rose largely out of health
considerations of the legislation did for direct smoking which resulted in a temporary ban on cigarettes.
Keep in mind now, this would have been only on cigarettes.
Cigars and snuff was never affected by this legislation, so it was cigarettes being
singled out and, in particular, cigarettes in connection with young people, especially young boys.
There was almost no mention ever of young girls smoking, but young boys were the concern of the state in 1893 to '95 when this legislation prevailed.
And then, Indiana also had legislation, as you know, from 1905 to 19, what was it, 09 banning the sale, the giving away or manufacturing of cigarettes.
And finally in 1911, the legislature continued that legislation, but only for minors.
So the thrust of the legislation was against direct smoking and particularly the health problems the state thought accrued to young people smoking, but especially young boys. .
Q	Let me ask you, why were snuff and
cigars excluded from that legislation?
A That's a good question, I think probably because the legislators smoked cigars and used --
Q They had an invested interest?
A Right, right.
Q Like Kennedy when he put the embargo on Cuban cigars and went out and got a bunch?
A Yes, it's like the use of submarines during the first world war.
President Wilson decided they were immoral, but, of course, we used them ever since.
And it's a new product and it was associated with the poor, with immigrants, with a lot of negative associations at the time.
And remember the progressive reformers were do gooders and they wanted to improve the lot of the masses.
And this was after the mass production of cigarettes, this was going to become the vehicle of choice probably for consuming tobacco products.
And, also, it was easier for kids to get their hands on cigarettes than cigars or snuff.
So a lot of the socioeconomic factors go into it.
Initially, only thugs used cigarettes and it was considered a bad environmental situation for children to get into,
that is where they were smoking cigarettes, but also because they had greater access to them.
Q	Let me ask you what you're aware of
with regard to the repeal of the ban in 1909.
How did that come about?
A It came about because it was unenforceable, because it was a total ban,
It was a very interesting case because it had been started by Senator Parker from Plainfield, who really wanted to protect children, and by a fellow named, I think it was George Glubb, who had been a family trial judge in Indianapolis, who established a home for young boys in Plainfield.
And, consequently, they got together and produced legislation in 1905.
It was just to protect children, but in the course of the debate it got out of hand and they wound up banning it for everyone.
And by 1909, it was evident they could not enforce this. Remember, you couldn't give it away, you couldn't sell it, or make it.
However, you could if you used tissue paper make your own cigarettes. You just
couldn't use cigarette paper.
It was an adequate prohibition, but it was unenforceable.
So in 1911 they came along with the idea that it would only apply to minors.
Also, remember by 1912, you did have -- yes, by 1911, 1912 you had about a dozen states who had, which had passed bans on, to one degree or another on cigarette smoking.	.
I think only Wyoming and Louisiana had no legislation whatsoever on the eve of the first world war.
Now, all of this was supposed to go by the boards because of the first world war, because the Government promoted smoking during the first world war.
Indiana went back in 1919 and tried to pass, again, a general ban.
And it even wanted to make it a piece of law that people who smoked couldn't run for public office, but that fizzled.
Indiana has this very, very strong anti-smoking history which made the research that my graduate students did while I was at
Bloomington a very, very interesting project for them.	■
Q	What do you believe the basis is for
the anti-smoking animus in Indiana during the time frame?
A In that early period, it has to do with the fact that the entire Midwest was a hot bed of reform, but it was particularly a hot bed of reform for temperance, which meant that these people who were opposing cigarettes, in particular, tobacco in general were also against alcohol.
Many of them in Indiana right down	.
through the 1950s were against the consumption of tea and coffee as stimulants.
So it's characteristic of the Midwest and then Indiana is peculiar, as I say, with the strength of this animus because it produced some leaders in the movement and also because the no smoking league, for example, and the no smoking journal were headquartered and published in Indianapolis or out of Butler,
Indiana.
So you have the Midwest, in
particular, but you also have a lot of women's Christian temperance people in that part of the country, in particular, in Indiana.
So the combination of the suffrages who were legitimate liberal reformers of the time, combined with the progressive men, who were also trying to reform Government, the economic system at the time, there was a tremendous reform movement that just happened to be stronger in the Midwest for a variety of peculiar regional reasons than in other parts of the country.
One being probably the lack of a large, large immigrant community because, again, smoking and other unhygienic habits were often associated with immigrants.
So you just had a freewheeling situation there in Indiana, but in the Midwest, in general, with a number of different reform groups coming together including the Women's Christian Temperance Union.
Q Let me stop you for one moment and in discussing Indiana can you divide Indiana regionally with regard to this temperance movement, you know, I think in your testimony in
the Rogers' case you talked about there was a large Quaker, Methodist and Mormon influence in the State of Indiana.
Do you find that true for the whole State or was it particularly localized in a part of the state?
A That's hard to say.
You have to keep in mind that you did have in southern Indiana, some tobacco growing and you had a tobacco trust down there and you also had
Q Would it be true that the southern part of the state is more German Catholic or at least part of it?
A Yes. That would be true, so that given the growing of the tobacco and the German Catholic smoking, and we have to assume population, you probably have that part of the state less involved in this type of reform activity.
What's interesting about the reform activity for this time period is that it was generally, I think one can say, liberally oriented.
That is, it was being promoted by liberals who were progressives whereas in the 1920s and 30s, the anti-smoking campaign was really in the hands of more conservative elements in the society.
So that to the degree southern Indiana was more conservative, for example, it was the area for a time around Martinsville, the hot bed for the revival of the Ku Klux Klan.
So to the degree that that part of the state was more conservative, the liberal progressive reformers, the women who were involved in suffrage and temperance and the men who were involved in progressive Government would have been more in the northern part of the state centered in Indianapolis and north, going north.
Q	I'm going to get there, but if I
could draw a distinction perhaps the region I always understood to be more ethnic with regard to eastern European immigrants and a heavy Catholic population there; would that be correct?
A	Yes.
Q So, essentially, we're talking about the central portion of the state that had a more
anti tobacco attitude than, say, the north or the south?
A Yes. Now, keep in mind now that publications were circulated throughout the state but, again, it's difficult to know who read all of these publications.
Q And the No Tobacco League Journal?
A Yes. That came out of Butler.
Q And the Clean Life Educator would
have?
A	Yes, it seems to have replaced the
No Tobacco Journal.
Q Now, Butler had a religious background, didn't it? It was a denomination; is that correct?	■	.
A	Yes.
Q	Do you know which denomination?
A	I don't offhand.
Q	Do you know what groups are behind
the No Tobacco League Journal or the Clean Life Educator?
A Not specifically, other than the fact they were supported, for example, the Anti Cigarette League, the National and Cigarette
League founded by Lucy Page Gaston out of Chicago gave them a lot of support.
The Women's Temperance League Union supported, then Older Women's League Suffrage, those that fought for suffrage after 1920 continued to support them in the 1920s and 30s, the Mormons, the Quakers, those groups that had been strongly anti smoke, even before the first world war, continued to support them, but you have to keep in mind that that first world war really threw them into a tailspin for a time, that is, all the anti smoking groups because the Government in General Pershing and others were so openly promoting smoking.
Q Perhaps I asked this, do you know if the No Tobacco League Journal or Clean Life Educator had any direct links to a particular denomination?
A I don't. I don't think they -- they probably had denomination support, but I don't think it was dominated by one denomination.
Q	Now, would I be correct that at that
time period the Roman Catholic church had no prohibition against smoking?
A That's for sure.
MR. OHLEMEYER: Do they now?
A	As far as I know, they don't now.
After all, the Pope is visiting Cuba and probably is going to pick up a few cigars.
Q	I would if I were him. There are
some Protestant denominations, aren't there, that have prohibition in smoking, aren't there?
A Yes. Keep in mind the Catholic church, ever since the mass migration of Catholics in the late 19th century has been very circumspect with respect to taking on social issues, whether it be smoking in this time period or even until most recently, even on the question of abortion simply because of its constituents.
So that on the smoking issue, it was clearly the Catholic immigrants were smoking and the church wasn't going to take a strong stand.
Q Are you aware or in your research when you were looking into the common knowledge of opinions about smoking in the state of Indiana whether in any Catholic periodicals there ever appeared, the sort of articles you referenced in the Rogers' case?
A I didn't specifically look at Catholic periodicals, so that I don't know.
Q Did you reference or did you find any articles that would have been, say, published in the region or southern Indiana, in particular, articles that have arisen out of, say, Hammond, Gary, South Bend, Evansville.
A	I have one researcher looking in the
Plainfield paper, I remember, and what we found there was the information on Hammond and Horne.
Q No, I mean Hammond City?
A	Oh, okay. Just looking at the
Plainfield paper, though, you found a kind of a mere image of what the Indianapolis star and other international papers would have been carrying.
Whatever it was called, the Bloomington paper, The Herald Telegraph, whatever the name was during that time period, had a local columnist named George Crane, who took issue with tobacco from really the late 1930s on.
So that when you look at small local newspapers, granted, I've looked primarily at two or three of them, they seem to mirror the national information that you're getting from the larger
papers, but that's common simply because of the nationalization of news through the A.P./U.P. services.	_
Really, that happened by the turn of
the century.
Q	The papers you were looking at are
really centrally located in the state you mentioned Plainfield and Indianapolis; is that correct ?
A Yes. Because they were papers, quite frankly, that Rogers would have read.
Q So that's centrally located Indiana
papers?
A	Yes.
Q	Is that the extent of the papers you
reviewed from Indiana?
A Basically, in any detail because we began to feel that because of the syndication of the major stories on tobacco, especially in the '50s when the first scientific reports began to appear and with the Surgeon General's report, until '64, most of that stuff was going out over the wire.
And what we wanted to make sure was
that these smaller papers would have carried it. And by and large they did.
And as 1 say, in the case of the Bloomington paper, they even had a local columnist, in addition to the national columnists, who were opposed to tobacco
Q Would you feel you could extrapolate from those papers as to what was being carried in the rest of the state or is it a fact specific analysis as to what Richard Rogers would have been exposed to?
A We focused on those because of that particular case, but I would be willing to make a fairly good bet you would find the same thing in other small local papers in the state.
Again, you have top keep in mind, we were not talking so much about the issue itself as about how small newspapers obtain their information and its over the syndicated wire services.
So whatever those wire services support, you would have that information being, you know, whatever those wire services would be emphasizing you would have carried in those local
newspapers,
Q why don't you define common knowledge for me?
A Okay. It's a term, again, one has to put into the context of the development of the last 20 years of this new social and cultural history, and what I call studying history from the bottom up.
what common knowledge is the lowest common denominator of information that people seem to have regardless of education.
Now, obviously, education should improve your common knowledge, but I think all of us regardless of how educated we are retain or can remember some of the common knowledge with which we were raised.
It's what you know without knowing how you know it, that it comes to you from your parents, it comes to you from gossip, it comes to you when you have your haircut.
It's what people talk about or assume to be true in a given time period.
Now, this doesn't mean that common knowledge is true. Sometimes it proves to be
true, like chicken soup is good for you if you're sick. There's been scientific studies to show that, but other common knowledge assumptions like flies cause polio or you get warts from handling frogs aren't true.
But what it is, is the kind of common sense, lowest common denominator of information that people grow up with and which if you become better educated you can look at some prospective or laugh at or ignore, but it still governs people's view of the world and govern how they operate.
It doesn't necessarily mean you're going to act on the common knowledge, but it's there in your mind and it allows us to have a kind of common culture.
In other words, what arises from common knowledge, this lowest common denominator of information in a culture is humor, satire, puns, jokes, some negative things like ethnic slurs and stereotypes about minorities or women.
All of this is part and parcel of common knowledge.
It's that very lowest level at which
we obtain information as we are growing up.
Q	Would it be fair to characterize it
as having a sort of universal application throughout a society?
A Yes. Whether you have through national borders depending on how homogeneous the country is as a universe, though it varies from culture to culture.
Superstitions are part of common knowledge. I'm doing a study on an Irish case which considered the last witch burnings in Europe, and in 1895 in which the Irish peasants believed in fairies.
Q	What time was that?
A	It was in Cork.
Q	That's my own I don't know the
town was Doneghal and Cork?
A Doneghal is on the western part of the state.
MR. BYRON: I have an objection because we come from Cork County and Doneghal County, too. We may have a conflict of interest on this case.
A But it's interesting to see at all levels of the Irish society in 1895 there was some -- there was knowledge of fairies just at the peasant level. They really believed in these fairies and they acted on it in this case.
MR. OHLEMEYER: When you get a chance, let's take a break.
Give the court reporter a little rest.
MR. RILEY: We can take a break now.
MR. OHLEMEYER; My watch shows 10:00 o'clock. Why don't we take ten minutes and I will put you guys on hold.
MR. RILEY: That will be fine (Whereupon, at 10:00 o'clock a.m., a recess was taken.)
(Whereupon, at 10:10 o'clock a.m., the deposition resumed with all parties present.)
JOAN HOFF, having been previously sworn, resumed and testified further as follows:
BY MR. RILEY:
Q When were you first approached about this case, Dr. Hoff?
A	This particular one?
Q	Yes, the Wiley case?
A	Sometime before the end of this
year. I'd say, I think it was in November.
Q And who approached you?
A	Bill Ohlemeyer,
Q And how many meetings did you have with Mr. Ohlemeyer?
A Actually, I don't believe we had any. We talked on the phone about it, but that's about it.	’
I mean, until today we were supposed to meet last night and the weather here prevented that.
Q	When were you approached in the
Rogers' case?
A That was back in '95 sometime that I was looking at the material '95, '96, basically before the case in '97.
Q Did you review the disclosure statement in this case?
A In this particular case, the Wiley
one?
Q	Yes.'
A	No.
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question.
I assume you're referring to the defendant's response to your 26 B-4 interrogatory.
MR. RILEY: That would be
correct.
MR. OHLEMEYER; Okay.
BY MR. RILEY:
Q	You want to change your answer, now
that you understand? I want to give you a fair chance,	.
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question. I think you have to put some time frame on it.
Q Have you reviewed it since November? A Have I reviewed? I haven't reviewed anything in writing --Q	Okay.
A --in this case.
MR. OHLEMEYER: I think
there's some confusion and I don't mean to interject, but the witness has in front of her a copy of the 26 B-4 interrogatory response that I provided her this morning.
I guess the question you ought to ask her is when she reviewed it or when she was given it or --
Q	Okay. I'll ask both those
questions.
Do you remember when you were given that document before you?
A	This morning.
Q	Do you recall reviewing it before
this morning at any point?
A No, not this particular document,
no.
Q	Do you have, since the break, have
you had any time to rethink any answers you've given me that you'd like to change?
A No, I don't think so. No, I don't really think so.
Q	Are you familiar with Professor
Gerald Strauss?
A No, I'm not.
Q	He was at I.U. at the same time you
were. He was in primarily the reformation, what was his area of concentration.
A He was there in the '80s?
Q That's correct.
A Okay. It's a big department. I knew other European specialists, but I didn't know
him.
Q	I take it, then, you wouldn't know
of his book Manifestations of Discontent in Germany on the Eve of the Reformation?
A No, I would not. I know a Jim Diehl, but he works -- you keep in mind my period is the modern period, so I know the modern Europeanists.
Q Actually X had him, too.
A	Gym Diehl?
Q	Yes.
A	Yes.
Q	Let's go back to the Rogers' case
and common knowledge and the state of Indiana?
A Uh-huh.
Q	And I may have asked you this
already, but at least it will help my mind start to function again since the break, what all things go into the formation of common knowledge.
You sort of mentioned myth, folk lore, things passed on in oral history?
A Yes. Very often and again this is some what peculiar to the state of Indiana, though other states have this, Indiana passed the beginning of 18, let's see, 1981 and right down to 1981 it mandated textbooks.
So the early grades, grade school, high school textbooks from 1981 forward and subject to revision by legislation had these mandated textbooks, particularly in the fields of health education, physiology, what they called sanitary health education.
And, again, because of what we talked about earlier, the reform tradition that had an impact on the legislature.
The textbooks used in these classes that were mandatory for the kids to take had the segments on - - against tobacco and tea and coffee and other drugs.
Q Let me ask you about --
A So at an early age, this is run by kids is what I'm saying.
Q The information is run by -A	Yes.
Q	Was there ever an attempt to
restrict through legislation, the utilization of tea or coffee in the state of Indiana?
A No. This was never included in these early bans on cigarettes, though in these textbooks there alcohol, tobacco, tea, coffee and other drugs are all associated, especially in the early textbooks that is 2Q's, 30's, 40's, the tea and coffee kind of get dropped by the wayside, by the 1950s, but they're all linked early on because I think a number of these authors of the textbooks really did lump them altogether.
Q	Does that include Jesse Williams?
A	Yes, it would. His is one of the
books 1 remember the best because his book was used at least -- Helpful Living, I think it was called in these health education classes or physiology classes, phys ed classes, I guess.
Q	Do you think it was part of the
common knowledge that coffee and tea were bad for
individuals?
A	I think probably if you were
subjected that to the Indiana educational system in the, you know, early part of the first half of the century, you probably did get a strong impression of that.
It's less so, as I say the tea and coffee seems to drop, they seem to drop out of the textbooks in the 50's, but the emphasis was almost equal on them, especially for girls there was an emphasis since they didn't think girls was going to be smoking or drinking alcohol as much as the boys, they stressed the tea and coffee ban or the, not the evils, but the harmful effects of tea and coffee for young girls.
Q	So that would have been part of the
common knowledge?
A Yes, I think you can say, up to, let's say, the second world war.
And as I said, common knowledge changes over time and in the case of tea and coffee, it obviously wouldn't have the same common knowledge prevalence after the second world war.
Q	Do you know why that changed?
A I think -- I don't know exactly, possibly because of its widespread use without any scientific proof of harmful impact, also because they're on the low end of the speed scale. I think it's, you know, as simple as that.
Q No, they're on the high end of the speed scale?
A Well, you have your amphetamines today, but I'm saying it's kind of maybe the equivalent to making marijuana equivalent to heroin or cocaine today, tea and coffee were made equivalent to tobacco and other narcotic drugs in the early part of the century.
And it simply is something that was patently untrue.
Q Now, can common knowledge be shaped by advertising?
A	It's a hard question to answer
because common knowledge can be shaped -- let's put it this way.
Advertising can be a component part of common knowledge.
There's no one dominant factor in common knowledge. What we look at as historians
for common knowledge is usually prescriptive literature of all kinds, whether it be newspapers, whether it be health publications, whether it be popular magazines, religious literatures we talked about before.
So what makes up common knowledge is, A, we think on the basis of this new social history is multiple sources make it up and advertising can be one of those sources.
Q Now, in formulating your opinions that you expressed in the Rogers' trial, did you examine the advertising that was carried on by the tobacco industry during the periods, let's say, during the 1930s onwards?
A I looked at some of the advertising for that time period. You mean, just in terms of the general ads.
0	Yes, just in terms of the general
ads that would be that would be present in the print media, things on the radio, things like that?
A Not so much the radio, though, I know Arthur Godfrey did some ads, but basically it would be the print ads that I had more knowledge
of or had seen, you know, copies of.
Q And how did that influence your opinion vis-a-vis the common knowledge of the evils of smoking in the state of Indiana?
A	There's no doubt -- and these are
national ads in national magazines by and large, there's no doubt that you find very few national ads on any product that aren't positive.
So that while the prescriptive literature that people are subjected to as they grow up on tobacco is generally negative, once they're able to read or to see ads on tobacco or other products, the -- as consumers, then the ads tend to be the opposite in this case of the prescriptive literature.
Q So they would counteract?
A	They would be a countervailing force
I think one would say.
Q Do you think and I'm going to go back to your earlier testimony, and I may misquote you, but I don't mean to, that no other product when you were referring to cigarettes has been vilified, but at the same time has been utilized so extensively; is that a paraphrase?
A Yes, I tried --my graduate students and I tried to think of another product that would have the same history over time, that is from what, the 16th century on once it was exported to Europe and it is difficult to find one.
You can find other phenomena like syphilis, for example, is universally condemned by wide circulation, but it's hard to find a product that has the same history. It's a very, very extreme history.
Q	Now, would it be fair for me to
characterize that at least in part the advertising of the tobacco companies counteract as a sort of prescriptive nature of the textbooks and things like that that were shaping common knowledge?
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question.
A Again, I have a hesitancy to agree with the use of the word counteracted. It would enter into a person's processing of common knowledge on the subject, yes, but it would be but one factor.
You have to keep in mind, again, even though I know advertisers or companies think
that their ads are directly, have a direct impact, it's a very difficult thing for them to prove.
Usually they can show maybe brand name recognition coming from their ads, but by and large, it's harder to prove that people buy things because of ads.
If that were true, there wouldn't be any smoking, for example, in Europe since they banned ads there.
Ads, obviously, have an impact when there's one component part of how people operate.
Q	As a historian, how would you
explain the rise in smoking rates during the period of say the '30s through the '70s when the common knowledge, in your opinion, was that smoking is bad for you?
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question.
Q	Do you understand my question.
Doctor?
A	I think I understand it, yes. I'd
say, again, as I mentioned earlier, the anti smoking people were off to a very strong start before the first world war.
They had state legislation. They thought they were going to get more, and then the war intervened and the government literally began to push cigarette smoking as a common factor for nervous soldiers.	'
And, in fact, even giving soldiers more courage. A white badge of courage label for cigarettes, one of the more positive labels it ever had came out of the first world war with General Pershing, of course, talking about significant results being as important as bullets for soldiers to have, so that if you just take the Government, what has to be called Government promotion of cigarette smoking during the first world war, combine that with the fact that the Red Cross handed them out during that time period.
And then you get into the 1920s and '30s where initially, again, only sleazy characters smoked, but by the advent of talking movies it became kind of a glamorous thing to do.
And consequently, you had, again, a number of factors associated with smoking that would have countered to a certain degree the prevailing negative common knowledge about it, but
also keep in mind that people don't act always on common knowledge and that I think is a basic assumption here.
People take risks all the time, and so there were these positive reinforcements for smoking, the Government, movies, it became a socially acceptable things to do in that time period, but at the same time people do take risks all the time.
So even before Government promotion and movies, people with a negative common knowledge of cigarettes, smoked.
It's like people gamble, they have unsafe sex, they drink while drunk, you do that all the time in Montana.
Q You don't have speed limits, too, don't you?
A No. That's the problem, we're driving fast while drunk. So it's fairly easy to show what the positive reinforcements were in the '20s and '30s even though the common knowledge remained quite negative.
Q	Now, let me stop you for one moment.
I was just watching a movie with Cary Grant in
Affair to Remember and in that movie he smokes.
And I can't actually remember what the leading lady's name was, but she smokes, too. Would it be fair to characterize and I think that movie was made in the 1950s that smoking was seen as glamorous?
A Yes. The movies did a lot to take away the criminal image of smoking because in the early pre-talking movies, the cigars and even the cigarettes were really only, as I say, present in the mouths of the unsavory characters, but it becomes a very, very fashionable and socially acceptable and kind of a - - there's a ritual to it that people pick up from the movies about how to smoke.
Whether the man should light both cigarettes for the women, his cigarette and her cigarette on the date, all of that kind of habit forming use of the ritual of smoking comes from the movies.
Q Now, do you think that would mitigate or perhaps shape the common knowledge during that period?
A Well, it helps a person decide to
take the risk, I think.
Without the movies, again, going back to that pre world war period without the movies and without the Government promotion more and more people were smoking.
I mean, it was an available cheap cigarette or a product, I should say.
Some of the new social historians were writing in the '80s. Michael Scudson, for example, and Robert Sobel pointed out that this particular product became a convenience of the modern world.
It was something you could do on the
job.
It was cheap and readily available, so it fit modern life.
So that probably even without the movies you would have had more people smoking on the job and generally using the product because it fit modern life.
It became, then, a kind of a product and convenience of modern life. So common knowledge then, the negative aspects of smoking, which are still part of common knowledge are
mitigated to a degree, but the fact that it's easy and convenient to do, that ultimately has this social value that we think of coming from the movies.
Q Would I be save to assume you can extrapolate the common knowledge that you say existed with regards to the dangers of smoking in Indiana as to the rest of the nation?
A Yes, I really do think you can on this particular product.
It simply crosses state borders.
It's that Indiana had a peculiarly strong anti-smoking history,
Q As a historian, would you be able to extrapolate that the employees and the executives of the tobacco companies would have possessed the same common knowledge?
A Oh, yes. As they grew up, yes.
Q	Did you review when you came to your
conclusions in the Rogers' case any documents that would have been internal documents of the tobacco company?
A I really didn't.
I had read about some of them
because they were beginning to make the headlines, but I really didn't review them in any analytic way.
Q	Let's sort of now use you as an
experiment on common knowledge.	•
You mentioned you read headlines vis-a-vis the internal documents of the tobacco companies.
What have you taken away from reading those headlines?
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question.
Q	Do you understand my question?
A	I think I understand it.
I think what one takes away from the headlines, I think it's obvious and that is that tobacco executives knew more about the negative health implications of tobacco than they conveyed publicly.
Q And that's your common knowledge that would be your basis -MR. OHLEMEYER: Excuse me. I object to the form of the question. That's not what the witness said, Mr.
Riley.
A No, I'm saying that's the impression that the headlines have conveyed.
Q Okay. And now I'm asking that, what's your impression, what's your common knowledge?
MR. OHLEMEYER: Same objection.
A My common knowledge is not only shaped by the recent headlines, but probably from the more highly publicized headlines coming out of the scientific information from the '50s and '60s especially from the surgeon general's report.
Q	Right now I want to just focus in on
your common knowledge with regard to what the tobacco companies knew and what they didn't, did or did not tell the public.
MR. OHLEMEYER: I object to the form of the question.
A I hesitate to say it's part of my common knowledge what I know from the headlines is this impression that I just stated that the headlines convey the impression that there was information that the corporate heads knew that
Ln
they did not convey publicly.
Keep in mind that common knowledge is kind of embedded early on in one and while you add and subtract from it as you go along, it doesn't immediately become common knowledge because you read, you know, a couple of headlines.
Q Now, if I could ask you to look at things, perhaps in a broader sense with regard to the common knowledge that tobacco products are dangerous.
Do you think that as a historian, if the headlines that we were just discussing had appeared in the '60s, '70s or '80s there would have been any change in the common knowledge?
A Well, I think you really didn't need those headlines in the '40s, '50s or '60s because you had what, so many cartoons, let's say, or so many jokes or so many even popular songs which would have contributed to common negative knowledge about tobacco in that time period.
What's curious about tobacco from a historical point of view is that common knowledge, negative common knowledge about it proceeded the negative, the publication of negative scientific
studies.
In this instance, the common knowledge was ahead of the bona fide scientific knowledge so that adding perhaps the negative information that you're talking about to the public discourse, perhaps would have stimulated a more active negative common knowledge than was prevalent, but it was so common already it only would have added to that negative image, I think.
Q But it would have added?
A	It would have added. We know, for
example, as you obviously know that when the first surgeon general, when the first scientific studies came out in the early '50s and the early surgeon general report in very much there was a decrease in smoking.
And then there was a similar decrease in smoking after the widespread of publicity given the '64 surgeon general's report.
So that that kind of highlighted publicity did temporarily reduce cigarette consumption, but only temporarily.
Q And maybe I'm not following up, so correct me if I'm wrong, so the headlines that
I've been discussing perhaps would have reduced cigarette smoking by the surgeon general -A	No. I'm saying it would have been another negative component that would have been added at the time.
You have to what appears to reduce cigarette smoking is highly concentrated negative publicity over a short period of time.
Historically, smoking we know that from the '50s we know that from the sixties.
We don't have conclusive data right now that for the period of the '80s or '90s.
Q Now, let me ask you, I'm sure you're aware and I think Warren Holland asked you about it in the Rogers' case, the Frank statement?
A	Yes.
Q Now, do you believe that that would have had any impact on common knowledge?
A	I don't think in and of itself it
would have had any blockbuster type of impact.
Again, because the lowest -- it wasn't the lowest common denominator type of information.
In other words, it's information
that would have had to be processed by people as opposed to them growing up with it, that's what's so, I think, insidious about common knowledge is that you grow up with it and it's embedded in your genes practically and you reprocess it over the years, but it's hard for more scientific or more rational information to make a dent in it, one way or the other, that is, to increase your already common knowledge of a subject or you decrease your interest in it because of new information.
Q	Would I be fair in saying it
probably had some impact on common knowledge it would be hard to quantify?
A	It could have. All of this is
imprecise, but it have would have had some impact possibly if added to the scientific reports of the '50s and the surgeon general report of '64.
What was the date of that Frank
statement?
Q I'm going to guess, I feel embarrassed, but I think it was 1954.
Bill, do you know?
MR. OHLEMEYER: Yes, 1 think it was actually May 12, 1954.
in
MR. RILEY: Thank you, Bill.
Q	Now, say, instead of the Frank
statement having been run, the headlines we were talking about that have recently come to light had been run, do you think that also would have had some impact, perhaps not quantifiable, but an impact on the common knowledge?
MR. OHLEMEYER: I objected to the form of the question. It's been asked and answered.
A	Again, my answer would be generally,
yes, but keep in mind what was making the headlines in the '50s and some impact on the smoking pattern of that decade were these very early scientific reports, the Hammond, Horne whatever reports, so that it would have just been one other ingredient.
As an individual, I think probably I would be more swayed by -- but, again, I'm speaking as an educated person, I would be more swayed by a scientific headline than a headline that's coming out of -- being made because of a statement by a head of a corporation.
Q	What is your understanding as a
historian, Doctor, of the term propaganda?
A It's in my mind, now keep in mind I'm a political historian, rather than a social historian, but when I put on my political forum hat, it's a form of political advocacy to my way of thinking it.
It can be associated with a particular national ideology whereby you're trying to convince people or smaller, at a national level or small groups of people about a particular point of view.
So it's a propaganda is a form of political speech and it can be on any subject pro or con.
It's kind of like the relationship of deconstruction to post modernism.
Ideology would be the post modernism and deconstruction is the methodology or the vehicle and propaganda is a way in which people advocate ideological points of view.
Q And I don't mean to in this sense use propaganda in the pejorative since, but purely in the technical since -A That's what I'm saying, it shouldn't
be viewed as pejorative, I don't think.
Q	Can propaganda be utilized to change
people's common knowledge, change their common change?
A You can try if you're a political advocate of some particular point of view, you use then your propaganda literature to promote that, and if you know people are opposing your point of view, then you will devise the literature to try to change their minds.
Now, I don't think most propaganda is aimed at changing common knowledge. It's usually aimed at because common knowledge becomes almost subliminal information that you have.
Political propaganda or propaganda, in general, is usually aimed at changing some very conscious narrow point of view that you know your opponents hold or that you know a group of people hold and you'd like to bring them over to your side.
So you would take an issue like abortion, God forbid, or you take an issue that's fairly narrow and subject it to this kind of
propaganda literature.
Q	Would I be fair -- when you use the
term political with regard to propaganda, it can also be social?
A Yes.
Q As it falls in the context of, as you say, abortion, which would be both political and social?
A	Yes.
Q	How does one appropriately agitate,
and I use that -A Remember, I'm from Berkley. I don't think you'd want to ask that question.
Q	Let's see. How does one, if you're
interested in communicating a social concept by utilizing propaganda, what are effective means of getting the message out that you wish to get out?
A Say, ask the question again.
Q It was pretty convoluted, wasn't it?
Say I was going to try and motivate individuals to adopt a position and I wanted to utilize propaganda to do so, and I mean that in the broad sense of it, how would I go about doing that?
A	Well, for one thing, you would,
depending on the socioeconomic level of your group, you would devise your tactics based on that. If you had a low level of education, you would want the most simplistic,' bottom basic approach.
*
If you're here in New York dealing with the intelligentia, you wouldn't use that approach, you would use another approach.
So it does depend on the target
audience.
Q	So I would want to carefully tailor
the message I would want to get across to the different groups I was trying to reach?
A Yes. Yes. I think that's all -- it is, for example, at Berkley we had an easy time of it to a degree because we were dealing basically with educated students and a faculty and a fairly highly educated community, so that we could talk ideas and do pro and con kinds of arguments that could be effective in that atmosphere environment.
Q	Now, utilizing propaganda I wouldn't
be limited to one particular methodology in trying to reach different groups that would sort of shift
back and forth?
A Not at all. Just look at campaign ads for example. Willy Horton, highly motive and simplistic and subtle ones, but campaign ads are becoming more and more simplistic.
Q Do you think those ads you mentioned, the Horton one, are effective in motivating individuals to adopt a position?
A	Temporarily, yes, because in this
case they're so emotional, but, again, it's a temporary impact that they have and you'll note that that ad was pulled immediately.
Q	So I guess I'm confused. It does
have an impact -A	Yes.
Q	--in shaping what people think?
A	Yes. In this case, at least a
temporary emotional impact.
Q And I would think in also -- I don't know if you remember the Dukakis in a tank and he was like Snoopy?
A	Yes. And remember the mushroom
cloud one run Bill Goldwater.
Q	I remember seeing that and had the
laughing voice in the background?
A	Yes. Again, on a very short term
basis. That kind of emotional gut wrenching visual presentation can have an impact, but it's usually quite temporary because it doesn't take too long to see through the stereotype or the simplistic aspects of it.
Q	Now, do you think that's true as you
describe it for the intelligentsias where ordinary people might be easier swayed over a prolonged period of time?
A I wouldn't say over a prolonged period, but in a short term gut leveled way, yes.
I mean, unfortunately what we're seeing increasingly in this society is people are less literate and more, you know, conditioned by television that they don't have the ability that people had even 50 years ago to probably stand back and analyze what the hell they're seeing or what they're reading.
Q You would basically say in the late 1940s there was a shift in the ability to process?
A Not so much in the late 1940s, I think its really been since the 1960s.
At least in the time period I've been teaching, the students read and write less well. And I think that --
Q	That hurts?
A Yes. Unfortunately, it's an unattended negative consequence coming out of the educational reforms of the 1960s of, you know, that I really promoted that time period, but had second thoughts about.
Q	So would I be fair in stating that
it's possible to shape common knowledge through the use of social propaganda?
A It's possible to influence it.
Again, you're dealing with an amorphous type of information that's kind of in your genes and you know certain things are right and you know certain things are wrong. You do them anyway.
And then you can either have you're doing of your partaking of that particular activity or not partaking of it reinforced by other things, yes.
Q Now, in your review of the literature and the different periodicals, particularly in Indiana, you mentioned you saw
different advertisements for the tobacco companies; is that correct?
A Yes.
Q I think you mentioned Arthur
Godfrey?
A	Yes. That would have been one, but
I have no personal knowledge of this. I think he also had a radio program, didn't he?
Q Yes, that's what I meant to reference.
Would you see that as a type of, that advertising as a type of propaganda?
A All advertising is a type of propaganda. It's a mild form of advocacy, it would seem to me.
0	And that advertising was attempting to get people to buy cigarettes?
A But all ads do. I mean, you wouldn't advertise a product you wouldn't want to sell.
Q That's correct?
A •Yes.
Q Did you ever come across any ads that feature medical professionals smoking
cigarettes or saying that these particular group of physicians after reviewing such and such advocates the use of smoking so and so?
A I can't remember ads, but I can remember in some of these columns that I read the advice columns some doctors were reported as saying moderate smoking was all right or some such language to that effect.
Q	Would you say that the companies
that ran those ads, was that sort of an attempt to move the common knowledge or to counteract the common knowledge on the evils of smoking?
MR. OHLEMEYER; Object to the form of the question.
A I think the common sense answer to that is yes.
Q	Do you anticipate having any other
opinions with regard to the Wiley case before our trial date on February 9th?
MR. OHLEMEYER: Object to the form of the question.
Q Do you continue to do research?
A I have an assistant in Ohio who will continue, but to do, as I say, it's been a
difficult area to research.
Q What's the name of the assistant?
A	His name is Matthew Flynn. He's
simply one of my graduate students there.
Q Is he at the university there?
A Yes, he's in the contemporary history unit program. He's a Ph.D. candidate.
Q	While we sit here today, could you
tell me what the common knowledge of environmental tobacco smoke was in the '60s in Indiana?
A I really couldn't because, as I say it, it wasn't prevalent in the surgeon general's report.
I think the first time you have it mentioned prominently, but the surgeon general's office I think is sometime in the mid-'80s,
Q	Now, I'm going to ask the same
question with regard to the '70s?
A Yes, same would be true.
Q	Same answer?
A Yes. It wasn't one of these focal point issues that made the headlines.
Q What about in the 1980s, you alluded
to that?
A Then you have Everett Koop statements by secondary smoke, I think that was maybe '88 and then in the '90s, of course, you have the FDA and the EPA both coming out with statements on secondary smoke,
Q The 1980s you mentioned the surgeon general's report?
A I'm not so sure it was a report, but it was a statement issued on environmental smoke.
Q	But do you have an opinion what the
common knowledge was in the '80s?
A About it, about that issue? Not
really.
As I said earlier, various state and federal -- federal and state Government's from time to time intervened on behalf of the public with respect to secondary smoke beginning at the turn of the century, but that intervention has always been somewhat erratic until recently.
So that secondary smoke is a separate subject from the negative impact or the negative aspects of smoking directly. It was •simply not separated out.
Q Now, if I could go back for a
u
moment, maybe I'm confused. You mentioned legislative actions in the early 1900s. I think those were related to direct smoking?
A No. There are at least a couple of cases where they would prohibit smoking on public transportation.
Q Do you know why they did that?
A I can only assume that it was again part of the progressive movement on behalf of' public health.
Q But assuming that it was on public health, it could have been any other reason couldn't it, bad social decorum or something like that?
MR. OHLEMEYER: Objected to, the form of the question.
A	It could have, but, again, you know,
the state doesn't intervene willy nilly on behalf of public decorum too often.
Q But that's still an assumption,
correct?
A It's still an assumption, correct.
Q	Did you hear me?
A Yes.
tn
Q And your answer was yes?
A Yes, it was.
Q Can you tell me what the common knowledge is about environmental tobacco smoke in the 1990s?
A There I'm not, again, the common knowledge or the popular knowledge that we're again getting, just only beginning to absorb from headlines and studies is that secondary, that secondary smoke is a health hazard and that, again, is reflected in the last 15 years in the attempts to bar smoking in public places and in some places they're considering barring smoke in not only public confined places, but in public open air places.
Q Now, would I be fair to characterize your testimony as, at this time and point you have no research that would show there was any common knowledge in the '70s and the '80s in Indiana with regard to the dangers of environmental tobacco smoke?
A It would be much harder to come up with documents for that. There would only be the general assumption that direct smoke wasn't
healthy and consequently perhaps secondary smoke wouldn't be, but it's difficult to see a conscious recognition of that.
Q As a historian, you wouldn't be able to say that now, would you?
A No.
Q You said no?
A No, I would not,
Q And perhaps this is better directed to Mr. Ohlemeyer, I would like to reserve the right to re depose her if she's going to find any documents or change her opinions before the trial date.
MR. OHLEMEYER: Well, I'm not sure I understand the nature of your request.
MR. RILEY: Well, if she's going to testify to something other to what I have on the record right now, I would like to know about it. She said she's got a graduate student -MR. OHLEMEYER: Let's put it this way, if what you're saying if between now and trial Dr. Hoff
develops an opinion as to the nature and the extent of the community's knowledge about the risks associated with exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, that is more specific than what she has described to you today, then the subject matter of that opinion and the bases of that opinion and the facts upon which she bases that opinion will be provided to you.
And I would allow you an opportunity to depose her on those opinions.
MR. RILEY: That sounds more than fair.
MR. OHLEMEYER: Good.
THE WITNESS: I think I understand that.
MR. RILEY: Lawyer mumbo
j umbo.
I don't think I have any further questions.
MR. OHLEMEYER: Very good.
The witness would like an opportunity
to read and sign, and then those of you on the phone need to let the court reporter know what you want in the way of transcripts or disks.
(Whereupon, at 11:00 o'clock a.m. the deposition was concluded.)
The Deposition of JOAN HOFF, taken in the matter, on the date, and at the time and place set out on the title page hereof.
It was requested that the deposition be taken by the reporter and that same be reduced to typewritten form.
It was agreed by and between counsel and the parties that the Deponent will read and sign the transcript of said deposition.
CERTIFICATE
STATE OF_:
COUNTY/CITY OP_:
Before me, this day, personally appeared JOAN HOFF, who, being duly sworn, states that the foregoing transcript of his/her Deposition, taken in the matter, on the date, and at the time and place set out on the title page hereof, constitutes a true and accurate transcript of said deposition.
JOAN HOFF
SUBSCRIBED and SWORN to before me this _
day of _, 1998, in the
jurisdiction aforesaid.
My Commission Expires	Notary Public
DEPOSITION ERRATA SHEET
RE;
FILE NO. 1565
CASE CAPTION: DUNN & WILEY vs. RJR NABISCO HOLDINGS CORP.
DEPONENT: JOAN HOFF DEPOSITION DATE: 12-30-97
To the Reporter:
I have read the entire transcript of my Deposition taken in the captioned matter or the same has been read to me. I request for the following changes be entered upon the record for the reasons indicated.
I	have signed my name to the Errata Sheet and the appropriate Certificate and authorize you to attach both to the original transcript.
SIGNATURE:_ ■ DATE:_
JOAN HOFF
lOEX
fitness:	Direct
rOAN HOFF	4
Jecember 30, 1997 lew York, New York
CERTIFICATE STATE OF NEW YORK )
) gg ,
ZOUNTY OF NEW YORK )
I, JOHN PHELPS, a Certified Shorthand (Stenotype) Reporter and Notary Public of the State of New York, do hereby certify that the foregoing Deposition, of the witness, JOAN HOFF, taken at the time and place aforesaid, is a true and correct transcription of ray shorthand notes.
I	further certify that I am neither counsel for nor related to any party to said action, nor in any wise interested in the result or outcome thereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this 5th day of January, 1996.
JOHN PHELPS, CSR, RPR