JOCELYN TOMPKIN,	)
)
Plaintiff, ) Case Number -vs-	) 5:94-CV-1302
)
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY, ) et al.,	)
)
Defendants. )
THE TELEPHONIC DEPOSITION OF KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., produced, sworn and examined on behalf of the Plaintiff, pursuant to Amended Notice to Take Telephonic Deposition Duces Tecum, between the hours of eight o'clock in the forenoon and six o'clock in the afternoon of Thursday, June 21, 2001, at the law offices of Shook, Hardy & Bacon, One Kansas City Place,
1200 Main Street, in the City of Kansas City, in the County of Jackson and State of Missouri, before me:
ANNISA B. JUSTICE of
JOHN M. BOWEN & ASSOCIATES Court Reporters a Notary Public in and for the States of Missouri and Kansas, in a certain cause now pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Missouri, Eastern Division, wherein JOCELYN TOMPKIN is Plaintiff and THE AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY, et al., are Defendants.
A p p e a r a n c e s For the Plaintiff (via telephone):
Mr. A. Russell Smith
AND
Mr. R. Bryan Nace A. RUSSELL SMITH LAW OFFICES 503 Key Building 159 South Main Street Akron, OH 44308
A p p e a r a n c e s (Cont'd.)
For the Defendants Philip Morris and Lorillard:
Mr. David M. Woods AND
Ms. Amy Crouch SHOOK, HARDY & BACON One Kansas City Place 1200 Main Street Kansas City, MO 64105 For the Defendant Philip Morris (via telephone):
Ms. Mary M. Bittence BAKER & HOSTETLER 3200 National City Center 1900 East 9th Street Cleveland, OH 44114 For the Defendant American Tobacco Company (via telephone):
Mr. Benjamin S. Shively MIDDLETON & REUTLINGER, PSC 2500 Brown & Williamson Tower Louisville, KY 40202-3410 For the Defendant Liggett (via telephone):
Mr. Tyler L. Mathews
McDONALD, HOPKINS, BURKE & HABER
2100 Bank One Center 600 Superior Avenue, E.
Cleveland, OH 44114-2653 Also present: Mr. William Northrip
I N D E X
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D.	PAGE
Examination by Mr. Smith............................................6
Witness' Signature (Waived)...................166
Reporter's Certificate................................................167
E X H I B I T S NUMBER	DESCRIPTION	PAGE
1	Dr. Ludmerer's expert report..............................2 9
2	Dr. Ludmerer's testimony from last
four years...............................26
3	Bibliography of secondary sources,
November 1988 ........................................................34
4	Bibliography of primary sources,
Lung Cancer: 1930-1950..................36
5	Bibliography of primary sources,
Post-1950 (1950-1959)....................36
6	Bibliography of primary sources,
1960-January 1964 ................................................38
7	Annotated bibliography by Jeffrey Harris,
References...............................43
8	Paradigm, April 1989.......................44
9	Supplemental Bibliography..................46
10	Additional Bibliography....................48
11	Dr. Ludmerer's curriculum vitae........................53
(All exhibits are attached.)
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D. the witness, of lawful age, being produced, sworn and examined, testified as follows:
MR. SMITH: And I guess for the record, my name is Russ Smith. I'll be asking questions on behalf of the plaintiff.
MR. NACE: And this is Bryan Nace on behalf of the plaintiff.
MR. WOODS: This is David Woods with Shook, Hardy & Bacon on behalf of Defendant Philip Morris and Lorillard.
MS. BITTENCE: Mary Bittence on behalf of Philip Morris.
MR. SHIVELY: Ben Shively with Middleton & Reutlinger on behalf of American Tobacco Company.
MS. CROUCH: Amy Crouch for Philip Morris and Lorillard.
MR. MATHEWS: Tyler Mathews on behalf of
Liggett.
MR. SMITH: Does that cover everybody?
Sounds like it does. I'm going to apologize too.
Can I trouble you for your name again, sir, on behalf of Shook, Hardy & Bacon?
MR. WOODS: Yeah. David Woods,
W-o-o-d-s.
MR. SMITH: I don't know that we've met.
But anyway -MR. WOODS: We've not met but it's nice to meet you.
MR. SMITH: Nice meeting you. Is there anybody there, David, with you also in the room?
MR. WOODS: Yes. Amy Crouch, who you may have met. I'm not sure if you've met her or not. And I also have a summer associate that's clerking with the firm for the summer.
MR. SMITH: Did they both identify themselves?
MS. CROUCH: I did.
MR. SMITH: The clerk that you have as
well?
MR. WOODS: He didn't speak up. His name is on the record as in attendance.
MR. SMITH: And his name?
MR. NORTHRIP: William Northrip.
MR. SMITH: Okay. And they're both employees of Shook, Hardy & Bacon?
MR. WOODS: William is a summer associate employed for the summer and Amy is an associate at Shook Hardy.
MR. SMITH: She's an attorney?
MR. WOODS: Yes, that's correct.
MR. SMITH: And I guess the same way we've done the rest of the depositions, it's my understanding that none of you folks will have any communications with the witness or, you know, pass him any papers or anything of that nature during the course of the deposition. And if anything would happen along that regard, I think the court reporter in the first deposition indicated the court reporter would so indicate. Is that okay?
MR. WOODS: That's fine.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. SMITH:
Q. Okay. If you would state your name, please, sir. A. My name is Kenneth Marc -- with a C -- Ludmerer.
MR. SMITH: Somebody else just joined us, I think. Is that right? I guess not. Okay. Forgive me.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) And your address, please, sir?
A. Are you asking work address or home address?
Q. Both, please.
A. Work address is Washington University Department of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri; the ZIP is 63110. The home address is [DELETED]
Q. And I apologize. Washington University, I got 66 and I lost the rest?
A. The ZIP Code of my business mailing address is 63110.
Q. No, I mean the part before the word "St. Louis" is what I missed. Washington University. You said something else.
A. Department of Medicine.
Q. Oh, I thought you said 66 something?
A. Well, I did in the next line of the address.
Q. Yes, sir.
A. 660 South Euclid -- like the philosopher,
E-u-c-l-i-d -- Avenue. That's the street address. Q. Okay. Thank you very much. And your occupation? A. I'm a physician and medical historian.
MR. SMITH: If you-all can excuse me a minute, I'll be back. Okay? I want to try to nail this question down for tomorrow and Monday on
these depos. I'll be right back.
MR. WOODS: Let's go off the record.
(A BRIEF RECESS WAS TAKEN.)
MR. SMITH: Thank you.
MR. WOODS: Shall we go back on the
record?
MR. SMITH: Yes, sir. I appreciate it. And I'm probably going to get called off one more time. This scheduling has proven to be a challenge.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Could you tell us, please, what
you brought to the deposition today, Dr. -- it is Dr. Ludmerer? Is that correct, sir?
A. That's correct.
Q. Am I pronouncing your last name properly?
A. Yes. Both e-r's are pronounced. So it's Ludmerer.
Q. Okay. Would you tell us, please, Dr. Ludmerer, what you have brought to the deposition with you today?
A. I haven't brought anything.
MR. WOODS: Let me clarify here. We put together -- first, what I brought is I have a list of Dr. Ludmerer's prior testimony from the last four years, both deposition and trial. Then I also have various documents -- and for the record, it's probably about three or four inches tall -various documents that represent a list of materials that -- well, I guess he can tell you what they represent, but broadly they represent a list of the materials that he has reviewed.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Dr. Ludmerer, do you have your file with you?
A. I have no file.
Q. Pardon?
A. I do not have a file.
Q. Do you have a file on this topic?
A. You mean a file on the case?
Q. On tobacco as a topic.
A. Well, I don't know if a "file" would be the right word to call it. We --
Q. Do you have filing cabinets on it?
A. Mr. Woods has the material that you requested, the bibliographies and the materials that I relied on. So we have assembled that for you. I don't have a file on this case, if that's what you're asking.
Q. Well, let me ask you this question, I guess. It's my understanding that you have boxes and/or filing cabinets full of material on this topic, including articles and things of that nature. That's my belief.
A. Everything that I have is listed for you on the
bibliographies that Mr. Woods has for you. So we have assembled today listings of various sources that I have relied on. And as you point out, most of them are published articles. Some of those I have at home, some of the most important ones, not all of them. But everything that I have is listed in the reference materials that we brought for you today.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Maybe I can go at
it from a different angle. Your first involvement with tobacco goes back to approximately when?
A. When you ask my first involvement with tobacco, do you mean the substance of tobacco in hearing about it? Do you mean as a witness in this case? I'm not sure I understand that question.
Q. Doing any work at all on the topic.
A. You mean as studying these issues for my testimony today.
Q. No, no. On tobacco in general.
A. Tobacco in general. But the materials from my expert report.
Q. No, just your first involvement with working with tobacco in any way.
MR. WOODS: I'll object to form. That's a little vague. Are you getting at when he first started doing research into the issue? I mean working on -MR. SMITH: Could the court reporter read the question back, please?
(THE REQUESTED PORTION OF THE RECORD WAS READ BY THE REPORTER.)
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Do you understand that question, Dr. Ludmerer?
A. Not really. And that's why I was seeking clarification.
Q. What part of it is troublesome for you?
A. When you say "working with tobacco," are you talking about studying this issue?
Q. Studying any issue on tobacco would be one, as far as studying goes, studying any part of the tobacco question.
A. Well, I began studying the tobacco question as
part of the process of being a consultant in these types of cases. And that was August of 1988. If that is the question you're asking.
Q. And the first involvement you had in August of 1988 was at the request of whom?
A. I was contacted at that time by a lawyer who was
and continues to work for the Washington office of Arnold & Porter. His name is Murray Garnick.
He's in the Washington office. And he called me in August of 1988 to raise the question of my doing work in this area.
Q. And sometime thereafter, you began acquiring materials, documents, papers; is that true?
A. That's correct.
Q. And that would have been approximately when?
A. Mr. Smith, that all would have been around the
same time. He contacted me in 1988 -- August of '88 -- to discuss my doing research in the area.
We had some conversations by telephone at that time. I agreed to look into the issue and to undertake the project. But that all began relatively quickly around the time of the initial telephone conversations. So I think it would be fair to call the entire thing August of 1988.
Q. And since that time, it is my belief that you have acquired many articles and many written papers and materials; is that true?
A. Well, that's correct. I studied, I did an extensive amount of research. A complete bibliography of what I examined is present in this room today. In the process of doing that work, many of the articles that I thought were more
notable, more important for some reason or other,
I made photocopies of. And I have those at home in addition to the written bibliographies which are a comprehensive reference to everything I looked at. So I have both of those things, the bibliographies and occasional articles.
Q. And the materials that you have acquired and
maintained would physically occupy approximately how much space?
A. It's hard to say exactly because they're spread out in different places, but quite a number of linear feet. Several linear feet.
Q. Are they stored in boxes or in filing cabinets or in both?
A. I wish I were that neat and organized. Some of
them are just kind of strewn over the floor in the extra room. But they should be in boxes or on shelves. Some of them are; some of them aren't.
My wife is unhappy with me because I'm too disorganized. But call them boxes and call them shelves.
MR. SMITH: Before I go on, David, did you folks get a duces tecum sheet that we were asking you to give to Mr. Ludmerer so we know what we're talking about?
MR. WOODS: Yes. We received both a notice and then an amended notice, both attaching items and documents to have present.
MR. SMITH: It's my understanding, I know we received something from you folks yesterday. And to the best of my ability, we produced the entire file today. And I'm just -just so we get past hopefully in this case the formalities and technicalities of it, I think, you know, we're asking that of all the witnesses.
MR. WOODS: Let me tell you what we've produced. First of all, we got the amended notice which lists the additional item. It appears to me that the only difference between the notice and the amended notice was the inclusion of Item No. 8, "Your entire file regarding this case." We received that after close of business. My fax sheet says received June 19, 17:21, which I assume is 5:21 p.m.
MR. SMITH: On Tuesday.
MR. WOODS: On Tuesday.
MR. SMITH: We got one from you guys on Wednesday. And I'm not here quibbling, I just, you know, I just would hope -- because the notices are identical for all the witnesses, as far as I can tell, from both sides. So I'm just trying to get past the -- we all know what they're saying and we all know all the witnesses, and I guess I'm looking at the future.
MR. WOODS: Yeah. Let me tell you what we did. We sent -- immediately when we received the subpoenas with the attached list of items to bring, we sent those to Dr. Ludmerer. Our understanding was that publicly available materials typically do not have to be produced.
Rather, you list those materials because they're as easy for us to locate as for you to locate. So that's what we've done.
MR. SMITH: David, I'd say this to you, sir. We're asking, I'd like to have access to whether they're public or nonpublic because they're a lot easier for the witness to make available than they are for us to sort out. Now, you folks, I wouldn't be at all surprised if you have every one on the shelf and more power to you.
But from our side, we are respectfully asking that the witness in some fashion make the hard copies available.
MR. WOODS: Okay. We'll certainly take that under advisement.
MR. SMITH: That request was, you know, made previously, and I -- well, if we haven't
worked our way by it, I'd sure like to hear what you folks have to say on it.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Dr. Ludmerer, when you describe a box, what size box would you refer to if we were going to speak in boxes?
A. Oh, I don't know the exact size but picture a box at a grocery store, maybe --Q. Do you have banker's boxes by any chance?
A. I'm not sure I know what a banker's box is.
Q. How about a filing cabinet drawer? How would that compare to the box you're thinking of?
A. The boxes in general would be smaller. Filing cabinet, of course, is linear. A box would be vertical. I'd say a filing cabinet -- well, I have boxes of different sizes. Some of the boxes are smaller. The largest boxes are the approximate size of a standard filing cabinet.
Some boxes are smaller. And as stated before, primarily what is in these boxes are copies of the published articles which are cited in the various bibliographies.
Q. And I think I may have disrupted the route you were taking, which sounds like it might be the easiest. If you were going to put the written materials you have in a linear foot basis, give me a range you're comfortable with that they'd probably fit within, please. Your best estimate. A. You know, it's really a little difficult to say because, you know, they're disbursed in a number of different places. Also, as we're talking, I remember at home, for completeness, I not only have copies of published articles but copies of depositions or trial testimony that I might have given in some of the other earlier cases. The attorney staff would frequently send me the depositions of other witnesses in the case testifying on a specific issue. So there are things like that around as well.
Q. So all of it, again, just your best estimate as to a range?
A. I'm guessing, you know, 15, 20 feet. That's an estimate.
Q. And that would include depositions as well?
A. No. That would include, for example, a deposition from Jeffrey Harris, who was a witness in the first Cipollone case. Attorneys from -- Murray Garnick from Arnold & Porter sent me some of his depositions. I think he had, Mr. Smith, a 21-day deposition. So the number of photocopy pages I
have from Jeffrey Smith deposition back in the eighties, you know, I've got quite a few feet of that, probably a couple of boxes of that alone.
Q. Is that over and above the other materials or is that included within it?
A. That's included within.
Q. So approximately how many feet of deposition -A. No, that's included within the estimate. That's
included within. And I want to emphasize that I'm just guessing.
Q. I understand. Your most honest guess is all I can ask for.
A. Well, I gave it to you.
Q. I mean for overall. But if you were going to
break the depositions and trial testimony out of it, how would you divide them up?
A. Well, if you break the depositions out of it, it would actually be much smaller because I might have, you know, the Surgeon General's report, several dozen different articles that are particularly important.
Q. I'm just talking about breaking the depositions and trial testimony apart.
A. I'd say that the majority of that 15 or 20 feet
that I estimated would be depositions of one sort or another, most of which are not mine. The actual articles and so forth would only be a small part of that.
Q. Your best estimate?
A. I'm guessing five feet.
Q. And do you have some of your own depositions and trial testimony?
A. That was included in that total of 15 or 20 feet
that I gave you. As you know, I've given a couple of depositions in the last four years. I would include the copy of the deposition among the material that I have at home pertaining to these litigation issues.
MR. SMITH: David, we would ask for access to copies of the articles and his testimony. And if you could get back to me on that. I think that's a request that, as far as I know, is going both directions.
MR. WOODS: We'll get back to you. I'll talk to Craig Proctor on that one.
MR. SMITH: Okay. I appreciate it.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Does the report that you've -well, I guess we ought to mark that as an exhibit. Is that what you have with you today is your report?
A. You mean the expert witness report for this case?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. Yes, that is here today.
Q. Is that the only thing you have?
A. That's correct.
MR. SMITH: I'd ask the court reporter if she'd please mark it. If you could mark that, please, Plaintiff's Exhibit 1, Dr. Ludmerer. And put today's date on it.
MR. WOODS: Mr. Smith, we're going to have to get a clean copy of that. I think Dr. Ludmerer basically brought nothing. So we can get a copy of the expert report. I have my
marked-up copy.
MR. SMITH: You have a marked-up copy and he has none?
MR. WOODS: That's correct.
MR. SMITH: And the marked-up copy you're talking about, Dave, is one with your markings on it as opposed to the witness'?
MR. WOODS: That's right.
MR. SMITH: We probably ought to have -MR. WOODS: We can go get a copy right now. It will take us a couple of minutes. We just need to run downstairs.
MR. SMITH: Okay. Maybe we can go forward. Can one of the other folks with you go get that while we continue?
MR. WOODS: Amy just ran out the door.
MR. SMITH: Do you care if we keep asking questions then?
MR. WOODS: That's fine.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Your involvement with tobacco was, if you could tell me in general what it has been?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Dr. Ludmerer?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell me what your involvement with tobacco has been, please?
A. My involvement with tobacco again, just for clarification, I know it's easy to speak colloquially. Are you talking about involvement as an expert witness with these various cases?
Q. Well, let me ask you, I guess I'd ask in total, do you smoke?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Have you ever smoked?
A. Have I ever smoked?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you ever sold or manufactured cigarettes?
A. No, I have not.
Q. And what other types of involvement -- or what types of involvement have you had with tobacco?
A. I've really had no other type of involvement.
Q. Other than what?
A. I have been an expert witness to the defense in a handful of cases regarding cigarette and lung cancer -- cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
Q. And that would be approximately how many?
A. I would say in total a handful of cases.
Q. Best estimate?
A. Best estimate in terms of actual involvement, at
this point I would say -- from the very beginning?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I'd have to count them, but in the range of six to eight.
Q. And can you give us the names of them? The ones that would appear before the last four years?
A. Before the last four years. Because we did this in response to your question for the last four years. So this will be able to give us a precise number. My first involvement was for the retrial of the Cipollone case. That is the issue that Murray Garnick from Arnold & Porter contacted me about -- well, actually, he didn't contact me for
that case, but the work led to my giving a deposition for the retrial of that case. I testified once in Boston in 1991 in the so-called Kotler case. I believe that is spelled K-o-t, as in Tom, L as in Larry, e-r.
Q. Are you looking at your report right now?
A. No.
Q. You do cover that in paragraph 3 of your report.
A. Okay. No, I'm not looking at anything. But there was a Kotler case that I appeared -- I didn't give a deposition for that. I appeared at trial as a witness for that case. So that's two.
Q. Okay.
A. Then I gave a deposition in the spring of 1997 for one of the attorneys general cases which were active, as you know, at that time.
Q. Yes, sir.
A. And that was -- it was one deposition but it served two cases. It served Mississippi and Florida, if I recall correctly. One appearance but apparently it was used for both cases because the teams of attorneys were the same.
Q. Did you appear -- was it a Mississippi case that you appeared in?
A. It's my understanding that this was Mississippi and Florida.
Q. Okay. I'm not sure that -- I have your report and we may have a separate sheet from you that I'm not privy to, but I don't see a quote -- there's a couple things I don't see in what I have. I have an old report that you sent us in May of '98.
A. Um-hum.
Q. And I'm assuming that's the one we're talking about?
A. What does that report say? Does it say Mississippi or Florida or both?
Q. This item it is missing from it. I don't know, you may have sent us something recently.
MR. SMITH: David, have you folks sent us a trial testimony sheet?
MR. WOODS: No, actually, that was one of the things I mentioned. We have a listing of prior testimony from the last four years pursuant to Request No. 6.
MR. SMITH: Have we received it from you
guys yet?
MR. WOODS: No. We brought it to the deposition.
MR. SMITH: Do we have a fee paper as to what he charges from you-all?
MR. WOODS: I don't know if that's been produced or not.
MR. SMITH: I don't think we have either one of those. If maybe those -- if that second one, the trial testimony sheet, could be marked by the court reporter also as an exhibit, please?
MR. WOODS: You want to call that Exhibit No. 2?
MR. SMITH: Sure. Just put Dr. --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Doctor, the beginning of your name is pronounced, even though it's L-u-d, it's pronounced L-e-d; is that correct?
A. No, that's not correct.
Q. It's pronounced Lud?
A. Lud. Correct.
Q. Okay. Thank you.
MR. SMITH: If you could mark that Dr. Ludmerer 2 then.
(DEPOSITION EXHIBIT NO. 2 WAS MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION.)
MR. SMITH: Do you have Exhibit 1 marked? Did it come up? The report?
MR. WOODS: We're still waiting for a copy of that.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) What were you asked to do with respect to this particular case, Dr. Ludmerer?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
You can answer.
A. With regard to the Tompkin case?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir.
A. I have been asked to be an expert witness for the defense on the issue that I did extensive research on in 1988 and '89, namely the scientific understanding of the causes of lung cancer and in particular the relationship of cigarette smoking with lung cancer in the period between 1930 and 1964. That was the subject that I did research on back in the eighties, and I've been asked if I would be, if I would testify on that subject for this trial.
Q. Looking at what's now been marked, I believe, as Plaintiff's Exhibit Dr. Ludmerer 2, when you look at that, have you covered all the areas that you testified in all the cases, depositions, trials? Are they all covered?
A. Could you please repeat that question?
Q. Yes, sir. If we add Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 to those cases which you have just told me you testified in, either by way of deposition or at trial, do we now have all of your deposition or trial testimony?
A. That's correct. Yes, you do.
Q. And could you tell me what other cases are listed on Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 that we haven't covered that you haven't orally told me of today?
A. Well, I have Plaintiff Exhibit 2 in my hand and
I'll just read them to you, and I think they were all mentioned but just to double-check I'll read them again. Now, if you're going back before the four years that you requested, there were three cases. There was the deposition for the retrial of Cipollone in 1990. There was the trial appearance in the Kotler case in Boston in 1991. And then there was a deposition for the Mississippi Attorney General case. And I don't recall exactly when that was. I think it was in 1997 sometime, spring of --
Q. Versus American Tobacco?
A. It was an Attorney General case and I don't know if there was one defendant or multiple.
Q. So those were three appearances that are not on
Exhibit 2. Now I'm reading from Exhibit 2. And I don't -- they appear to be in alphabetical order, not time order. So there was the Anderson vs. Philip Morris case. That was a trial appearance
in June of 2000. There was the Apostolou case,
which was a trial appearance in December of 2000.
There was the Boeken vs. Philip Morris case of May of last -- May of this year, May of last month.
There was a deposition for the Blankenship case in October of 2000. There was also a deposition for the Scott case in October of 2000. Those were held at the same time, at the same place. There was a deposition for the Engle case in June of
1998.	There was a deposition for the State of Washington Attorney General case. This is a separate deposition from the Mississippi Attorney General case that I mentioned earlier. The State of Washington deposition was in June of 1998. And then lastly, there was a trial appearance in the Williams case in Portland, Oregon, in March of
1999.
I read completely from Exhibit 2. And I believe that it is comprehensive.
MR. SMITH: David, since actually this document was due to us some time ago, would you folks be so kind to fax a copy of that to my office today?
MR. WOODS: Sure. That's fine.
MR. SMITH: And also, when you come up with the compensation sheet, we'd like to get a copy of that as well.
MR. WOODS: For the record, I'm not sure, those may have been sent to you, they may not have. I frankly am not sure.
MR. SMITH: If they are, I'm not aware of it. But I can't swear to you that they haven't been.
MR. WOODS: We'll send them to you. And also, to let you know, in the mean time, we got a copy of the expert report. I'm handing that over so that can now be marked at Exhibit No. 1. (DEPOSITION EXHIBIT NO. 1 WAS MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION.)
Q. (By Mr. Smith) In your report that's been marked Plaintiff's Exhibit 1, have you stated all the opinions that you intend on expressing in this case?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
MR. SMITH: By that you mean what,
David?
MR. WOODS: Express all of the opinions --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) -- that you intend on expressing in this case. Are they all contained in the report?
MR. WOODS: I would just object on the basis that "opinions" is a little vague. I mean, a summary of opinions versus every single -MR. SMITH: I'm asking for every single
opinion.
MR. WOODS: I guess if you can answer that, go ahead.
A. Well, certainly the rather extensive report we
sent you, which is over 20 pages, I believe, is a comprehensive and accurate overview of my opinions for this case. I don't know precisely what I will be asked on the witness stand, so I really can't say is this every opinion that I have, but I think
it's a very accurate and comprehensive overview of my opinions on this matter.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Let me ask you this question. Overview notwithstanding -MR. SMITH: You're going to have to excuse me again. I'll be right back, please.
MR. WOODS: Off the record.
(A BRIEF RECESS WAS TAKEN.)
Q. (By Mr. Smith) I do want to ask you the question, Dr. Ludmerer, whether or not there are any opinions that you're going to express that aren't contained here because it is my belief that we are entitled to your opinions in your report rather than just an overview. And I'm operating under the assumption that they're all stated. I'm not telling you that my understanding is correct, but I am telling you sincerely my understanding.
A. Well, I think it's accurate to say that my major opinions are stated. And please understand I'm very pleased to be discussing this with you and want to be completely candid with you. I did more exhaustive research on this topic than anyone in the world has ever done. I examined something like 1,200 articles. There's a lot behind what I say. So I don't know precisely what I will be asked or what the questions will be. But my major opinions, I think, are stated in that 22- or 24-page document that you have. I can't think of any major opinion that I have that is not in it.
Q. And I guess all I'm really saying is that just in fairness, I will object to there being any new opinions that are not stated here.
With respect to the basis of your opinions, are they all stated here?
A. Let me take a look. I'm going to look through the report.
Q. I say "basis." Let me broaden that. The basis, reasons, facts, and information that support your opinions. I'm asking whether or not they're stated.
A. Yes, they are. And they are in Paragraph No. 4 or Article No. 4 on page 3. Do you have a copy in front of you?
Q. Yes, sir, I do. I'm looking at page 3 and I'm looking at Item 4.
A. Correct. Where it discusses how I employed the basic principles of historical research to this project doing a very complete examination of pertinent secondary sources and even more important, doing an exhaustive and total study, as much as humanly possible, of primary sources, that is articles on this subject in published scientific literature from 1930 to 1964. Those research steps are -- form the basis of my opinions. And they are indicated in that paragraph 4.
MR. SMITH: David, it's my understanding, sir, you folks have a bibliography today with you?
MR. WOODS: That's correct.
MR. SMITH: Is there any other documents
that you have pertaining to this case, just to
make sure so I cover them all, that are with you
today so I know we get them marked? The last one?
MR. WOODS: The last one is actually a series of different documents that comprise, and Dr. Ludmerer can tell you more specifically what these are, but the broad overview is that they are a bibliography of the materials that he has reviewed in forming his opinions.
MR. WOODS: Can we just go ahead and mark the rest of them and we'll identify them maybe and then we'll have it done?
MR. WOODS: Sure. I tell you what I'll do is I'll just place this pile of paper comprising several documents in front of Dr. Ludmerer and maybe he can just explain what the first one is briefly. We'll hand it over, have it marked, he can explain what the second one is briefly, we'll hand it over, have it marked, etc., etc., until he gets to the bottom of the pile.
MR. SMITH: Do you mind reversing that and having the number first?
MR. WOODS: That will work too.
MR. SMITH: It will help me, frankly.
MR. WOODS: Okay. I will hand these to the court reporter and she can mark them. (DEPOSITION EXHIBIT NOS. 3 THROUGH 10 WERE MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION.)
MR. WOODS: They've all been marked.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Okay. If we could just go through them and identify them, please?
A. Exhibit No. 3 is a bibliography of secondary sources that I examined. This was one of the first steps I did in my research project going back to the spring and fall of 1988. And this --Q. Secondary source, when you use the term, you're using it defined as what?
A. Something published about an event by someone else.
Q. Okay. Thank you.
A. This bibliography is also dated November 1988. So I comprised that at the time I completed my review of secondary literature pertaining to the topic of cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
Q. When you use the term "secondary source," though, it's my understanding that was, as you determined it to be, the best available material you could find?
A. Some of it was excellent. Some of it, quite
frankly, was not so good. But it was published, it was available. These were histories, either histories of cancer and related topics, smoking, lung cancer controversy-related topics such as the history of cancer, history of public health.
These were accounts of events written by historians. As opposed to someone from 1954 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering writing an article in the New England Journal of Medicine. Those I would call primary sources. These are historical accounts of events from the past.
Q. These would be look-back articles?
A. Look-back, correct.
Q. As opposed to contemporaneous articles?
A. Right. These would be considered works of
history. Some are articles, some are books. But these are look-backs. These are historians writing about a subject from the historical viewpoint.
Q. If they had been writing it contemporaneously, you would have labeled that a primary source?
A. That's correct. I would have labeled it a primary source. And the important point of distinction is who wrote it and for what purpose. Because there are some books that, for my purposes, were secondary sources that were written in the sixties or even before but were look-backs. A source that I'm calling a primary source is one from the period, you know, a scientific article from 1946 or 1961.
Q. Okay. Thank you.
A. So Exhibit No. 3 is a bibliography of secondary
sources. And there's also a date on that, to help you identify it, November of 1988.
Exhibit No. 4 is entitled, it's in my own handwriting, the bibliography, a copy of the bibliography that I in fact kept in doing my research through primary sources. It says "Lung Cancer: 1930 - 1950." This is a bibliography of 280 or so, approximately 280 articles from the world's medical and scientific literature written between 1930 and 1950 on this issue of lung cancer or its possible relationship to cigarette smoking.
Q. Okay.
A. And that's entitled -- these are primary sources.
So these are scientific articles from that period. And it says "Lung Cancer: 1930 - 1950."
Exhibit Item No. 5 is another bibliography of primary sources. It says "Post-1950" and then in parentheses 1950 to 1959. This is an annotated bibliography of the world's scientific literature on this issue of lung cancer and -- from the primary sources at the time. As I say, it's titled "Post-1950," in parentheses 1950 to 1959. The literature was getting so extensive that I divided the 1950 to 1964 period into two parts just to have a more manageable chapter. So this is post-1950, parentheses 1950 to 1559, that is Exhibit No. 5.
Q. Now, number 3 dealt with what period?
A. Well, number 3 dealt with -- was the list of
secondary sources. And that dealt with the entire period. It also dealt with subjects that are important to understanding the history of lung cancer. For example, the history of cancer in general, the history of public health, the history of NIH funding. So that is pertinent both -those sources which are secondary sources are pertinent to understanding the entire 1930 to 1964 period.
Q. Okay. Plus other materials as you've indicated?
A. Correct.
Q. But 4, is that 30 to 50?
A. That's correct. Number 4 is primary sources and they were all published between 1930 and 1950.
Q. And then Exhibit 5 -A. Primary sources 1950 to 1959.
Q. Okay.
A. And there we have close to 400 specific articles.
Q. And then Exhibit 6?
A. Exhibit 6 is primary sources 1960 to January 1964.
Q. And the reason you quit at January of '64?
A. Well, I'm glad you asked that question because it's an opportunity to illustrate --
Q. General's report?
A. -- important points in historical analysis. Yes. An historian properly needs to have good reasons for the dates that you use for a study. You begin on a certain date because; you end at a certain time because. And, in fact, as you know, January 1964 was the Surgeon General's report. It was such a major landmark, it seemed an appropriate stopping point.
I might also add that I was contacted in the aftermath of the original Cipollone trial. I wasn't part of that trial. I was called after that. And in the original Cipollone trial, the plaintiff had a witness who looked into this issue also who also used January 1964 as a stopping point. So it seemed to be reasonable to stop in January '64 for that reason.
I might add that in undertaking this study, I indicated to Murray Garnick that if I saw any reason to change the stopping date as I got to know the subject better, I would speak up and tell him that. But as it turned out, my initial sense that January '64 was a very viable and responsible stopping date, that proved to be correct. So I stopped in January '64 for that reason.
Q. Why did you start in '60 for that third group?
And in what month of '60 did you start?
A. I started in January 1960. The previous
bibliography ended in December of 1959. That was purely arbitrary. It was just getting -- the amount of literature increased substantially after 1950. And just to have a manageable chunk, it was more convenient to do '50 to '59 as one unit and then to do '60 to '64 as another unit.
Q. And the next question is why did you begin in 1950?
MR. WOODS: Russ, just to give you a heads-up, I think it's just part of the way this is being done over the telephone, sometimes you're in advertently cutting off his answers. So I'd just ask -MR. SMITH: Oh, I appreciate your telling me. And if I do it, let me know.
A. Well, it's always hard over the telephone.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir.
A. You're saying -- maybe you could repeat the last question.
Q. Yes, sir. You started in what month in 1950, please?
A. Well, I started my study in 1930.
Q. I'm sorry. But in the 1950 period, what month did you begin? January of '50 for that group?
A. January of '50. Simply because of how the Index Medicus was organized. It was a very important turning point in our understanding of lung cancer. So I thought it was appropriate to use 1950 as a chapter mark, looking at the before 1950
literature and the after 1950 literature. The way the Index Medicus is organized, which is the main bibliographical tool to using the medical literature, it's published by volume and one volume will have an entire year's literature in it. So I just began with the 1950 volume and created a bibliography. And then read the sources.
Q. And you just picked a time period that matched the grouping that Index Medicus had for the '50s period?
A. I used 1950 as a turning point because that is a very important date in terms of understanding our evolving knowledge of the relationship between cigarette smoking and language cancer. Now, that had nothing to do with the Index Medicus. That had to do with the history of this scientific area. In terms of January 1950 versus March of 1950 versus September of 1950, that happened to be a reflection of how the Index Medicus is organized and published. There is a volume published each year that has that year's work in it.
I suppose if one wanted to, you could separate out the articles for March 1950 versus November 1950. But that would get to be quite a bit of work with no substantive return. So I just began with the 1950 volume for the next chapter. It's all one study. It's all one study. But I just did it one step at a time.
Q. So you picked the month because of Index Medicus organization -A. Correct.
Q. -- because that's when you thought a lot of material began coming out?
A. Well, there was a lot of material surprisingly before 1950, though that material qualitatively was different and had a different focus and emphasis. But in terms of the scientific developments, pre-1950 as a whole represented one chapter and then 1950 began another chapter. So I did this project in an understandable way. I did it step by step in a logical way. I looked at the pre-1950 material and digested it and analyzed it at one point, and then I went on to the next step.
Now, as I said, Index Medicus contains a year's references to a year's worth of publications in one published volume, and this is chronological year. If you go into any medical library and pick up the Index Medicus for, hypothetically, 1974, you will find it containing publications January 1 through December 31 of 1974 in that one volume. So I began the next chapter of this project with the 1950 volume.
Q. And you indicated that it was, in your judgment, the reason you picked the year 1950 was at that time there was a distinction in both the quality and the focus of the work being done?
A. Correct.
Q. Is that correct?
A. Correct. 1950 was a watershed year in terms of the evolution of our scientific understanding of the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. The Surgeon General himself in the
report, '64 report, points to 1950 as a watershed year. So just taking this very long project and dividing it up into manageable steps, manageable chapters, in one step I looked pre-1950 and then in the next step I began post-1950.
Q. Let me ask this question while we're here. Now,
the next exhibit would be Exhibit No. 7? Is there a 7?
A. Yes, there is.
Q. And what is that, please? How many exhibits are there altogether, please?
A. Altogether, nine.
MR. WOODS: There's actually ten
exhibits.
MR. SMITH: Okay. Great.
A. Altogether there should be ten and we're on number 7.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) And it is what?
A. Number 7 is -- oh, there it is. Okay, we just located Exhibit No. 10.
Q. Okay. Seven?
A. Seven says at the top "References." What this is is an annotated bibliography of sources that a man named Jeffrey Harris did in doing an expert report for the original Cipollone trial.
Q. And he was the attorney for the plaintiff that asked him to do work; is that correct?
A. That's correct. He was a witness for the plaintiff in the Cipollone case.
Q. That's his bibliography?
A. That's his bibliography.
Q. And the reason it's an exhibit here?
A. Because when I did my original study back in 1988 and 1989, one of the early steps I did was to read his report and to read the articles that he used in his bibliography in creating that report. So that was another step of the project. It was one of the things that I did at the beginning of the project. So that's Exhibit No. 7.
Q. And Exhibit 8 is what?
A. Now, Exhibit 8 is entitled "Paradigm." And it was my finding that the work studying the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer actually amounted to a scientific revolution in terms of standards that we use to determine causation with chronic diseases. The conventional standard over five centuries of medicine had been that you need experimental evidence. A new standard was invented during the period of the fifties and early sixties that if certain circumstances were met and certain requirements met, that in the absence of biological evidence, you could nonetheless draw conclusions about causation by statistical evidence. Using Thomas Kun's view --K-u-n's -- this was a scientific view, a new paradigm, a new view about evidence deemed necessary and acceptable. So I read on this theme of scientific revolution, and a shorthand term that I used was the word "paradigm" to describe the reading of secondary sources I did about paradigm shifts and shifts of world view. And that bibliography -- and it's numbered; there are 56 items on it -- is entitled "Paradigm."
Q. And that began at what time, please?
A. These are secondary sources --
Q. No, no, I'm sorry, the paradigm shift occurred when, in your judgment?
A. In the 1950s and early 1960s.
Q. When would you say it began?
A. I would say that it began in 1950, which is
another reason that I chose 1950 as a chapter point.
Q. And Exhibit 9?
A. And it concluded in the aftermath of the Surgeon
General's report in January of '64, which is why I stopped in January of 1964.
Q. Okay, sir. And Exhibit 9?
A. Exhibit 9 is an easy one. It's entitled "Supplemental Bibliography." And I don't remember -- maybe Mr. Woods knows -- exactly when I put this together. But you'll notice from the chronology that I had three episodes, if you will, one deposition -- no, two episodes, a deposition and a trial, one in 1990 and one in 1991. And then my next involvement in smoking-related cases was in 1997. And in getting back into the subject, occasionally I came across articles --
Q. This was new material that you found?
A. No, actually, let me restate that, if I would.
I'm confusing Item No. 9 and Item No. 10. In Item No. 9, Exhibit No. 9 --
Q. Yes, sir.
A. -- this was put together, if I recall correctly, put together around the time of my deposition for the Cipollone case and/or appearance in the Kotler case in '91.
Q. So this was put together in approximately 1991?
A. '90, '91, where I put additional things that I -primarily secondary sources that I happened to stumble on since the earlier exhibits and bibliographies were prepared, or things that I might have inadvertently omitted from my bibliographies. So it's a follow-up bibliography done so that I could be as complete as possible in my reporting at that time of sources I had looked at. So there's a supplementary bibliography of 31 sources. These are almost all published sources. There are a few depositions in there. For example, in preparation for my deposition of the Cipollone case, they sent me a couple of other depositions from that case to examine. Those items are listed in the bibliography. So it's a supplemental bibliography to make certain that I had listed everything at the time of either Cipollone '90 or Kotler '91.
Q. You put that together in approximately 1990 and 1991?
A. That is correct.
Q. And Exhibit 10?
A. Exhibit 10 is similar. There was a six- or
seven-year hiatus in terms of my involvement as a witness in these cases. And then as I started reviewing material and getting back into it, occasionally I came across new things. In a few instances, these were pre-1964 articles that I felt properly should be included. In other
instances I came across a secondary source of one sort or another that I thought was appropriate to list. So there are 20 items in additional bibliography that was prepared actually for you and it's listed as June 2001.
Q. That's one that has just been done. Did anyone else help you put Exhibit 10 together, please?
A. I'm not sure I understand. These are all my --
Q. Were you the only one that had any involvement in it's creation?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. These are a result -- these all, as a recall,
reflect articles that I brought to the attention of Mr. Woods, who's sitting next to me. We tried very hard to cooperate with the request that you gave us. So to answer candidly and in detail, I asked him, "Can you think of anything that I have forgotten?" But I think that it would be correct to say that this is my creation even though I -you know, Mr. Woods is someone that I have worked with in other cases. He's familiar with my testimony. I did ask him, "Dave, have I forgotten anything?" But other than that, this is my creation.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) I'm making an assumption, you
correct me if I'm wrong, that Exhibit 10, both you and Mr. Woods had input into its creation?
A. I believe that would be correct. I ran it by him.
Q. Did he provide you with any other additional items to include?
A. No. Everything here was originally found by me. And, actually, every item in this list are -represent something that I brought, that I found myself that I put in the bibliography myself. I used him as a sounding board. He knows my testimony well. We've worked together for a period of time. So I did ask him, "Can you think of anything important that we have talked about or that I have mentioned to you that I have not put in this bibliography?" And he responded, to the best of my recollection, "It's all here." But this is really my creation. He was my sounding board. And all of it came from me. I don't recall of any articles that he added himself or that he remembered that I had not independently remembered.
Q. Were any articles deleted following that discussion with Attorney Woods?
A. Absolutely not.
Q. How about Exhibit 9? Did anyone help you in its creation? Did you work with anyone in creating it?
A. To the best of my recollection, we're going back 10, 11, 12 years, to the best of my recollection,
I did that myself. In all candor, it's possible that I asked Murray Garnick a similar question that I asked Dave Woods now. "Murray, can you think of anything that we have talked about that I have not put together on this list?" But honestly, I don't even recall having asked that question. To the best of my recollection, I did the supplemental bibliography which is Exhibit 9 myself.
Q. How about Exhibits 2, 3, and 4? Forgive me.
That's not accurate. Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and 6?
A. Those are easy ones because those are a direct and immediate product of the research I was doing assembled at the time. So those are totally my doing. There was not the same circumstance of having a couple of years of discussion and finding new articles between cases and trying to check to see if I've forgotten something new. Those were totally mine. They were generated at the time; the lists were prepared at that time; and there was no input into those other than from yours truly.
Q. Do you have any citating method between the report that is marked Plaintiff's Exhibit 1 and the bibliographies that you have?
A. There are some articles mentioned by specific citation in --
Q. -- the report?
A. In the report.
Q. Other than that, is there any correlation or -A. No, I did not see --
Q. -- method between your bibliographies and your report?
A. We gave the specific, concrete information in the report. When -- so there are a number of articles that are cited fully with author, title, where they are found, and so forth. Every one is in one of my bibliographies. But we did not cross reference and put McConnell, et al., from Lancet 1952, as 1930 to 1950 Bibliography No. 174. We did not do that.
Q. So the bibliography, as I understand it, is just a general list of materials that you considered in preparing your report?
A. That's correct. I did an exhaustive and complete examination of the world's scientific literature from 1930 to 1964. That represents most of the material in the bibliographies, Exhibits 3, 4, and 5. There may be a thousand articles in those three bibliographies alone. In preparing the expert witness statement for this case, the 22-page document or so that you now have, some of the articles are mentioned in it, but we thought it would be of more value to you to give you the article instead of, you know, bibliography for Item 17 9. We didn't do that. We gave you the full citation.
Q. And let me switch gears a minute and go to your CV. Is that Exhibit 2? Is Exhibit 2 the CV?
MR. WOODS: The CV has not been marked
yet.
MR. SMITH: Oh, it hasn't?
MR. WOODS: No.
MR. SMITH: Let's see, Exhibit 1 is the report? Is that correct?
MR. WOODS: I believe Exhibit 1 is the report; Exhibit 2 is a list of his prior testimony from the last four years; and then Exhibits 3 through 10 is his bibliography.
MR. SMITH: Maybe we could mark the CV as Exhibit 11 then, please?
MR. WOODS: Okay.
(DEPOSITION EXHIBIT NO. 11 WAS MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION.)
A. Do you have a copy of the CV?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir. No, I don't. Strike that. I do not have a copy -- well, wait a minute. Let me just pause a second here. I have a copy of your CV. I don't know if I have your current, though. It's dated July 1996.
A. '96? Oh, that's far from current. Actually, I just noticed that the copy Mr. Woods has here is November of '99. Only this week I updated my CV, so there's a copy that says June 2001. I will overnight a copy when I return to St. Louis to Mr. Woods and then he can get one to you. But there's a more current version than that.
MR. SMITH: If you could do this for me. If we could mark Exhibit 11 for now and if you folks could do this for me, maybe -- David, if you would be so kind as to tomorrow to fax me a copy of Exhibit 11 along with the new CV you get and I'll know what we talked about here in the depo and I'll also know what his current one is, please. Would that be all right?
MR. WOODS: That's fine.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Let me ask you about the American Journal of Medicine. Let's just talk about that a minute. Do you consider that a prestigious journal?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And that's published by whom?
A. Tell the truth, I'm not certain.
Q. And your involvement with it has been what?
A. Well, actually, I am not presently involved. But for a number of years, beginning in the early eighties through the late nineties, for roughly a 15-year period, I edited a column that appeared in that publication called the "Clinical Pathological Conference." So I was very actively involved in that time. But I'm not doing that any longer. Fifteen years was long enough.
Q. You have no involvement with the Journal at this time, though?
A. Not in an official sense. I'm occasionally
contacted by them as a manuscript referee and that type of thing, but I was an associate editor and a part of the actual running of the Journal during that 15 years. Now I'm a friend of the Journal and will referee manuscripts occasionally and that type of thing, but I no longer edit that column or serve on the editorial board as I once did.
Q. And it's a peer review journal?
A. Yes. It's a major journal. There's an
organization called the Association of American Physicians, which is basically -- excuse me -- the American Professors of Medicine, which basically those are the department chairs in internal medicine at U.S. medical schools. And that journal is their publication. So it's a highly reputable publication.
Q. And you've published in that journal, have you?
A. I have not published original articles of my own in that journal. But I was the editor of a column. I edited the clinical discussions of
others on a monthly basis for about 15 years.
Q. And that would be from approximately when to when?
A. That would be from approximately 1981 through 1996.
Q. And you say columns. Would these be articles or columns or how would you categorize them?
A. Well, Washington University has -- and other
medical schools do as well -- but we have a weekly conference called the Clinical Pathological Conference. And a patient with an interesting diagnostic problem will be presented to a senior clinician as an unknown. And the clinician will generate a differential diagnosis in an attempt to determine on clinical grounds what in fact the patient was suffering from. These cases become exciting because we have pathological confirmation of what in fact, what was going on.
In some cases the patient, unfortunately, had died so we have autopsy material. In other cases we have biopsy material from the living patient. But in either case we have pathological confirmation of what in fact was happening with this perplexing -- in this perplexing clinical situation. So the pathologist speaks as well. Often we'll have other consultants make some comments as well.
It was my job to determine which of these were suitable for publication. The conference is held weekly. The American Journal of Medicine is a monthly publication. So as editor of the column, it was my responsibility to determine which of the discussions will be published and then to oversee all the details of publishing.
We would transcribe them and I'd send out copies of the comments to all the participants and they would have the opportunity to edit their comments, to put in references, to put in graphs or illustrations or figures if they thought it was necessary. They would send it back to me and then I would go over the whole thing and make sure it was consistent and do further editing and organize it and get it ready for publication, send it off to the Journal, and handle the publication details.
Q. In addition to handling the details, you would also write for that organization?
A. I'm sorry?
Q. You would also write for that publication; is that correct? Yourself in addition to just organizing the article that you're referring to that would come out?
A. I have written a total of maybe 30 articles. The number of articles is longer than the one that you have on your bibliography. And the articles have occurred in various publications. Some have occurred in medical publications. Some have occurred in historical publications. I published articles in the Annals of Internal Medicine, which is actually an even more important journal than the American Journal of Medicine. But it is not correct that I have published original articles myself in the American Journal of Medicine. I
have edited columns, I've been the editor of columns for them, but I have published none of my own original articles in that particular publication.
Q. And these are, what you are referring to as these clinical pathological conferences would be these weekly phone calls?
A. Well, they would actually be weekly conferences in a large auditorium.
Q. They would meet personally? Physically meet?
A. Correct. You know, there would be faculty in the audience, house officers, students, nurses. There might be a hundred, 150 people in the audience at a well-attended conference. And we would transcribe the conferences. And in the way I described before, I would be responsible for determining, you know, roughly one out of three, one out of four we published. So it was my responsibility to determine which were, quote/unquote, publishable and then to take charge of the various tasks that were involved in getting it into publication.
Q. Your role would serve more as an editor and a publisher for those articles?
A. Well, I wasn't the publisher. I was the editor. And as I --
Q. That was your role, as the editor?
A. That's correct. And that's how it's listed. I was the editor of that column for the American Journal of Medicine from the early eighties through the mid-nineties, about a 15-year period, approximately. But you're correct. I am an editor and I'm editing views of others. I'm not making original -- I'm not doing the writing myself.
Q. Were those articles peer reviewed?
A. They were peer reviewed in the sense that I was the peer reviewer.
Q. You would make the decision?
A. I would make the decision.
Q. Had the authority to make the decision whether or not they would be published?
A. Yes. I was on the editorial board and editor of the column. So I did the peer reviewing for that column for 15 years.
Q. Would those writers of those various articles, if they were testifying, would they be able to state that those were peer reviewed articles or peer reviewed journal articles?
A. In general they would. Most of the authors list them on their bibliography.
Q. As being peer reviewed?
A. Yes. And list them with their original
statements. Now, these are clinical discussions. And I don't want to misrepresent anything. We have one of the world's great faculties at Washington University. We've had a number of Nobel laureates. We have a large number of members in the National Academy of Sciences, including a good friend of mine who was elected to the national academy just a month ago who has been a speaker. So from their perspective, giving a clinical discussion is not as an important
contribution as some of their own original research.
On the other hand, it is appropriate to consider this peer reviewed. The recommendations was that we gave to people were that it was peer reviewed and it was permissible to use it in their CVs as a peer reviewed contribution. To the real scholars, this was not a great contribution. To some of the young people and more junior faculty, they were very proud of having this.
Q. You wrote that, or you edited that particular column or article, that would come out approximately how often?
A. I believe I answered that it was monthly.
Q. Okay. I missed that. Thank you.
A. The Journal is a monthly publication. The
conferences that we held were weekly on a Friday. We tended to have them during the regular academic year but not the summer. So on average about one out of every three conferences was published.
Q. You've also indicated you've written approximately 30, thereabouts, peer review articles yourself?
A. That's correct. Many of them are on the CV that you have. There is a current CV which we'll get to you that has the current and longer list. But I'd say about 30 articles. But mostly historical articles.
Q. When you started doing the work following the
first Cipollone case, why was it that you picked the year 1930 to begin?
A. I picked 1930 for two reasons, number one, it was, from general knowledge, and from early work in the secondary reading that I was doing, 1930 was approximately the time that in the United States physicians began to notice lung cancer appearing with greater frequency than before. So it seemed to be a convenient starting point. Now, that's arbitrary but 1930 is a nice round number. But it's round so I picked 1930 rather than 1929 or 1931.
Q. Could it have been 1920? Could you have picked 1920 as your starting date?
A. There is no reason one couldn't have. But, in
fact, 1930 is recognized as the approximate time that we began to see a rise in the increase of lung cancer. So it seemed to be a reasonable starting point. I might also add that Jeffrey Harris, the plaintiff witness in the original Cipollone case, in his expert reports for plaintiff, began his report in 1930 for the same reasons. I believe I mentioned that I reserved the right to change the dates as I got to know the subject better. But as I studied the subject, it seemed to me that 1930 was a very appropriate beginning date and just stuck with that.
Q. When you say 1930 was the date that -- I'm not so sure who you said -- "they" recognized or was recognized as the beginning date for a lot of lung cancers?
A. Yes. Once upon a time --
Q. Who recognized that? When you say "they" or the group, what group are you referring to?
A. I'm talking about the medical and scientific
community.
Q. As a whole?
A. As a whole. Once upon a time, lung cancer was
considered a very rare disease. It was the sort of thing that if you saw a patient suffering from lung cancer, you get all the students out or all the attending physicians out and have them meet that patient as well because it was thought that might be the only patient with lung cancer you you'll meet in a lifetime of medicine.
Around 1930 we began diagnosing lung cancer more frequently. It no longer was the rare disease it had once been perceived as. I should point out that it was unknown at the time whether this increase in lung cancer was a real increase or merely a perceived increase due to better diagnosis. Nonetheless, we began making the diagnosis much more often and lung cancer ceased to be a rare disease. And that change occurred around 1930 and hence 1930 was the starting point for the detailed study. By that I mean the year by year, month by month, week by week reading of all the scientific and medical articles for the primary literature.
Q. Approximately when, as far as you understand it, was the first lung cancer diagnosed in the world that you're aware of?
A. I'm not really sure. It goes back a while.
Certainly I know that around the turn of the twentieth century it was known.
Q. You think it was being diagnosed in the 1800s?
A. I don't know. I don't know. I know that through 1930 it was considered a rare disease. But quite frankly, as I understand your question, you are asking me when was lung cancer in a human being diagnosed for the first time in the history of the world? When was it first described? And I do not know the answer to that.
Q. Do you know when people began smoking cigarettes approximately?
A. I'm not an expert in this subject. As part of my secondary reading, you get a general sense. But certainly cigarette smoking became more common in the late nineteenth century. And I don't know precisely when but sometime either in the late nineteenth century or early twentieth century there were more ways to mass produce cigarettes, and after that point it became a much more popular habit than it did before. That's really the extent of my knowledge.
MR. WOODS: Russ, let me interrupt here. I just want to put something on the record. I've been proceeding and my assumption is that all objections except as to form are reserved until trial. Is that right? For example, questions on what his knowledge is as to when cigarettes first began being produced I would argue as relevant, but I don't want to slow things down given -MR. SMITH: David, I don't have trouble
with that.
MR. WOODS: Okay.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) My understanding, Dr. Ludmerer, is the first time you're aware of cigarettes being
smoked that you could testify as to your knowledge of would be sometime just before the turn of the century? And correct me if I'm wrong. I'm just trying to take you back as far in time that you're aware of.
A. As far as I'm aware of. But I want to emphasize that I'm not a historian of --
Q. Sure. I understand.
A. This is out of my area. And certainly could it be possible that cigarettes, as opposed to other forms of tobacco, were used in small amounts for a long time? That's very possible. I know King James, you know, back in 1604 or something talks about the health hazards of smoking. But I don't know if he was talking about cigars or pipes or cigarettes.
Q. He was.
A. So I am really not the one to speak about the
history of the smoking habit or industry. That's really out of my area.
Q. It is your belief that the mass production of
cigarettes began sometime in the early 1900s? Is that your best belief?
A. My best belief is if not the early 1900s, then the late 1800s. I want to emphasize again that this is far out of my area and not something that I have expertise in at all.
Q. Did you look at any articles published in the
1920s focused on smoking and lung cancer or talked about it?
A. Some of the secondary sources discussed smoking and lung cancer in the 1920s, which in fact is how, one of the reasons I know lung cancer was considered a very rare disease. In my own independent, original work, that began in 1930.
Now, as we speak, I have Exhibit No. 7 in my hand, which is Jeffrey Harris' bibliography, and he does have citations in his bibliography that date before 1930. And insofar as he cited them, I read them. I read those articles in addition to the articles that I assembled on my own.
On the other hand, a lot of the pre-1930 articles deal with not lung cancer but mouth cancer. Not cigarettes necessarily but pipes and cigars. I'd have to look at each title. I mean, here's one by a Mowat in 1929, "The early stages of oral cancer," which means mouth cancer, from a journal in 1929. So I'd have to go through his bibliography one by one. And there are a couple hundred things that he has --
Q. If I can ask you this, without going through his
bibliography. From your own work that you've done and your own recollection, do you recall reading articles published in the 1920s that focused on smoking and lung cancer? Do you recall reading any? If you don't, that's okay too.
A. Actually, I don't.
Q. That's fair enough. Let me ask you this question.
A. Let me emphasize that some of the secondary
sources or even some of the primary sources that I read had reference to earlier articles. I'm not saying that 1930 was the first time that there was
an article on lung cancer.
Q. You're just saying you haven't read any before 1930 that you can recall?
A. Exactly.
Q. Now, let me ask you this question. Were there researchers doing work in the 1930s on this question? By "this question" I mean smoking and lung cancer? Was there research being done by any physicians in the 1930s or any people?
A. Well, I'm glad that you asked that question.
Because it illustrates the flavor of the times. There was a tiny amount of research into the cause of lung cancer.
Q. Let me ask you this. When you say there was a
"tiny amount," just in the interest of time, can you tell me as best you're aware of a range of approximately how many research projects or efforts were made as far as you can tell, a range you're comfortable with, in the thirties?
A. Oh, you know, a handful. Most of --
Q. Five or so?
A. You know, five, ten. A lot depends on how one
defines "research." There was lots of speculation but speculation is not the same as research.
There was, you know, a surgeon might have a series of 50 patients with lung cancer that he operated on. He would observe that 4 0 of them were smokers. And in describing his series of patients he might have a paragraph on ideology and say, you know, 80 percent of my patients smoke, maybe lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. But that's not really evidence because there are no controls. It's just speculation. So there was more speculation than evidence.
And it's also important to recognize in the thirties that putting lung cancer in the context of cancer, cancer was a big mystery. This is before epidemiology, it's before biochemistry or molecular biology. The cause of cancer in general was considered unknown and unknowable. It was the view in medical science that if you wanted a dead-end career in medical research, go into cancer because you're not going to discover anything and you'll have a dead-end career.
There was a large literature about lung cancer in the thirties and forties, but the questions that were being asked were different. This was a clinical literature describing the natural history of disease, how it presents in patients, how you diagnose it, how you treat it, and so forth. It was not a literature studying the cause of lung cancer as we later developed in the post-1950 years.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Were there any
studies, in your judgment, before 1940 that used or employed any epidemiological methods to study smoking and cancer? Any that you're aware of?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. Can you please repeat that question?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Sure. Maybe Annisa will read it back.
(THE REQUESTED PORTION OF THE RECORD WAS READ BY THE REPORTER.)
A. There were, in my opinion, a handful of studies in the 1930s and forties that did try to look at this question using retrospective techniques. The main difficulty with the studies at this time was that they did not have controls and hence the conclusions or interpretations of authors were considered speculation and there was no -- they weren't really, they hadn't brought evidence.
The typical example is the example I gave before where you would have a surgeon looking back at his or her -- most of them were he's, not she's -- looking back at his own population of patients with lung cancer and describing them and finding that, you know, two-thirds of them were cigarette smokers. The problem was that these studies at this time did not have controls. And since two-thirds or 80 percent of the general population smoked, there were no legitimate conclusions that could be drawn from those studies.
There were a couple of studies that actually represented methodological improvements over these -- we call them retrospective surgeons looks. On the other hand, these were published in Germany during World War II. Very few Western scientists saw them at that time. There were international conferences on lung cancer in the late forties and early fifties that did not cite
these studies. They were discovered only later.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Let me ask you this question.
When we talk about you say the question of a control group?
A. Correct.
Q. In 1928 did Lombard and -- is it Doering? -Lombard and Doering do a study that they tried to have a control group in?
A. If you hold on a second, I can tell you. It's my recollection -- I don't have the article in front of me and I'm having trouble reading some of the photocopies where I have some notes. The concept of a control is not new. And a few investigators before 1950 tried to have controls. The most effective, as I mentioned, were the German investigators, not Lombard and Doering. Also, I would have to look at that article to see to what degree they were looking at lung cancer and to what degree they were looking at oral cancer. That's a very important distinction.
But I think that Lombard and Doering paper deserves mention. Despite its existence, it was considered insufficient by scientists at the time to establish any relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. That's why 1950 is such an important turning point. Not that those represent the first retrospective studies to be published, but that they were much better than any previous retrospective studies.
Q. When you say to establish a relationship -- is that the phraseology you used?
A. That's what I said, yes.
Q. When you use that phrase, what do you mean? To establish a relationship?
A. In this particular context, I was using it to mean
a statistical relationship, not necessarily cause and effect. Retrospective studies were ultimately successful in showing a statistical relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. My recollection is that the Lombard/Doering paper of 1928 was hardly among those. I think most of their focus was on oral cancer. But I have not reviewed that paper in preparation for this deposition, so I would need to review that to answer more specifically. But even a good retrospective study has limitations of all retrospective studies that they can show statistical relationships. You need something more to establish cause and effect.
Q. Let me ask this question. When do you think that, as you look back in time, when was the first statistical relationship created that you think was worthy of note?
A. 1950 was the turning point. The Surgeon General --
Q. Let me ask you this question, if I can. Before 1950 do you think there were any statistical studies that would have been worthy of note by a physician?
A. Statistical studies of any sort?
Q. Yes. Regarding -A. Regarding lung cancer?
Q. Regarding smoking and cancer, period. Any type of cancer.
A. Well, that's the point. There were not if you were looking before 1950.
Q. If you were a physician?
A. That's correct. In fact, evidence for this is in the expert report that you have. As examples, both Dr. Wynder in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1948 and then the same year, in 1948, there was an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association, reviewing the whole field and what had been discovered. Both concluded that there was no evidence -- both concluded that the cause of lung cancer was unknown. And in addition, there was no evidence at that time, statistical evidence, to link lung cancer with cigarette smoking. That changed, of course, but that changed with important retrospective studies published in 1950.
Q. You're saying that if you'd been a physician in the nineteen -- say you'd been a physician from 1930 forward.
A. Right.
Q. There's no point prior to 1950 that you would have wanted to mention to your favorite patient that say, you know, it might be a good idea if you don't smoke?
A. Well, it's important to distinguish the specific problem of lung cancer from other problems associated with cigarette smoking. Now, also, this is time dependent.
Q. I'm talking about just health problems in general, though. I'm with you on what you just said.
A. If we are looking, say in the 1930s and 1940s, there were other health problems that were associated with cigarette smoking: ulcer and acid
secretion, certain vascular problems, Buerger's disease, for example; there's a visual condition called tobacco amblyopia. If you were looking at other conditions, relationships had been established and it was in the medical literature that physicians and patients should be concerned of this. If you had vascular disease or circulation problems, you shouldn't smoke. If you had ulcer, you shouldn't smoke. If you were an athlete in training, you shouldn't smoke; it's bad for the wind. But this is different from lung cancer. The cause of lung cancer through this period was considered unknown and in specific it was stated explicitly that there is no reason at this time to suspect cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
Q. Are you talking about the JAMA article in '48? Is that what you're referring to?
A. I'm referring to the entirety of the world's literature.
Q. At that time?
A. Yeah. The JAMA article in 1948 and the New
England Journal of Medicine article the same year, which are review articles and important journals that are read widely, are good examples to use to illustrate this point where you would have major authors, major medical scientists in lung disease, reviewing the world's literature, writing review articles for the general reader of the Journal and concluding that there is no evidence -- concluding that the cause of lung cancer is unknown and there is no reason to suspect cigarette smoking as the cause.
Now, that was 1948. But this comes out of hundreds of articles. You'll notice that my pre-1950 bibliography is close to 300 sources and it comes out of the totality of the world's experience. People before then had not been able to show in a conclusive way that there was a relationship. So these are expressions of the world's literature. These are good examples to use.
Q. Let's go back a minute for this piece. It's my understanding that it is your opinion that prior to 1950, a good physician would have warned his patients -- or if it were a woman doctor back then her patients -- that there were health risks involved with smoking cigarettes; is that correct? In your opinion.
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I would like to rephrase that wording.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Go ahead.
A. I think it is more accurate to say that before
1950, it was known in the medical community that cigarette smoking cannot be considered entirely benign. That there were documented health problems associated with it.
Q. And you believe that?
A. Do I believe that?
Q. Yes.
A. Do I believe that now or do I believe the evidence at the time justified that conclusion?
Q. Both.
A. I definitely believe that now. And I also believe that the evidence in the 1930s and forties did justify the view that if you were a runner, you shouldn't smoke, and if you had vascular disease, you shouldn't smoke, and so forth.
Q. What other "so forths" would there be?
A. Excuse me? What other --
Q. When you use the words "and so forth," if you'd flesh that out a little bit more, please?
A. That would include ulcer, it would include a
visual problem called tobacco amblyopia. Those would be two other important ones to add.
Q. Any others come to mind?
A. Not as we speak at this time.
Q. Let me ask this question. When you use those phrases, were cigarettes considered both a causative force and also an aggravation of those conditions?
A. A causative force of?
Q. Causing those conditions.
A. I would have to review that. Certainly it was considered to be intertwined. How much is the main cause? How much is an aggravation? I don't recall that distinction precisely as we speak. I understand what you're asking and I appreciate it, but in important proceedings such as these, I'm not going to answer something definitely unless I'm definitely sure.
Q. Let me ask you this question on that. In your
judgment, would a good physician have warned his patients of that potential, those that were smoking, if you knew someone was smoking?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I don't think that is a question that
appropriately allows for a yes or no answer because --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Is there some circumstances when a physician would have so warned their patients in that time period regarding any of those conditions?
A. Right. Because the problems, the health problems associated with cigarette smoking that had been established, if we're looking 1940s, though they had been established, they are relatively minor compared with lung cancer. They affect a small portion of the population. We know that tens of millions of Americans smoke yet there were, as late as 1950, 3,000 deaths from lung cancer. Now, that's 3,000 deaths too many, in my opinion. On the other hand, it's something like two or three out of every 10,000 smokers. And smoking, so many people smoked and enjoyed it, derived social effects from it, did not have circulatory problems or weren't athletes in training. Physicians, as you know, had a very high, perhaps the highest, occupational rate of smoking.
I think it's a bit, it's using hindsight and being, I think, a bit more, you know, more value judgment than we have the right to use to say that a physician would have warned or should have warned. I think it is more correct to say that certain health hazards were associated with smoking. And if you had a patient who had one of
those problems, who had ulcers or who had vascular disease, certainly it's appropriate to mention at that time.
But if you have a healthy 28-year-old male without ulcer, without emphysema, without tobacco amblyopia, without any of the other problems, who enjoyed smoking and was feeling great, do you have to warn them of everything that can happen? I just don't know. It starts to have a valuated view of present advocacy as opposed to a legitimate statement describing the scientific knowledge. It's hard to know what someone should or shouldn't have done on tangential matters 55 years ago. I think the correct phraseology would be that relationships with certain other health problems had been established by that time. But what a physician says to a patient, I believe and continue to believe, is very much a matter of the individual patient and that patient's circumstances. Are you talking someone healthy or someone who already has a problem or a risk factor for it? So I'm not comfortable allowing generalizations to be made.
Q. So with respect to those health problems in the thirties and forties, I'm understanding you to indicate that it would be patient driven, depending upon no particular patient's condition, would be the important factor in determining whether or not a good physician would warn that particular patient of that problem?
A. Well, I want to emphasize that I am here as a medical historian.
Q. I understand. I hear you but you're also making some -- you're telling me you have no opinion on that, so be it. Is that what you're saying? You can't answer that yes or no?
A. I'm saying I have no expert opinion as to what a
physician should have told a patient about tobacco smoking and vascular disease back in 1948. I think as a medical historian I can say that there was already, by the late forties, scientific evidence associating cigarette smoking with problems other than lung cancer. It's very important for this case to say that there was no credible evidence at that time linking cigarette smoking with lung cancer. But one thing that I think --
Q. Just a second. I'm not asking about lung cancer right now and we have a limited amount of time.
A. Well, I'm speaking as a medical historian.
Q. My question is do you as a physician have an opinion as to whether or not a physician practicing in the thirties and forties should have warned or should have informed a patient of theirs who suffered from one of these other conditions that you mentioned, other than lung cancer, as to the potential for smoking to either aggravate or further harm their condition?
A. I want to emphasize that I'm not an expert on the doctor/patient relationship.
Q. I understand. Do you have an opinion? If you don't, just tell me.
MR. WOODS: Can I interrupt here? Russ,
you're asking questions -MR. SMITH: He won't answer.
MR. WOODS: You're asking questions, first, that are a little confusing and, two, they don't call for a quick or an easy or a yes or no answer.
MR. SMITH: Well, the first one does, David. It's simple. Whether or not he has an opinion on that question. If he says he doesn't, just tell me no.
MR. WOODS: I would argue with you that that doesn't -MR. SMITH: Well, he's been doing it now and it's taken up 20 minutes. I mean, he either has an opinion or he doesn't as to whether or not a physician should have discussed those potential problems with a patient that he thought was particularly vulnerable to them insofar as the smoking relationship. If he doesn't have an opinion --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) If you don't have an opinion, Doctor, just tell me.
A. You're getting very specific. And it is important for everyone, for me and for you, to be reasonable. And as you paint a very specific circumstance of a patient suffering from vascular illness --
Q. Let's just leave it right there then. A patient suffering from vascular illness.
A. It certainly appears reasonable to me that a physician should discuss smoking with that patient. But I want to emphasize that so much goes into a proper doctor/patient relationship and you have to know a lot of things about the patient that, in my view, it's also irresponsible to generalize what a physician should or shouldn't say from little snippets. We talk with patients when we know our patients well, not just little snippets. So in general, if you're talking about a patient with an ulcer, yes, even in the forties I think it's appropriate to say "watch your smoking."
But I also want to put the caveat that I'm not an expert on the doctor/patient relationship in this sense. And before I would give a final answer, even to a particular case, I really would like to know about the patient, the circumstances, and so forth.
Q. So I'm gathering that you are saying that under
certain circumstances, you think that that patient should have been informed and had that issue discussed with them by their physician; is that true?
A. I'm saying that it's easy for me to imagine
certain circumstances in the late forties when you have a patient with ulcer or vascular disease who smokes where the physician would want to point out the dangers of smoking.
Q. How about in the late thirties?
A. I'm not exactly sure when the beginning was. I feel more comfortable saying the forties.
Q. Were there some of those conditions that they
should have been discussed with a patient under
certain circumstances going back even into the thirties, some medical conditions insofar as smoking aggravating them?
A. I don't know the answer to that question because as I interpret it, you are really asking when was tobacco amblyopia first described, when was the relationship between cigarette smoking and vascular disease first described, and not only described but generally accepted in the medical community, and that's an important qualification. When was the relationship between cigarette smoking and too much acid secretion in the stomach first described and generally accepted? I did not investigate those issues as I did lung cancer.
Lung cancer is what I investigated. So I really don't know when they were first described. I do know that by the late forties they were described. You find that in textbooks. You find that mentioned in review articles. But if you're asking when the relationships were first described and accepted, I do not know the answer to that question.
Q. Let me ask you this question. When you say "generally accepted," what do you mean?
A. I mean that other physicians and medical
scientists are familiar with the results or the claim and have accepted it. It would be a grave mistake to assume that something that's common knowledge or accepted merely because it's stated by someone or that it has been published. To understand the state of scientific knowledge in any discipline, you need to know how an idea, how a paper was received, what the reception was. And this is what I'm referring to. Not was a paper published but what were the results read by the rest of the medical community? Were they understood? Were they accepted? Were they incorporated into teaching and practice? And that's a higher level question.
Q. Do you think a physician should wait until at least half the physicians agree with that something has a causal relationship before they go to the trouble of talking about a potential problem with the patient?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. That's a question that does not allow a yes or no answer. It depends on --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) That's fine. You can't answer that yes or no. Is what you're saying? Right?
A. There are certain questions that you've asked, one about what you say to a patient, this particular question now, that really require much more texture and information to be able to render a reliable opinion.
Q. By "texture" are you saying it would depend upon the particular patient?
A. Well, among other things. It would depend upon the patient, on how serious the problem is, it would depend upon how good the evidence was. Are you talking about evidence that really is strong, or are you talking about evidence that is really quite unstable and unreliable? And you also have to remember, you have to understand how science
works. It's a mistake to think that doctors or scientists change their mind immediately when a new idea comes along or a new approach. You are always, always going to have some physicians who are the first to accept a new idea or a new technique or a new treatment. You'll have most people who are in the middle. You will have some people more conservative and need additional evidence to come in or to have the confidence that comes by saying that most of the medical community has already subscribed to the new view.
After this question we've gone about two hours and 15 minutes. The witness wouldn't mind a rest room break for two or three minutes.
(A BRIEF RECESS WAS TAKEN.)
MR. WOODS: I'm looking at a letter, June 15, 2001, from Craig Proctor to you, that lays out Dr. Ludmerer's rates of compensation.
MR. SMITH: Fantastic. That's okay, just so we have it. His prior testimony you're getting me.
MR. WOODS: That I'll send you.
MR. SMITH: And the CV you're getting
me.
MR. WOODS: That's correct.
MR. SMITH: So there we are. Are we ready to go?
MR. WOODS: Yes.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Dr. Ludmerer, I'm going to ask you some questions that if you can't answer them yes or no, tell me.
A. Okay.
Q. And then I'll have to do something else because -I love long answers in a deposition but not when I'm on the clock and your deposition is going to go nowhere.
Are you aware that in the 1964 Surgeon General's report, they cited a number of articles published in the 1920s regarding smoking and lung cancer? Yes or no, are you aware of that?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. You did not include any of those in your paper; is that correct?
A. I have not written a paper.
Q. Well, that document you did that began in the 1930s, what is that called?
A. Well, the research that I did --
Q. What do you title that, the document that covers '30 to '64, sir? Just give me a name that you call it then I'll know what to call it.
A. How about the original bibliography.
Q. Okay. And then you had a paper that came off of the bibliography itself, or did you just cite the articles? The paper that is, for instance, marked as your report in this case?
A. That was an independent expert witness statement.
And that came from the totality of research that I did. And I do want to clarify for the record that --
Q. I -- the record -A. No, I think this is very important. That despite the fact that my detailed research began in 1930 does not mean that I did not somewhere along the
line read occasional papers before 1930, and I certainly recognized that there had been various discussions about the health hazards of cigarette smoking that go before 1930.
Q. Doctor, I'd really appreciate if you would try to be concise as you can.
A. Well, I want to make certain that the question as you asked it does not allow my testimony to be misrepresented.
Q. Approximately how many dollars were you paid for the preparation of the bibliography and the paper that came out of it total?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Best estimate. Range you're comfortable with.
A. Well, it's in my testimony several times --
Q. Approximately. Just give me your best estimate, a range you're comfortable with, please.
A. -- that the research and that my findings were based on took about a thousand hours. That was $200 an hour at that time in '88 and '89.
Q. Two hundred thousand?
A. So that's about 200,000.
Q. And after that how much? Any more?
A. That was my rate through '91. Then --
Q. And you were paid only about $200,000 from '88 to '91? Is that the total? Approximately?
A. For the research it was around $200,000. As you're now aware, I gave a deposition and testified in a case and there was additional compensation for that.
Q. Approximately how much was that?
A. I would say that the additional case and
deposition together represented another $100,000.
Q. And from 1988 until this time, you've been paid
approximately how much money by tobacco companies or lawyers or other persons representing them or working for them? Best estimate. Approximate range total.
A. Please understand that I'm guessing and this work occurs in staccato fashion where I may --
Q. Your best estimate for the number at this time?
A. I would guess in the range of, you know, another hundred fifty, $200,000 since then. So call it four hundred fifty, $500,000 total.
Q. For testimony, papers, reports, research, what have you?
A. There's been no new research. There has been no new --
Q. But I mean for everything you've done.
A. Right. You know, there have been some additional, as you know, additional depositions since then and that's what the compensation was for.
Q. But my question is the total amount you've been
paid for all the work you've done for the tobacco companies or their lawyers or other people connected with them would be in the area of four hundred fifty or five hundred thousand to your best estimate?
A. As I sit here today, correct. We're talking from the beginning now. 1988 through the present.
Q. When you did your initial bibliography and document that you created, you did review
international medical and scientific literature; is that correct?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. Could you state that again? I didn't catch the question.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Sure. Did you review
international medical and scientific literature in the curation of your bibliography and the document you wrote and the research you did in conjunction therewith?
A. By "document" are you referring to the expert witness statement?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. The answer is yes. I reviewed the world's literature.
Q. What countries did you review besides the United States, please?
A. Well, the --
Q. Just tell me the countries, if you would. That you can think of.
A. Well, there were papers from around the world. There was England, there was Germany, France, Scandinavia, occasionally South America, occasionally Italy, occasionally the Far East.
Q. Any other countries you can think of?
A. It was really quite extensive.
Q. Have we covered the ones you can think of right now, though?
A. Well, we certainly covered the main ones because medical research at this time was American, British, and certain countries in continental Europe. So those were the leaders in medical research.
Q. Were there articles published on smoking and lung cancer in the German medical literature prior to 1930? Yes or no as best you know. If you don't know, just tell me. If you think there were, say yes and otherwise no, please.
A. My strong suspicion is yes. I didn't
systematically review that. Certainly there were German articles after 1930 and I read those in my research.
Q. In your review of the literature, did you use
citations on smoking and lung cancer that came out of the 1964 Surgeon General's report, as best you recollect?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I'm not certain I understand that question. Maybe you could clarify that. What do you mean publications coming out of the Surgeon General's report?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Citations that came out of, that the Surgeon General Committee used?
MR. WOODS: You mean that the Surgeon General report cited?
MR. SMITH: Yes, sir.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Do you recall whether or not you used any of those?
A. Yes. Many of the papers that I looked at myself were cited by the Surgeon General's January 1964 report. Conversely, many of the papers cited in the report I had already looked at.
Q. That's not my question and I don't have time for
the aside, please.
A. I'm trying to answer your question.
Q. I understand but that wasn't my question?
MR. WOODS: He's trying to give you full and fair answers.
MR. SMITH: I'd love it if I had ten
hours.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Do you recall there be a citation in the Surgeon General's committee report reciting back to a citation in 1930?
A. I don't know what you mean by "reciting back."
You mean citing back?
Q. I apologize. C-i-t-i-n-g, citing.
A. I would have to look at that report. Certainly
the Surgeon General's report cites materials that were published before 1930. When the earliest paper was or report was, I don't remember offhand. But there were pre-1930 studies that were cited by the Surgeon General's report.
MR. WOODS: Just to clarify here, we're talking about the 1964 Surgeon General's report unless we say otherwise.
MR. SMITH: Yes, sir.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Did the cigarette ads that JAMA
took from the tobacco industry trouble you in any way as a physician or just as a human being?
A. I don't know what ads you're referring to.
Q. Are you aware of the fact that -- was there any advertising involving, that JAMA took from the tobacco industry?
A. At what period of time?
Q. Any period.
A. I'm not an expert in this. I'm talking about scientific --
Q. Okay, you're not aware of it one way or the other, whether there was any ads then?
A. From general knowledge, it is my recollection that there was a period of time that JAMA and many other medical and scientific journals --
Q. Did it trouble you that JAMA took advertising money from the tobacco industry?
A. Trouble me when?
Q. At any time.
A. Well, it's really not been an issue for me in the sense that JAMA has not published tobacco ads as long as I've been in medicine. There was a time before I was born or when I was a child that JAMA did have ads, but, you know, I had no awareness of any of these issues at that time. During the time that I have looked at JAMA, there have been no ads. So that's really out of my area.
Q. The answer is just no, it hasn't.
A. Well, the answer is -- it requires the explanation that I gave.
Q. Okay. You gave a long explanation.
A. Remember, some of your questions, as much as you would like them to be answered yes or no --
Q. Did any tobacco company share any of their research findings with you at any time?
A. No. That's an easy one.
Q. Did any tobacco company or any of their
representatives, including their attorneys, provide you with any public or private statements
made on behalf of the tobacco industry regarding any position on smoking and health?
A. I have seen no private documents of that sort of any sort.
Q. Did your research on the history of smoking, it was searching the medical literature only?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
You can answer.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Is that correct?
A. As opposed to?
Q. Medical literature?
A. It was my responsibility to understand --
Q. Help me with that. Did you review anything other than medical literature?
A. -- state of knowledge in the scientific literature, scientific community.
Q. Answer is yes?
MR. WOODS: Russ, you're going to have to let him answer the question.
MR. SMITH: He won't answer.
MR. WOODS: He is answering.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Doctor, you win. You just don't bother answering the question. I don't have time to hear speeches.
MR. WOODS: Well, then stop making them. Sorry about that. Tell you what, the doctor will try to be as brief as he can -MR. SMITH: I doubt it.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Did you review any literature published in any hygiene journals when you did your research bibliography and this report at any time?
MR. WOODS: Object to form. Hygiene
journals?
MR. SMITH: Yes, sir.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Ever published in hygiene journals. Do you recall doing so?
A. Are you talking about scientific hygiene --
Q. Yes, sir.
A. -- or are you talking about popular hygiene in popular journals?
Q. Either one.
A. I would have to check my references to be certain. Popular journals, certainly no. There could have been a few articles in scientific hygiene, particularly since scientific hygiene evolved into public health. But I don't remember for certain one way or the other as we speak. There could have been but I don't remember -- scientific hygiene.
Q. Did you review any tobacco industry trade
journals, tobacco industry symposiums, conference proceedings -A. No, I did not.
Q. -- chemistry conferences, anything?
A. No.
Q. Do you recall from your research when the first pneumonectomy was performed?
A. Yes.
Q. Approximately when was that, sir?
A. Well, let me be specific. Are you talking pneumonectomy for lung cancer or for other reasons?
Q. Lung cancer, sir.
A. That would have been in the 1930s. For sure it was the 1930s. I want to say 1937 but it was somewhere in the mid-1930s. I'm proud to say that it was done by Dr. Graham, who was chairman of surgery at my own medical school, Washington University.
Q. Let me ask you this. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, what was the field of public health called?
A. The field of public health?
Q. Yes, sir. Do you recall from your research?
A. Well, it often was called "public health." It focused mainly on infectious diseases and acute diseases at that time, but the term "public health" is not a new term.
Q. That was the term for the field as best you can
recall from your research? Nothing else comes to mind at the moment?
A. I'm not an expert on the early history of public health and it had many manifestations to it. I know you don't like the important qualifications. But the term is not a new term --
Q. I like them. I just don't have time for them tonight.
A. But there may have been -- there could well have been other terms as well. But the term "public health" is not a new term. Public health changed over time -- pardon?
Q. Did you review the "Annals of Hygiene and Public Medicine"?
A. I did not systematically review that journal in
the sense of going through it year by year. It is very possible that in the 1,200 articles from the time period that are in the bibliographies, it's very possible that one or more articles came from that publication. I just don't remember as we speak here today -- as we sit here today.
Q. In your research, do you recall the tobacco
industry being accused of false and misleading cigarette advertising at any time? In any medical journals where they discussed it?
A. That was really not an issue that came to the
forefront in medical journals during the time I examined.
Q. You don't recall it being there then when you examined?
A. Correct, correct. It's not to say it wasn't. But I don't recall and certainly it was not a major theme in the medical literature. To say it wasn't there at all, I'd have to check. But I don't recall it as we sit here today.
Q. Did you review a 1962 report of the Royal College of Physicians?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I presume you are referring, to help make things easier for you, I presume you are referring to their 1962 report on cigarette smoking as opposed to other reports, including during 1962 --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir, yes, sir.
A. I did in '88 or '89. It is not a report that I've had occasion to look at recently, but I did examine that a long time ago at the beginning.
Q. If you were a practicing physician, again say beginning in 1930, when do you think the first time that you ever would have mentioned the possibility of cigarette smoking causing lung cancer to a patient of yours? Approximately what year do you think would have probably been the first time you would have done so?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. Could you repeat that question?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir. If you had been a
practicing physician from 1930 to date, under the right circumstances, with the patient that you think is somebody, you know, should be made aware of the possibility of there being a tie between smoking and lung cancer, when do you think is approximately the first time you would have done so?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. You know, it's very difficult to answer the
question in the form that you asked it because you're talking 60, 70 years ago.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Yes, sir. But anytime in between there. Or a range that you're comfortable with.
A. I think it would be more appropriate to say that the whole issue of the concern of lung cancer coming from cigarette smoking -- again, using the Surgeon General's report was, the watershed year was 1950. So it was a matter of great scientific debate and popular debate as well after 1950. But it's something that really exploded with the 1950 publications.
I do not feel comfortable with the phraseology, "Would you have said anything about it before 1950?" I'm sure out of the hundreds of thousands of physicians you might have found some who did. Does that mean it was wrong to go along with the consensus and not even think about it since the consensus was the cause was unknown? So there's a twist to your question that makes -that as a scholar I don't feel totally comfortable answering in yes or no.
But certainly the scientific awareness of the causes of lung cancer and possible relation to cigarette smoking, that exploded in 1950. And certainly after that point we know physicians did talk about it and debate it.
Q. Let me ask you this. In 1964, following the Surgeon General's report, if you'd been a practicing physician -- were you ever a practicing physician?
A. I'm a practicing physician now.
Q. Beginning approximately when?
A. I would say early seventies with clinical clerkships and --
Q. When would you have started?
A. That's what I said. Early 1970s.
Q. And had you started in the early 1960s and the
Surgeon General's report came out in '64 -- well, withdraw that.
Have you ever, as a practicing physician, warned any of your patients of the potential for lung cancer from smoking?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And you've been doing that since approximately when, as the best you recollect?
A. I've been doing that in my own personal medical
practice since I began practicing medicine, which was the early and mid-1970s.
Q. If you had been practicing in 1964 when the
Surgeon General's report came out, do you think you would have done so?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. Well, it's very difficult to know, you know, putting yourself in hypotheticals and so many circumstances --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Something you don't have an opinion on?
A. It's hard to say. I think it is likely I would have. It also depends on how old a person would be.
Q. I understand. I'm not saying you've done it for everyone.
A. I think this is important, though. Are you a young physician who's educated while clinical epidemiology is emerging and you are already accustomed to it? Or are you a 67-year-old physician who still isn't quite persuaded despite the Surgeon General's report? There are a lot of qualifications to that.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Let's say you were a physician that had been out in practice five years, as we go back in time, okay? And you have your board certification in internal medicine?
A. That's correct.
Q. Let's say you were board certified in internal medicine, you've been practicing -- say you've been out for ten years, you graduated from medical school in ten years and you're board certified in internal medicine, okay? And it's 1964, the Surgeon General's report comes out. Do you think you would have discussed the relationship of smoking and lung cancer or the potential relationship with some of your patients?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. Well, you know, these are all hypotheticals. I'm a historian --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) I understand. No, it isn't
hypothetical. And if you're telling -- I guess, first of all, do you have an opinion as to whether or not you would have discussed it with some of your patients in 1964 following the report? If you don't have an opinion, just tell me and I'll accept that.
A. Am I 35-year-old physician or a 70-year-old physician?
Q. You've been out ten years and you're board certified in internal medicine.
MR. WOODS: Does he have an opinion as to what he might have done?
MR. SMITH: Whether or not he would have discussed it with some of his patients, yes.
MR. WOODS: Does he have an opinion
on -MR. SMITH: That's the question, yeah.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Do you understand my question, Doctor?
A. After 1964.
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I think it is very likely that I would have. On the other hand --
Q. I want to go back with you again. Now I want to go back to 1959. Do you think at that point in time, again, you've been out of medical school ten years, board certified for five, everything else the same, do you think that you would have discussed the potential relationship with some of your patients at that time, in 1959?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. I think it's likely I would have discussed the
potential -- the question with them because this was a large issue. And I think it's very likely that patients would have come to me as their physician and said, Dr. Ludmerer, what do you think? I think it is likely the issue would have come up. Is it certain it would have come up? I don't know. These are all very hypothetical questions that --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) I understand. That's all I can ask you for is your best belief.
A. But keep in mind that, quite frankly, I don't know what my answer would have been. It would have depended on who my teachers had been; what type of intellectual and scientific background I had; was I exposed mainly to the experimental model; how much of the new epidemiological model that I had.
Q. Say it was the same schools you went to only back in an earlier period.
A. Well, you're asking a question that, very
candidly, does not allow a yes or no answer. It's really I don't know.
Q. You don't have an opinion on that one?
A. We know that conscientious physicians themselves were divided on the issue. So I think I would have been conscientious. I like to think that.
And I think it was very likely that some of my patients would have raised the issue with me.
But, very candidly, I don't know what side of the controversy I would have been on. There were lots of reputable scientists and leading medical practitioners in 1957 who thought that the evidence was not conclusive and that the relationship was an artificial one between --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) So you don't have an opinion. Let me ask you this question.
A. You know, so I really don't know --
Q. -- what you would have done.
A. What I would have done.
Q. Period. I hear you. I do. Let me ask you this question, Dr. Ludmerer. Let's assume -- no, I'll rephrase it this way.
Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the tobacco industry, based on the research you've done, was privy to the same information that the medical community was over the time you studied?
A. The answer to that question is easy and the answer is yes. We're talking published articles that are in the public domain, the marketplace of scientific ideas. That's accessible to anyone
with an interest.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Do you think that the tobacco industry, in addition to having the information that was available to the medical community available to them, that they also had access to additional information based on the search you've done?
A. I have no reason to suspect that the tobacco
industry on its own had access to verifiable and substantial and important scientific information that the world's medical community and scientific community on its own had not discovered independently. I have heard that allegation before but I have never been shown any evidence to substantiate it and, quite frankly, it's not a very credible hypothesis, in my opinion.
Q. Let's me ask you this question. In addition to -well, withdraw that.
When was the first time any warnings were put on cigarette packages as you understand it?
A. My understanding, Mr. Smith, is that would have been around '66 or '67. I know it didn't happen immediately.
Q. Let's say it's '66 or '67 for the sake of, you know, just the sake of discussion.
A. Yeah.
Q. Prior to those warnings -- would you call them
"warnings" that had been put on cigarette packs?
A. Well, I'm not an expert in labeling but they seem like warnings to me.
Q. Okay. So let's call them "warnings" for now.
Prior to those warnings being placed on cigarette packs in approximately 1966 or 1967, do you have an opinion as to whether or not a responsible tobacco manufacturer would have put some type of warnings out to the public in some fashion or another prior to the warnings that we're talking about going on cigarette packs in 1966 or 1967?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Do you have an opinion on that one way or the other?
A. I do not. That's far out of my area. I'm here as a medical historian with the scientific knowledge, it's condition, and state, not what is appropriate or legal or ethical behavior for any company in any industry. It's really -- you need a different expert for that.
Q. Have you read any of the other reports that have been submitted in this case?
A. Expert reports, you mean?
Q. Yes, sir, Dr. Ludmerer.
A. For this case? The Tompkin case?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. No, I have not.
Q. Do you know any of the other experts that are involved in this case, the names of them?
A. I could not tell you the names of experts in this case on either the plaintiff or defense side.
Q. Have you been aware of any of the experts that
have testified in the defense side in any of the other cases that you've been involved in?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. What do you mean have I been aware of them?
Q. (By Mr. Smith) The names of who they are. You've been involved in cases that had other experts involved in them; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And did you know the names of any of the other defense experts that have been involved in any cases that you've been involved in? Do you know the names of any of them?
A. The most honest and direct answer to that is no.
I may have seen a name at the time. You know, you're getting on the witness stand and someone else is leaving or you're getting off and someone else is coming. So it's very possible that I was, said, Here is Mr. So-and-so. But I had not known those names prior and I certainly don't remember them now. So, essentially, the answer to your question is no, I do not know other witnesses from the defense or from the plaintiff, who they might be.
Q. And to the best of your knowledge, you don't even know any of them?
A. That's correct.
Q. Who was the first Surgeon General to ever make any public statements regarding undesirable symptoms involving smoking?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) If you know. Or who was the first one in your opinion? I'll put it that way.
A. I would phrase it a little bit different because, as you know, the history of lung cancer has a different history than other conditions associated with cigarette smoking. And I'm here to talk about lung cancer, not peptic ulcer, emphysema, or vascular disease. But given that qualification and focusing on lung cancer, to my recollection as we sit here today, Surgeon General Burney in the 1950s was the first who made a meaningful public health statement on this issue.
Q. Let me ask you this question.
A. There could have been others, but he's the name that I recall at this time.
Q. He's the first one that comes to your mind at the moment?
A. That's correct. Chronologically, yes. That was like 1957.
Q. In your research, what seems to be the first
connection that you came across where people were beginning to think that smoking might be a cause of emphysema?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I did not study that and I don't know.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) It did come up in your research, the topic, the discussion of emphysema, however?
A. Many diseases came up in the course of my research because the prospective studies that were first published in the 1950s and then continued forward demonstrated associations with other diseases beyond lung cancer. And emphysema and chronic bronchitis were among the two. And the Surgeon General discusses this.
So in this fashion, by reading the prospective studies and the Surgeon General's
report, I know that other diseases came to be associated with lung cancer. Also, reading criticisms of those studies -- I said lung cancer; I meant to say cigarette smoking. What I am not able to say at this moment as we speak is when the first evidence from anywhere came in suggesting that emphysema was related to cigarette smoking. That I don't know.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Do you have a belief or an opinion as to whether or not emphysema was considered in the 1950s or suggested in the 1950s to be related to smoking?
A. The first solid evidence that I'm aware of
relating, what we call chronic obstructive airway disease, came from the prospective studies, the first of which was published in 1954 and others were published where the same study was continued. Now, that's not to say that was the first time an association was demonstrated, but that's the first solid evidence that I can think of as we speak.
But again, my investigation, my detailed investigation was lung cancer, not other conditions.
Q. So far as the diseases of the lung would be
concerned, you'd have emphysema, you gave lung cancer. Do you have bronchial problems?
A. Bronchitis is another problem. Now, keep --
Q. Any others come to mind other than those three?
A. Well, those are three big ones. By the way, the evidence for emphysema and bronchitis was different. And for all the dozens of times that I've read the Surgeon General's report, I always forget which is which. But the evidence in 1964 was statistically significant for one but not the other. It was either statistically significant for bronchitis and not for emphysema or for emphysema and not for bronchitis. But one of the two the evidence was statistically significant for. It would be a mistake to say that a cause-and-effect relationship had been demonstrated for both at that time. We're talking '64.
Q. How about cancer of the tongue? Do you recall
anything about when that started to appear? Or at least some people were concerned that there might be a relationship?
A. Now, that has an older history. There is more in the medical literature about oral cancer early on. By "early" I mean early twentieth century and even late nineteenth century. And certainly this was another, oral cancer was another cause-and-effect relationship, as I recall, that the Surgeon General report discussed. But keep in mind we're not talking cigarette smoking. We're talking about cigars and pipes and that type of thing.
And those were in vogue long before cigarettes were in popular vogue.
Q. You have no information of about what the tobacco industry has done at any time regarding its response to any studies that were published or any news articles that were written about smoking, I take it. If I'm wrong, I want you to correct me. But I think that's what you indicated.
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. That's correct. My opinions deal with state of
scientific knowledge in the scientific and medical community and not the opinions, reviews, or actions or behaviors or press releases or whatever from the industry itself. I've not investigated that. I have no intention to investigate that. It's a completely different area from the one I'm familiar with.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) When the term "controversy" is
used in conjunction with smoking and lung cancer, what does it mean, as you understand it?
A. The term -- and it's not my term, Mr. Smith --
Q. I understand. You didn't create it.
A. -- it's the Surgeon General's term, among
others -- refers particularly to the period in the 1950s, early 1960s where scientific evidence is being accumulated linking cigarette smoking with lung cancer. But the question was what is the meaning of this linkage? Most of the evidence, as you know, was statistical, not biological, and the whole debate was is this a statistical problem or a biological problem? If you thought it was a biological problem, you were unconvinced. If you thought it was a statistical problem, you were more likely to be convinced. But the fact that you had responsible medical scientists and physicians and investigators and doctors and surgeons disagreeing over the nature of the relationships allows controversy.
The Surgeon General used "controversy" not only because of the fact of disagreement, but the fact that it was an important issue as well. You can disagree over tiny things and it won't be controversial, but this was, obviously, a very important issue scientifically. It was an issue that had great bearing upon American culture, American economy, and so hence the Surgeon General coined the term "controversy."
Q. Are your opinions today the same as they were when you wrote your first report during the Cipollone situation? Have they changed in any way?
A. To my knowledge, I never wrote a report during the Cipollone.
Q. Were you involved in Cipollone II?
A. I was involved in Cipollone II. I was not involved in Cipollone I.
Q. Did you have a report that you prepared during your involvement with Cipollone II?
A. Let me distinguish between a formal report and an expert witness statement. Some of the depositions or trials where I've been asked to appear have required an expert witness statement. They have been longer, as in your case; in some cases they've been brief, like a paragraph or a page.
And when asked to do it, that has always been complied with. I do not remember such a statement being asked as part of my deposition for the Cipollone retrial. My memory could be faulty on that, but I just do not recall an expert witness statement at that time.
Q. Were the opinions that you held at the time of Cipollone II the same as you currently hold?
A. Yes, they were. Regardless of what type of expert witness disclosure has been requested or required by the various courts in these, you know, handful of cases I've been involved with, my opinion from the beginning of my -- the opinion from the conclusion of my research in 1989 through the present is the same. It has not changed.
Q. The statistical evidence, as you understand it, been used by science going back to approximately when? Just in science in general, not limiting it to medical science.
A. I don't know for sure about science in general.
Q. Do you take it back to any point in time to at least, you know, a certain year or before?
A. My recollection is that crude statistics and
simple statistics were used for a long time in chemistry and physics. But I don't know for certain --
Q. It would be in the nineteenth century, in your judgment?
A. Probably. Probably earlier.
Q. Eighteenth century or earlier?
A. Or earlier. Certainly I can speak about medicine and the so-called numerical method was introduced to medical research in the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth century. So that's when we started using it in medicine. The type of statistical evaluation, the types of conditions that were studied at the time were far different from the chronic diseases and cancers of the present. But with acute diseases and infectious diseases and certain treatments, we have the introduction of numerical methods in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.
Q. Measuring the effectiveness of various treatments?
A. Right. You know, for example, bloodletting was a big treatment in medicine, believe it or not. You know, so doctors in France would get two populations of patients and put leeches in one and do bloodletting on that group and have a similar group of patients and not do bloodletting. They would find no difference in the outcome. You know, this type of thing.
Particularly in therapies, treatments, where you were treating an acute disease and you saw the results of treatment very quickly. The numerical method was introduced in the early eighteenth century.
Q. And they were trusted to have a status of being
trustworthy as of the time they did these studies on bloodletting, in your judgment?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. Well, you know, that's another battle that had to be fought in the evolution of medical science, in medical knowledge. Medical science did not change on a dime. What happened was that there was a whole discussion about the validity of numerical methods that lasted a number of years.
Ultimately, medical science came to accept that this was reliable, but it didn't happen overnight or immediately; it took a while.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) That would have been approximately when, the regarding the bloodletting? A range
you're comfortable with, please.
A. Early nineteenth century.
Q. And so sometime in the early nineteenth century, at least insofar as studies on bloodletting were concerned, the medical community placed trust, at least a certain amount of trust, in the statistical determinations that were made insofar as the effects of bloodletting, I'm understanding; is that correct?
A. Yes. And other treatments as well at the time.
It was an era of the so-called heroic treatments: bloodletting and blistering and purging and bleeding and so forth. And different drugs, Calomel and so forth. And a number of treatments were studied by the numerical method and the medical profession came to the view that such methods weren't reliable and legitimate in studying these treatments.
I want to emphasize, Mr. Smith, that the medical profession came to the view. It's not that Pierre Louis in Paris had the idea of using statistics and everyone accepted it right away. A lot of the debate and discussion and controversy occurred within medical science at the time, whether this was appropriate or not. Ultimately, the conclusion was that it was and such studies became more commonplace. But it was a process; it did not occur immediately.
Q. That was going back to the early nineteenth century, you indicate?
A. That's correct.
Q. Thereabouts.
A. That's correct. And studying treatments and treatments of acute diseases, those sorts of things. They weren't studying chronic diseases like cancer.
Q. But that's in the area of 200 years ago that we're talking about, as I understand it.
A. Two hundred years from today, right.
Q. And was it or was it not, as you understand it, used in other areas following the situation regarding bloodletting?
A. Well, as I believe I said, the numerical method
came to be accepted and it was used to study a lot of treatments.
Q. Such as?
A. Well, all the heroic treatments of purging and blistering and inducing emesis and diarrhea and leeching and so forth. There were a lot of drugs that were common at the time. I couldn't even give you their names today without picking up --
Q. But that was used in a lot of various ways insofar as checking out the validity of any given treatment?
A. Right. It was discouraging because a lot of treatments that were thought to be valid were shown not to be valid by this type of testing.
Q. Except for the poor devil that was about to get one of them, right?
A. You'd be better off without treatment than with treatment.
Q. If you can, determining causation, when did that first start to occur, as you understand it?
A. Well, that's the point. If you were talking the causation of chronic diseases --
Q. Of any disease, actually. Of any problem as far as the statistical approach. As you understand it, your first awareness of any of them that come to mind.
A. Well, I think it is absolutely essential to
recognize that acute illnesses, such as acute infections, behave differently from chronic diseases like lung cancer that develop over years and decades and that may not occur at all in someone who is exposed to the presumed risk factor. So our scientific understanding of acute diseases has much different history from chronic diseases --
Q. Let me ask you just a minute, though, on the one, on the acute diseases, please. When it comes to acute diseases, approximately when are you aware that or first aware of when -- withdraw that.
When it comes to acute diseases, as far as your research has led you, what's the first area that comes to your mind insofar as it's being used insofar as determining causes of acute diseases? Approximately. Just a time range you're reasonably comfortable with?
A. Well, again, we are talking at the time that the numerical method is being developed. And it has two major applications. It has applications to treatments such as we've been discussing --
Q. Right. And now I'm asking about causation.
A. Right. And at the same time, it was used
successfully in causation of some acute diseases, particularly some infectious diseases.
Q. Some that come to mind, sir?
A. Well, a classic example would be the Broad Street Pump and cholera in London in 1822. It did not require sophisticated statistics for observers to tell that if you drank from the Broad Street Pump, very soon thereafter you developed cholera and died. If you drank from a different pump, you did not become sick and you lived. That didn't require sophisticated statistics. The result was death.
Q. And it didn't require any prospective studies either, I take it?
A. I don't remember how much was prospective and how much was retrospective. The point is that cholera occurred so quickly. It was all or none; either you got it or you didn't. You know, everyone who drank from the Broad Street Pump got it. If you drank from a different pump, you didn't. If you got it, you died. It was not obscure. This would be an example of the use of crude statistics successfully in studying disease causation.
Q. Others come to mind in the nineteenth century?
A. Well, I think another category, it wasn't as broad as infectious diseases; infection diseases were really the dominant theme in medicine. But another example would be certain nutritional diseases and vitamin deficiencies. And I think a classic example would be scurvy. So British sailors would go out to sea and they'd be given citrus fruits, they would not get scurvy. But if
they did not receive citrus fruits, with a much higher percentage, they did. And again, you're talking something that's not as acute as cholera but something that happens over weeks and months as opposed to decades. So there were some applications outside of infectious diseases. I like the application of scurvy as a vitamin deficiency.
Q. Yes, sir. That makes sense. It seems like a good one to me. Any others come to mind? As far as, well, do any others come to mind as we're talking here?
A. As we're talking, I'd say no. We're talking infectious diseases, which covers -- it's a category covering a lot. We're talking some nutritional diseases. That covered a big part of medicine at the time. I think as we sit here today, I would stop there, which isn't to say there aren't other examples. But right here I think that's pretty good.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Would the
development or the coming down with scurvy, would that be a chronic event or an acute event?
A. Well, I think it would probably be most accurate
to call it a "subacute." Certainly it took longer than most infectious diseases did. Cholera you got right away. You know, scurvy would take weeks or months. But it was still measurable within the time frame that medical scientists of the period could observe. They could observe a ship of sailors or two ships, one that got citrus fruits, one that didn't. And observe and study the sailors when they returned weeks or months later.
It was doable as opposed to something like lung cancer, which we know can occur decades after a person commences smoking. So perhaps "subacute" would be a better term. I don't mean to suggest it was as quick as some of the infectious diseases but certainly was something that could be studied by investigators at the time. It was finite. It was concrete. Either you got it or you didn't. So it was amenable to study.
Q. Let me ask, just for my understanding, the phrase, I'm taking it "subacute," that means somewhere between acute and chronic?
A. I think that's a fair characterization.
Q. So it does appear that medical science would accept something that didn't have to occur immediately before their eyes, but you're indicating the problem occurs as to how far out you can go from what you can see happening immediately. Is that -A. I think we're on the right track. I'd state it
slightly differently. Sailors were out for weeks to months. That's not immediate like contracting gonorrhea after an exposure or cholera after drinking from the pump. But the point that's important to understand is that it was amenable to study with the techniques and methods of the time. People went out to sea; they came back. It could be studied. It was concrete. The trip was over; either they got scurvy or they didn't. It was
amenable to study in a way that lung cancer and other cancers initially seem not to be when you're talking about these latencies of decades, not weeks. So amenable to study, I think, is the key word.
Q. Now, lung cancer was first realized to be a
chronic disease approximately in what time period would they have put it in that category? As you understand it.
A. Well, lung cancer, I think, was considered part of the, quote/unquote, cancer problem. And early attitudes toward it were similar to others.
Now --
Q. That would have been about when, though? I don't care if it's a 30- or 40-year period, but approximately what period of time would you put that in?
A. I'm talking early twentieth century when it was known, when it was described, when it was considered a rare disease. It didn't develop immediately as say an infectious disease developed. It didn't happen immediately as trauma does. You fall off the truck, you break an arm. There's an immediate cause-and-effect relationship. And though you can always find exceptions, but as a generalization, patients often lingered with the disease for a period of time. They didn't get cancer and die immediately but it lingered with them and they suffered from it for a while, as opposed to many of our terrible infectious diseases. When you get it, if you don't receive treatment, you're going to die. If you get cholera, you'd better be treated or you have a high chance of death. So these were some of the differences.
Q. Dr. Ludmerer, let me ask you this. Cancer, the medical field first became aware of cancer approximately when?
A. I don't --
Q. As broad a stroke as you want to put on it. I don't want to pin you into an area you're not comfortable with. Just give me a range you're comfortable with.
A. You're going a bit beyond my area. And I'm not trying to avoid the question, but I just don't know for sure.
Q. Would it be back in the nineteenth century, in your judgment?
A. I'm guessing. It could have been before. I really don't know.
Q. Let me ask you a second question on that. When did the concept of a chronic illness or disease become part of the medical mind, as you understand it?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. Well, you can answer that or look at that in two ways. If you are asking were there documented examples of chronic diseases in general, what today we call chronic diseases in general, were there documented examples of cancer that go back for a long time in the history of --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) In the earliest parts of this century?
A. Well, I would say probably before -- I'm guessing. I don't want to guess.
Q. But I mean considering cancer to be something that was a -- well, when you use the phrase "chronic," what does it mean?
A. Well, I'm talking about conditions today such as coronary artery disease, such as various arthritis, such as cancers --
Q. Something that takes a long time to develop?
A. It takes a long time to develop. It's something that may occur not immediately on exposure to an insult but after years or decades. That's an important distinction, that often -- not always -but often is something that people live with and linger with as opposed to acute meningitis.
Q. It can be both long and developing and something that you might not, you have a long time getting rid of if you're going to get rid of it?
A. And also there's no guarantee that you'll get it. One of the important things we discovered about many acute diseases is that there was, in many instances, an all-or-none phenomenon. Infectious diseases are an example of this, some infectious diseases. So you're exposed to the Broad Street Pump in London and you get cholera; you're not exposed, you don't. This is different from the understanding that later developed about lung cancer because -- or other chronic diseases like coronary artery disease, because if you smoke it's not that you will get it, it's that your chances increase.
So this whole concept of risk factor is new to chronic diseases. It did not apply to acute diseases. And that was very puzzling to people in the fifties and sixties because there was a statistically increased risk of lung cancer with cigarette smoking, but most lung cancers didn't get it. That defied the conventional medical way of looking at the world.
Q. You mean cancer was considered to be a chronic condition probably before the turn of the twentieth century or thereabouts?
A. Well, I would like to say two things. If you're
talking, you know, the eighteen century, seventeen century --
Q. I'm not trying to do that to you. I'm just
saying, just for the sake of argument, I'll even go further than that. In your best judgment, by the year 1910, did the medical community pretty well think that cancer was a chronic condition?
A. They certainly recognized that cancer behaved
differently. They didn't understand much about it, as I said. It was such a mystery, it was considered a dead-end field of research.
Q. Let me ask you this. How about by 1920?
A. Same thing.
Q. When did they start thinking that cancer was chronic then?
A. Well, you know, I have not --
Q. Wasn't acute, that would evolve over a period of time?
A. You're asking, I think, very good questions and I don't have the answers to them. I know that the
concept of chronic disease in America was a concept that became generalized in the middle third of the twentieth century, particularly after World War II, though you can find predecessors in the 1930s. You can find a man, for example, Franz Boas in 1940 writing an important book, "The Chronic Plague of Cancer." So this consciousness of chronic diseases and their behaving differently certainly is a very important part of mid-twentieth century medicine. That is not to say that cancer was unknown before then. We've documented cancer and chronic diseases for a long time. But I haven't studied that history and I cannot tell you precisely exactly what medical attitudes were or when did they start using the term chronic disease.
Q. Well, let me ask you this question -A. Cancer was known but what language was used to
describe it and that sort of thing, I don't know. It was not an important theme of medical science. When you have a 1900 life expectancy of 45 and the top ten killers are all infectious diseases, you don't really have medical science focusing on cancer in the same way that they did later when people are living longer and they're seeing more cancer. Cancer has been described but it accounted for less morbidity and mortality then than it did later.
And I haven't, as I said, studied the early history of cancer. I know it was around. I know it was described, pathologists had identified cancer. I cannot tell you when the first identification of cancer was made. Was it 1860?
It was probably earlier but I cannot tell you that. I can't talk about early attitudes toward pernicity. Certainly in the mid-twentieth century, particularly after World War II, you find medical science talking about chronic disease in a way that we would recognize today.
Q. Let me ask you this. It strikes me that there's a pretty decent chance that cancer, insofar as the acquiring of it, cancer was considered by the medical specialists as far back as 1930 to be in the chronic category as opposed to the acute category?
A. Oh, yes, oh, yes. I haven't studied the detail, but cancer was well described and they recognized it behaved differently from acute diseases and it often tended to be a chronic problem. And, in fact, cancers of various types had been described well before 1930. Cancer of the lung had been described before 1930. But you're asking a lot of questions about the early history of cancer and attitudes toward it, which I think are thoughtful questions and I'm pleased that you asked them, but I really have not looked into them and I don't wish to speak beyond what I am --
Q. No, you're just giving me your best estimates. I accept that. But I guess what -- going further on that is this question. Lung cancer, it strikes me, from what I'm hearing, in that same time zone, would have, in the minds of the bright medical people, have been considered to be a chronic
condition as well, or a chronic acquisition?
A. Yes, I think that would be true. The chronic
diseases were -- cancers were not only recognized, but it was seen that they behaved differently. We didn't see much lung cancer. It was not on the medical consciousness as it later became, but, yes, it was seen and it behaved as a cancer and cancers can linger and cause a lot of suffering.
I think that's very fair to say that. And that goes back well before 1930, that is correct.
Q. And diseases of the lung probably go back before then too? At least some of them. I would guess that silicosis goes back into the thirties at any rate?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. There is a history of each of the lung exposure diseases, but I have not studied that history.
And, you know, as far as I know, some astute observer in 1810 rather than 1910 first described it. I don't know how far back those go. You're asking me questions that I did not investigate.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Let me ask you this question.
Here you have statistics starting to come up at -there's a rise in lung cancer, there's a rise in smoking. We know, I mean, not "we" but the bright medical scientists know that cancer or at least believe cancer is a chronic item. It seems to me that I certainly wouldn't just thumb my nose at the concept that smoking caused lung cancer if I were a responsible, curious medical scientist in the thirties?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Right?
A. Well, you're incorrect because you're not familiar with the medical literature and you're taking things out of context. Certainly lung cancer is rising and there is no one that I know who thumbed their nose at it or did not take it seriously. In fact, that's another reason I use 1930 as a starting point for my research, because you see the volume of literature increasing significantly after 1930, volume of literature on lung cancer.
But what you have to understand is that a statistical relationship is not the same thing as cause and effect. You can show the same type of statistical relationship, rise of lung cancer with tarring of the roads or increased use of automobiles or other things. So you need much more than a statistical relationship. The point, if you're looking at the 1930s and 1940s, is not that anyone dismissed the relationship. There were a handful of people who tried to bring forth evidence, who studied the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and the results were negative, the results were unsuccessful, or the studies were uncontrolled. So there was no credible evidence.
Q. You mean like working on rats or what have you?
A. Well, they weren't --
Q. I mean, is that what we're talking about? Laboratory tests?
A. Well, I'm talking about everything. Keep in mind that cancer in general, and lung cancer in
particular, in the 1930s and forties was such a mystery that most people were intimidated from even looking into the question of cause. We were before epidemiology, we were before molecular biology, before modern genetics.
You know, the question as you phrase it assumed that investigators had tools available to them that we have today. That is false. History is anchored in time. Tools that we have successfully used in more recent years to study cancer were not available at the time. People studied questions that could be answered. So they focused on the clinical behavior of the disease rather than cause. A few people tried to do retrospective studies but they conducted the studies very poorly. But the most common problem, as I said before, was that they did not have controls. And hence their results were considered to have no results at all other than speculation.
You have tens of millions of smokers, you have a couple thousand deaths from cancer per year. People would smoke for years and decades without developing ill consequences to it. Unlike acute diseases where the ill consequences come early. If you put yourself in the context of the period, it's very reasonable to say the evidence wasn't there and not to worry about it and to look for something else.
Q. Let me ask you this. So you're a physician back then and say there's, I don't know, there's how many cases of lung cancer?
A. I don't recall how many cases there were. If you look at deaths through 1930, there were maybe several hundred deaths in the world literature. 1930 there were 3,000 deaths.
Q. In the year 1930?
A. Correct.
Q. United States or in the world?
A. My understanding, Mr. Smith, is that the 3,000 figure is U.S. deaths.
Q. Say there's 3,000 U.S. deaths in the United States -A. With, you know, maybe 50 or 60 or 70 million smokers.
Q. And there's articles coming out saying, hey, you know, I had this patient and they smoked and they died of lung cancer and I wonder, there's a connection. Just say it was that weak an article. And that stuff's starting to show up -A. And that suggestion was made. But keep in mind that in science you need controls.
Q. Say you need controls but just bypass that for a minute with me. Let me ask you this, okay?
There's 3,000 deaths in the United States. They had death certificates in 1930?
A. They did but if you immerse yourself in the
context of the period, which is what responsible historians do, and not impose the values or views of the present, you find that the death certificates were unreliable. There were death certificates but one of the debates was what do these death certificates mean?
Death certificates at that time, for
example, did not distinguish between primary cancer arising in the lung and metastatic cancer spreading to the lung. There were many death certificates that were signed and certified without having any tissue documentation at all.
So some death certificates that in fact the person died from lung cancer were misascribed to other things that looked like lung cancer, tuberculosis or lung abscess. Similarly, some death certificates read as lung cancer but in fact those patients did not have lung cancer. They had a lung abscess or bad pneumonia or something of that sort.
So the death certificates themselves were very, very unreliable. That itself led to a study, to discussion, to new evidence. By 20 years later, the death certificates had improved considerably. A tissue diagnosis was required. So if you said that Ms. Tompkin had lung cancer, you really needed tissue documentation of it. You cannot make that statement on the death certificate merely from an x-ray because x-ray might be something that mimics lung cancer.
Also, the death certificates in the early fifties for the first time began to
distinguish between primary lung cancer arising in the lung and hematostatic lung cancer arising elsewhere that went to the lung. That itself was -- the improvement of death certificates itself was a step of scientific -- a sign of scientific progress. But it would be a grave error and totally unfounded to assume that death certificates in 1930 were just as good as death certificates today and the evidence was there. That's called hindsight and not looking into the context of the time.
Q. What did you think would be the strongest article for the case that lung cancer was caused by smoking that was written in the twenties?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
Q. (By Mr. Woods) The strongest piece of writing, in your judgment, in the twenties, to support that concept?
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. I would have to go back again and look at the
articles. But there were, you know, you can find an occasional speculation. I want to emphasize speculation. Hypothesis without data.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Your definition of "speculation"? A. No data. Saying, you know, I've got 15 patients
in my practice with lung cancer, 12 of them smoke; maybe cigarette smoking is the cause.
Q. Let me ask you this question. We're in the 1920s now -- and I'm not quoting you, you're giving me an example. But say there was an article that came out: I have 15 patients that have lung cancer; 12 of them have cancer. I'm assuming that in your studies, there was information available as to the population of the United States?
A. Well, that was the problem. Because with
80 percent of the population or 70 percent of the population smoking --
Q. In the 1920s?
A. Well, certainly in the 1930s. You see more of this in the thirties and forties. The point is that the authors of these early -- they weren't even studies, sometimes they were mere letters to editors. The authors would have no controls.
They would not look at the incidence of lung cancer in their patients who did not smoke. So they were fatally flawed from the beginning.
Q. Did the cigarette industry make any effort to
investigate this in the twenties as far as you're aware of?
A. I have no information --
Q. One way or the other?
A. -- one way or the other at any time what the cigarette industry did.
Q. Do you think they should have in the twenties or thirties?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. Far out of my area.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) You don't have opinion on that one way or the other?
A. No, I don't.
Q. You will not express any opinions at trial as to whether the cigarette people were good guys, bad guys, should have done something, shouldn't have done something. That's not your realm; is that right?
A. That is correct.
Q. Your only position in this trial will be to show what the medical literature established?
A. What was known, yes, from the medical and scientific literature, the biomedical literature -- to use a popular term today -- what the status of that discussion was. Because this is where the research and discussion was occurring.
Q. You're not going to give any opinions as to what anyone should or shouldn't have done?
A. That's correct. I'm not opining on what an
individual patient should have done, what a doctor should have said to a patient, what advertising cigarette companies should have done or should not have done.
Q. What tobacco companies should have done or shouldn't have done?
A. None of that.
Q. What doctors should have done or shouldn't have done?
A. No.
Q. The only thing you're going to testify to is in your judgment what was known?
A. Yes. In the scientific literature.
Q. And your definition of "known" is?
A. The state of knowledge in the scientific community.
Q. Meaning? When you say "state of knowledge," you mean what?
A. The view coming from the scientific and medical
literature, including original articles, including review articles, textbooks, things of that sort. What the scientific understanding was of the cause of lung cancer in general and, in specific, any
possible relationship to cigarette smoking.
Q. You say "any possible relationship." What will that mean?
A. Well, I think that's a very appropriate term. In the 1930s the same type of statistical information that you were -- association you're citing now was brought forth for perhaps two dozen potential causes of lung cancer. Maybe it has to do with the influenza epidemic of World War I. Maybe it has to do with the increased use of newsprint. Maybe it has to do with occupational pollution or environmental exposure or that sort of thing.
Q. In your judgment, would tobacco have been one of them?
A. Right. Tobacco was one of perhaps two dozen --
Q. Okay. Say that's the case. And I won't hold you to the number, but for the sake of argument, say it's one out of two dozen. We're talking about what time zone? Ball park. As far back as you can comfortably go.
A. I am talking in the 1930s and 1940s.
Q. How about in the twenties? When these articles
start emerging and you know that they just started manufacturing cigarettes in the early 1900s -A. Now, as I've said several times, a began my
systematic literature review in 1930. That's not to say that the first speculation ever --
Q. Okay. You're not expressing an opinion about the twenties?
A. I'm not talking 1920s other than it was a rare disease and it --
Q. Okay. But you're not going to get up on the
witness stand then and pick up the flag and run and say that nobody knew or should have known in the twenties; is that true?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. Well --
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Research begins in the thirties and you're going to focus on the 1930s to -- there on, I take it?
A. 1930 through 1964. I think it's unlikely that more was known in the 1920s and the years of World War I.
Q. That would have been known in the thirties?
A. Right. And if you look at the literature of the '30s and '40s, as is in my expert statement, the leading scientists of the world conclude in 1948 that the cause of lung cancer is unknown, and in specific there is no evidence to associate lung cancer with cigarette smoking at the present time.
Q. Can I ask you this question?
A. So I doubt that scientists in the 1920s or
World War I had any additional information beyond that. That state of ignorance continued for quite a while.
Q. In 1948 when they made that statement, though, they didn't say that they didn't have certain items that they thought were the most likely candidates, be it a dozen, two dozen, whatever?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Is that true? They were looking at items that they thought were in that group, that differential diagnosis or whatever,
differential causation items?
MR. WOODS: Objection. Can we identify the "they"?
MR. SMITH: 1948.
MR. WOODS: Who?
MR. SMITH: "They" being the medical community who spoke out and says we can't say that it's cigarettes.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) They were looking at a variety of items as -- they knew something was causing lung cancer, right?
A. Other factors were examined as well.
Q. As smoking?
A. As well as smoking.
Q. Correct. And that would be -- your best estimate of approximately how many items were on their board at that time?
A. Well, Mr. Smith, this is time dependent but the --
Q. '48?
A. '48.
Q. Give me a range you're comfortable with. I don't really care about the number. Just give me your best honest range.
A. I would say, you know, if you look at the thirties and forties together, perhaps 20 to 25 items had been suggested in this fashion. By 1948 I know --
Q. Okay. Was smoking one of them?
A. Yes, smoking was one of them.
Q. Smoking became one of them going back as best you understand it to how far?
A. Well, it was certainly on that list of
hypothesized possible culprits as early as 1930, which is when I began my systematic review.
Q. And at that time there was a ball park of a couple dozen?
A. I would say in the 1930s a couple of dozen. There were fewer in the 1940s. There were some hypotheses in the 1930s that you don't hear anything further about in the 1940s. So I suspect the number was smaller by the 1940s.
Q. And by '48 would it have been down to a dozen or less, in your best judgment?
A. Possibly. But that's very hard -- that's a hard number to pinpoint.
Q. Less than two dozen, though, I take it?
A. No more than two dozen.
Q. Where would you go to best determine that list, that groupings?
A. Well, I did it by --
Q. There was nobody to group them together and said, you know, look, guys, there could be these 21 or these 22 -A. Actually, at the time in 1988 I did do that. You know, I had a list of causes and, you know, you say, you know, a handful of papers on cigarette smoking but you find a handful of papers on influenza and a handful of papers on scar pneumonia and a handful of papers on asbestos and a handful of papers on tomato juice and so forth.
Q. Have those listed as your best targets, the best papers to look at for that?
A. Excuse me?
Q. The best paper to look at for that information
would be which one, as you see it?
A. I don't think that is the sort of thing that was ever reviewed systematically because no one had any evidence. It was all speculation. It was more the sort of thing that in reading the world's literature, I would come across a handful of papers on this subject, a handful of papers on that subject. I do not recall anyone having reviewed the list of culprits in that way. What they usually say is that the cause is unknown or, you know, sometimes a paper in the thirties and forties will give a list of a dozen and say, you know, "Among the things suggested are 1 through 12 or 1 through 15. There's no evidence to implicate any of these. At this time the cause of lung cancer must be considered unknown." That's kind of how the literature went.
Q. But the concern or the -- well, I guess the
concerned scientist, though, would have, he would have had all those items in his mind when he was trying to figure out what's the cause, I take it then?
A. Well, I think the Dr. Churchills and others who
reviewed this literature, Dr. Ochsners, you know, the great scientists of the time who reviewed the status of lung cancer and its causes in the late forties, they reviewed this and they said, Look, guys, we're stuck. The cause of lung cancer is unknown and we don't have truly any idea what causes it at this time. There have been a lot of suggestions but no evidence to support any of them. Tobacco has become a very popular habit in our culture. Some suspect it's cigarette smoking. We have no evidence to support that right now and we suspect --
Q. How about the statistical evidence?
A. There is no good statistical evidence in the
forties. That's why 1950 was such an important turning date.
Q. Let me ask you this question. We used the example a while back, say the physician says, I've got 15 patients with cancer; 12 of them are smokers. Just for sake of argument, in the period of time when you said there were 3,000 deaths in the U.S., approximately 3,000 lung cancer deaths in 1930?
A. That's correct.
Q. What was the approximate population in 1930 in the United States?
A. Oh, I don't know. Your guess would be, you know, as good as mine.
Q. You think that in 1930 that 80 percent of the people smoked cigarettes? Really?
A. Certainly it was growing. I'm not an expert and that is not my testimony.
Q. And you're not an expert at all on that factor as to the number of smokers in the United States at any time? You haven't done a study on that?
A. No. It would be disingenuous of me not to say that I didn't have some sense of the history of smoking, that smoking is becoming a very common habit in American culture. But that's not --
Q. Have you done any studies, though, to come up with the number of smokers --
A. That's not my area.
Q. -- per capita in the United States for any year?
MR. WOODS: I think we need to step back a little bit. We're starting to talk over each other and I'm getting looks from the court reporter.
MR. SMITH: I'm sorry. I'm trying to speed this up a little to get us out of here.
MR. WOODS: Yeah, I understand.
MR. SMITH: And I think Dr. Ludmerer is
too.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) But let me ask you this question.
Did you do any studies to determine the per capita smokers in the United States for any year?
A. Oh, no, that's totally out of my area. I didn't do that at all.
Q. So as far as, you did not try to do an independent statistical study?
A. Oh, no, no, no. I'm just quoting those who did.
Q. And you have actually made no independent
scientific assessment of the situation yourself other than -- and I'm not diminishing, I'm trying to get precisely what you did do -- you looked at the medical literature and attempted to report what it said and you -- that's one thing you did; is that correct?
A. I did a study on the history of medicine. I did not do a new scientific or clinical or epidemiological study.
Q. And when you studied the history of medicine, you studied it by looking at the literature, primary and secondary, that was written?
A. Yes. And the most important literature was the primary literature. And I studied this as it evolved over time in the context of what was known at the time, not in the context of applying our present views or biases to the past.
Q. And you also -- I'm making an assumption that you weighted what you read based upon what you felt the protocols or the controls that were used? You made determinations of what you thought were good articles and what weren't as good. Correct me if I'm wrong.
MR. WOODS: Object to form.
A. Well, certainly, you know, a historian of medicine has a dual responsibility. You need to know history but you need to have an understanding of medicine and science to do full justice to your work. And in the process of doing the work, it's clear that some studies are more sophisticated than others or done at a much higher level than others. And that was apparent to me when I looked at the studies, that a letter to the editor with no controls, no data, was far less scientifically significant than one of the early retrospective studies in 1950 by Doll and Hill or Wynder and Graham. And, in addition, these views were expressed by scientists at the time. So it's not Ludmerer talking but scientists at the time. I would point out that the quality of study after 1950 was a huge quantum leap over anything that had been done before.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) You did make assessments, value
judgments on the various items that you read?
A. Yes. And that's typical of any historian.
Q. I believe that. Did that include an assessment of those people who were doing the studies, what you considered their talents and their efforts? Their reputation?
A. Well, the two tended to go hand in hand. Why does a certain study get a lot of attention? Partly because it represents a breakthrough, partly because of the stature of the person who does it. But yes, you're cognizant of who is chief of cancer research at the National Cancer Institute, the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Institute, versus who is an ordinary practitioner in Lubbock, Texas, doing a review of the subject for the Texas State Medical Journal. So you do get a sense of some of those differences.
Q. Let me ask you a question. Why do you think the tobacco industry sought you out as the person to do this work after they lost Cipollone I?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. I've never talked with anyone in the tobacco industry.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Well, you talk to their attorneys. You were contacted to do the work, right? 1988?
A. I was contacted by attorneys representing the
defense. I've never had any contact whatsoever with industry officials.
Q. Sure. You've never spoken to them in your life?
A. Correct.
Q. But why do you think their attorneys sought you out?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A. I don't know for sure. I can tell you what they told me.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) Sure. What did they tell you?
A. Number one, it was clear from the first Cipollone case that in the evolution of these various trials, that the issue of medical history became important, that the issue of what they called by shorthand "state of the art" became important, and they wanted someone to do it with "impeccable" -that's their word, not my word -- impeccable historical and medical credentials. They contacted an officer of the American Association for History of Medicine and requested the suggestion of someone who had impeccable scientific and historical credentials who might be willing to undertake a study of this issue. The first Cipollone case demonstrated to be an important one. My name was given to them. We did have a number of conversations and things developed from that point on. But that is how I was informed I was contacted.
Q. Were you glad to be contacted?
A. You know, it really didn't matter to me in that way. It's not a question of being glad or not glad. It was an interesting project.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Had you ever been an expert in any other case for any other time?
A. Yes.
Q. And what type of cases were they?
A. There was one case prior to Cipollone and that was
a malpractice case in which the defendant was the University of California San Francisco Medical Center. The issue had to do with appropriateness of the use of a new Rubella vaccine, how it was introduced, and how it became standard practice.
Q. You testified on behalf of which side?
A. I testified in behalf of the University of
California. It did not go to trial. I gave a deposition for that case. Soon after my deposition, the case was settled. There was never a trial. But I gave a deposition in that case at that time.
Q. Have you ever appeared as an expert for any other defendant?
A. No other defendant and no other plaintiff.
Q. Do you do consulting work for corporations?
A. You'll have to define what you mean by "consulting."
Q. Do you have any source of income other than what you earn as a physician?
A. Well, you'll see from my curriculum vitae when you receive it, particularly from the new version,
June of 2001, that I've written three major books in medical history, two of which deal with medical education and current health care policy issues, two of which were nominated for Pulitzer prizes. And I am frequently asked to be a lecturer at medical schools and universities, professional organizations, foundations. I've met with government officials occasionally to give a lecture, to be a consultant on issues relating to medical education, the quality of care, the future of our academic medical centers, our health care delivery system in general. So I've done a lot of that, particularly since my most recent book was published a year and a half ago. But that has nothing to do with litigation per se or being an expert witness.
Q. Do you do consulting for companies?
A. I've not -MR. WOODS: Object to the form.
Q. (By Mr. Smith) If you do, just tell me the type that you do, if you do it.
A. I have had no association that I recall with
companies per se. I have been -- the invitations that I'm describing now to speak and discuss these issues come --
Q. Medical groups?
A. Medical groups, foundations, hospitals, universities.
Q. Let me ask you this question. The work that you've done with the tobacco industry would represent about what percentage of your total income over the last -- since you started in 1988? Just give me a range you're comfortable with, please.
A. It is a small percentage of my income. It's even a smaller percentage of my time. You know.
Q. You make about how much an hour when you do it?
A. Well, I began at $200 an hour in 1988.
Q. What do you get now?
A. Well, from 1996 through -- I started again after
about a six-year hiatus, five- or six-year hiatus,
either in December of '96 or early '97. My rate at that time was $300 an hour. In the spring of this year, with time and inflation, the rate is now $3 5 0 an hour.
Q. You glad you're doing it?
A. I really don't have a thought one way or the other.
Q. Let me ask you this question. Are you married or single?
A. I'm single. It's not --Q. Are you married?
A. No, I'm sorry. I'm married.
Q. Do you have any children?
A. Two daughters.
Q. Any of them that smoke?
A. No.
Q. Your wife smoke?
A. No.
Q. What do you like to do in your spare time?
A. Well, I like to play with my daughters, who are very young, four and six.
Q. What else do you like to do? What other hobbies do you have?
A. Well, I enjoy jogging. I need to do more of that. I'm getting too heavy. But I enjoy jogging and running. I do a lot of community service work.
Q. Type of community work you do?
A. Well, I've been on the boards of a number of organizations in St. Louis.
Q. The types of things they do?
A. Well, Missouri Historical Society. They deal with culture, with education, and with human services, particularly children.
Q. Do you waive signature?
A. Human services, particularly with children. I'm on the board of the Summers Children Bureau; the Jewish Family of Children's Service; I'm on the board of the St. Louis Symphony Community Music School, which is education and music aimed toward children. I've been on the board of the Missouri Historical Society; that's more culture. But things of that sort.
MR. SMITH: David, do you waive signature? Does the witness want to sign it? Hello?
MR. WOODS: No, he doesn't need to sign
it.
MR. SMITH: Okay. Type it up. I have no other questions. If anyone else has any . . ..
MR. WOODS: I have none.
MR. SMITH: Okay. Nice talking with you
all.
(The witness was excused.)
S T I P U L A T I O N Whereupon, it was stipulated by counsel and the witness that submission of the transcribed deposition to the witness for examination, reading and signing is waived, and that said deposition shall possess the same force and effect as though read and signed by the witness.
C E R T I F I C A T E STATE OF MISSOURI )
) ss:
COUNTY OF CLAY	)
I, ANNISA B. JUSTICE, Notary Public in and for the States of Missouri and Kansas, hereby certify that pursuant to Amended Notice to Take Telephone Deposition Duces Tecum, at the law offices of Shook, Hardy & Bacon, One Kansas City Place, 1200 Main Street, in the City of Kansas City, in the County of Jackson and State of Missouri,
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D. came before me, was by me duly sworn to testify the whole truth of his knowledge of the matters in controversy aforesaid; was examined and his examination then written in shorthand by me and afterwards typed, presentment of the deposition for signature to the witness, as well as signature by the witness, was expressly waived by counsel on the day in that behalf aforesaid, and said deposition is herewith returned.
I further certify that I am not counsel, attorney or relative of either party, or clerk or stenographer of either party, or otherwise interested in the event of this suit.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and seal at my office in said County and State, this 29th day of June, 2001.
ANNISA B. JUSTICE Notary Public in and for the States of Missouri and Kansas