i» m twww	kkjmh
JUDICIAL CIHCUI1 IN AMD FOft
owal cocm, florid*
JAHt* Tr CLAW,	I C«it K*. *S-63iJ‘«
1 BMplen; CV-&
PlilhUtfi I
I MP05JTIt>U Of I IACT K, TOM'
*vi -	I
I
LTCCltt c«our lire. I
* (artlgn e#rp«rtil»i I I
bcfcM)«ftt< J
(Ivan k*foio ViMtN L Unity, Court Mjwrttf «kd PcUry MUUi it tl4 W^iiy BuUof h<h*1, }00 noniridfl# Drlv*P CoIunbU, Couth farelln, or rildif, ftftwbii JO, lift, cm^clKf *t Itijll o'clock, «.a
MAY ItjUTl I ASSOCIATE! OF SOUTH (UOLIft
Court Mp«rUrt
ctoritut* CelvpfcU U»r«M4 n/fti«
JJI-9191 JJtiJJJ
Ton r«* i-»oo-i»-hh
aftrvln9 th* Uffl CwnunUf flnci |W
for tht rl«lnttrr tpehr«f» HitMr, Ktkvtlli FMcUjtviU i lun(or4 •yr Kortfwd ttintr, tiquir*
<U I Duv*l Itrm Jtektuvlll** tl
irUin hm* KLlhtr't ourtftatloA vn cwtdoctid
vi« ulif4)0Pt.l
Tor th* (MftrtiAU uthM I KiUlhi
•jrt JiAti V. Mtrftiy, Epquirt Patrick J Cirt^ tujvlr*
III Third Avaitut mv reck* K« York itm
INK* TO CUMltfATlMS'
fig*
Dlr#et EmU«t|» by Hr Nllnii. f . < , . )
liotx TO IU(lk!TVl (Ho tiMbltl Mftt4 I
*	*
It was stipulated by and between counsel for the parties that the deponent was explained his right to read and sign the deposition and did not waive that right, • (lacy k. ford, being duly sworn, testified as follows:)
DIRBCT EXAMINATION BY MR. WUNBR:
Q. Mr. Fiord, can you hear me okay?
A, Yes, I can,
Q. All right You are Lacy Fbrd of the Department of History, University of South Carolina, in Columbia?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. And right now you're in Columbia, South Carolina, and I'm taking your deposition by telephone? A. That's correct.
Q. How long have you worked on this case?
A. I believe I began working on it in February of this year,
Q. Have you ever worked for the cigarette industry before this?
A. 1 was consulted with about one other case in July of 1995 but no other contact other than that,
Q. What was that case that you were consulted
Dan* A
with in 1995?
MR, KEARNEY; Let me interrupt here.
As 1 understand it, Professor Ford has not been designated as an expert in that case.
MR.WLNER: Okay,
MR, KEARNEY: So I’d rather not give the name.
Q. All right, Well, I won't push that Tell me then what was the nature of the consultation?
A. Since July of 1995, I've been working on (he issue of public awareness of smoking and health problems.
Q. Have you prepared any reports?
a. 1 have one written set of notes. 1 have not prepared a formal report.
Q. Have your notes with you?
A. No, they are not in front of me.
Q. You intend to use your notes to refresh your recollection to testify?
A. Yes.
Q. How long are your notes?
A. Fifteen to twenty pages.
Q. When were they prepared?
A Well, it's been sort of an ongoing proccss_
of probably mainly prepared in this past summer:
! June, July, August of 1996.
Q And do (he notes have excerpts from various newspaper articles among other things?
A Excuse me, I didn't quite catch a word in that question.
Q. Among other ihings, do they have excerpts from newspaper and magazine articles and publications?
A. There arc very brief *• some very brief quotations in them from those sources, yes,
Q. Excuse me. Did you do or have done at your direction and supervision some kind of a research project looking through newspapers and magazines to find references to tobacco and disease?
A, Yes, I did.
Q. And have you asked any of the people who have retained you, be it Liggett and Myers or any other cigarette manufacturer, for documents from its internal files which have not been published?
A. No, 1 have not.
Q Have you scanned any particular newspapers for articles on smoking Bnd disease?
A Yes, I have. ) have researched several
different newsnaoers.
Q. Which ones’
A The Charlotte Observer, the Charlotte News, the Raleigh News and Observer, the Shelby Daily Star, the Florida Times Union, and the New York Times, And I believe I've listed all the ones I've consulted in that list.
Q Have you looked at news •• I'm sony -periodicals, magazines and periodicals?
A Yes, I have.
Q Which ones?
A Systematically, I have examined Time magazine, Newsweek, Readers Digest, U.S. News and World Report, Life, and probably some scattered issues of other magazines that I can't recall off the top of my head
Q. And do you have a box of the excerpts with articles from these periodicals that you felt important?
A. I made a number of copies as I was in the process of doihg the research, and I certainly do have those That might not includc every article that I thought was important, but it was -* I certainly did keep us some copics
Q Have you reviewed transcripts of Congressional heannes on labeling, legislation. and
l other tobacco-related bills? i A. Yes. 1 have reviewed congressional
>	hearings, 1 believe, from 1957 and 1964-'65 period,
I Perhaps some others as well but that's what I can
5 recall at the top of my head.
S Q Say it again.
l A. I said perhaps some others as well, but I t recall going through those two sets of hearings.
>	Q. Where did you find them?
) A. The University of South - the government i document section at the University of South Carolina, ! Thomas Cooper Library, i Q. Have you reviewed any Federal Trade i Commission findings or reports from the PTC?
>	a. I don't recall examining any ftc reports
i other than what was reported in the public press and 1 testimony given by FTC officials al hearings,
; Q. And have you reviewed any -■ have you 1 reviewed any documentation provided to you by any i cigarette company, regardless of whether it was Liggett and Myers or anybody else, that was obtained directly from them rather than obtained from one of these sources that you've discussed?
A. No, I have received no ** I've asked for nor received anv documentation from anv r.ieitmHi*.
rage i
company.
! Q. Have you reviewed any medical literature
>	that was published in medical journals such as the Journal of the American Medical Association, Chest,
; The Lancet, and journals of that nature?
>	A Since I'm not a physician and have no expertise in that area, I've certainly made no systematic effort to look through those journals, 1 have as I recall looked at a handful of articles just to see what an article in the medical journal looked like and see how it was written and that sort of thing. So I won't say that I haven't seen any, but I've made no effort to do that as a general proposition.
Q, You reviewed any documents from the Hill and Knowlton Advertising Agency On their work with TIRC9 A, No, I have not.
Q. Do you know who Hill and Knowlton was?
A. Beg your pardon?
Q. The role Hill and Knowlton played in working with TlRC in the 1950s?
A. Could you repeat the question? There was some
Q. Do you know who Hill and Knowlton is?
A T'ftl AWArc that Hill unH (Tnnuilinn uinc rmA rtf
the leading advertising finns in the United States in the post-World War n period.
Q Did you know whether Hill and KnowJton ever worked for TlRCf a I do not have any specific knowledge of that that 1 recollect.
Q Do you know what TIRC was?
A Yes, 1 do.
Q Haw you - from what source of information have you learned about TIRC7 a Essentially, the information that was presented about TIRC in ibe public press in the various sources that 1 listed earlier.
Q. Have you seen any publications of TIRC that were sent to the public from TIRC?
Mr, Kearney: I object to the form of the question. You can answer it.
A 1 do not recall seeing any publications or documents that were from me directly,
Q Have you been seen any publications or documents that were offered by the tobacco industiy -* I'm sorry, by the Tobacco Institute I meant to say,
TI.
A, No, 1 don't believe I have,
Q. TIRC offered a document called "A Scientific
Perspective of the Cigarette Controversy" in 1954. Just to make suit I asked you - just to make sure my question earlier was clear, have you seen that specific document?
A Can you describe the document more fully?
Q Yes. It's about a 25 or 30 page document.
On the cover it says "A Scientific Perspective of the Cigarette Industry," and it has statements in quotations by various physicians in it.
a 1 do not recall seeing that.
Q. Have you seen any of the communications to shareholders offered by different cigarette companies at any time?
A. No, I have not,
Q Have you seen television footage of any matter concerning cigarettes? And 1 don't mean just contemporary news, restrictive as to a period in time that would be relevant for your testimony.
a Yes. I have viewed some television material >n *• I reviewed news stories related to smoking and health controversy as well as a special report show hat Edward R, Nfurrow produced on "See It Now," I relieve it was, in 1955, and, also, one of the networks did a special in the 1960s which I've also /iewed,
Q. Do you have those with you? I mean, not ! with you today, but in your possession? i A No, I do not. i Q. Where did you see them? i A All right. I saw them •* let me clarify
■	that answer I saw the vast majority of that at the Vanderbilt Television News Libraiy at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenncssoe. And I do have a copy, a video copy, of the Muroow "See It Now* program. I apologize
Q. See It Now?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know how many people watched it?
A. I don't recall seeing a rating number on it, Edward R. Murrow's shows were certainly among the most popular television news documentary. He was an internationally prominent journalist; so I would assume that it was pretty widely watched on network television
Q. What polling data have you referred to or studied?
A. I've examined a broad array of polling data, a large number of polls, I would hesitate to say exactly how many, drawn from the published versions of Gallup polls and also polls, but published in other
places and also unpublished polling data available from the Roper Center at the University of Connecticut Libraiy, which can be accessed through the Internet.
Q. What specific polls, and please list the polls that you have consulted?
A. I wouldn't be able to provide a list off the top of my head,
Q Well, not off the top of your head, using any resource you have at your deposition. 1 don't want it limited to the lop of your head.
A. I don't have any resource with me today.
Q You have some resource, but it's back at your offioe7 A, Yes, that's correct.
Q. What resource is that?
A I have copies, physical photocopies, of some of the Gallup polls that I looked at in hard copy, and I have downloaded printed versions of a few of the polls that 1 looked at on the Internet through the Roper Center in a couple of files.
Q. Who paid for the Roper polls?
A. I'm unclear. Do you mean who paid for the polls, or who paid for my access to them? q No, who paid for the polls?
A The Roper Center collects polling data done
by b variety of polling institutions like the Gallup Polling Data, Harris Polling Data; I believe ABC News Data is in tliere. There arc a list of organizations that allow the Roper Center to collect their polls, and to the best of my knowledge, those are polling organizations that sort of earn their living producing that kind of polling data.
Q. Were you aware whether Liggett and Myers had markel planning polling surveys done by something called the Market Planning Corporation?
A 1 have no knowledge of that, sir, in that area,
Q Have they shown *• have you run across in published form a market planning summary containing polling data from the year 1957 done by the Market Planning Cotporation for Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company?
A I certainly do not recall seeing tint,
Q. Did you ask whether or not internal marketing and polling infoimation existed in the files of the Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company?
a Since my expertise is in the history of smoking, health-related diseases and public awareness,
I did not set any reason to ask for an internal document of that kind; so, no, I did not.
Q. Have you studied the advertising and marketing of cigarettcs?
A As part of my larger study of public awareness of the smoking and disease controversy, I have ccrtainly considered advertising as part of that larger picture.
Q. Did Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company use television advertising to promote its products?
A In all honesty, I'm not sure that I recall reviewing an L&M -* any video clips of L&M television ads, but most of the major companies did use television; I assume that they did.
Q. Well, what television shows were sponsored by Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company in the 1950s?
A 1 cannot recall.
Q. What did Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company through its advertising tell the public in its advertisements on television?
A. At this point, I couldn't recall a specific content of Liggett and Myers*• ads for Liggett and Myers products well enough to give an answer to that question.
Q. Did anyone believe what they were told by Liggett and Myers advertisements on television?
Mr. Kearney: 1 object to the form of
the question. He just said at this point in time he doesn't know what was told, and you're asking him to give an opinion on whether or not people believed what he doesn't know what they were told. And I don't think it's a fair question, but you can answer the question.
A. Well, my answer is similar to the objection. Since 1 can't recall, specifically, what Liggett and Myers was saying in their advertisements, 1 couldn't give an informed answer as to how those advertisements might have been received by the public.
Q. You said you can't recall. Did you have this information available at one time and just don't have it available now?
A. No. I've never made any attempt to systematically collect every advertisement that ran for Liggett products.
Q. Okay. Have you ~ regardless of whether you attempted to collect systematically every advertisement, have you collected any advertisements?
A. Yes, I have -■ I do have - have seen in my research, advertisements for Liggett products as well
as products of other tobacco companies.
Q. And do you have these as part of your -■ the materials that you’ve collected to refer to in giving your opinion?
A If-yes, I have some-some advertisements arc in my collection of materials which I refer to.
Q. Which ones?
A. Oh, 1 couldn’t recall anything that specific without actually going back through the material. But I certainly do recollect that there were some Liggett products advertised in the material I collected.
Q. What is the *■ returning just briefly to your looking through various magazines and periodicals. What were the dates, in genera! Just, you know, not necessarily the day but just the general time periods that you looked through Time, Newsweek, Reader's Digest, U.S. News, and whatever other ones you looked through?
A. I believe, as an ovcr-arching journalization, I looked through those magazines beginning in the 1930s and running up through about 1970, perhaps a little bit beyond 1970.
Q. Why did you start so early in 1930?
A Based on the research that I've done, the
smoking and health issue has been prominent in American socicly end received coverage dating back even before 1930, and I wanted to be as inclusive as I could within the time parameters that I had to work with
Q Can people's opinions and attitudes be
influenced in later year* by things that they see many
years ago?
MR KEARNEY: Object to the form of that question
MR WILNER: Is that too Vague?
MR KEARNEY I didn't understand it, Woody.
MR WILNERr I'm Sony. I'll withdraw it I guess I was trying to understand.
Q. Are you saying that, you know, what was shown or what was published in 1930 may have an effect on what people believe in 1970 or '80?
A If I understand your question correctly, I think that there are a variety of influences that go into shaping the common, popular perception in the public mind on a number of things.
And things like what wc were told by niir nanenl£ and what wr weir taueht in fchnolfi. mavhe.
even what we were (old by our grandparents, are certainly things that can have a lingering and lasting influence.
Q. Okay. Did you look at any school curricula?
A Yes, I did.
Q. Which ones?
A I looked at curricula and textbook materials from the state of North Carolina where the plaintiff in this case resided during his schooling years were the late 1940s, 1950s, and into the early 1960s.
Q. Where do you get these curricula?
A I received ** I honestly can't remember whether I received them, or one of my research assistants received tiem, but they were compiled by Professor Dick Means, who is a retired public health education professor who lives in South Alabama as I recall.
Q. What's his name?
A Richard Means.
Q.D--
A Means. M-c-a-n-s.
Q Okay, Richard Means, All right. So you got it from Richard Means you said?
A Yes.
O All rinhl Anri to'c nrtt rnrririilfl for
different states other than Atabama?
A, The material 1 got from him was from the state of North Carolina.
Q. Oh. What docs the material you got from him look like? How many pages?
A. It's a substantial box of material. I don't know how I would categorize it other than that. It's probably -■ estimate, 300 pages, something like that,
Q. Okay. And what school textbooks did you obtain and from where?
A. Again, all of the educational material I obtained, I obtained from Professor ■■ or copies of from Professor Means. And there is a substantial list of textbooks which I reviewed which I would not be able to repeat them by name without having them in front of me.
Q. Do you have physical possession of them?
A 1 do not have them with me at the deposition today.
Q. Do you have them back at your office?
a. Yes, I do.
Q. And those you got from Mr. Dean, too?
MR. KEARNEY: No, Woody, it's Mean. M as in Michael.
MR. WILNBR- All right. I got -■
1
1 heard it right; 1 just said if : wrong.
Q. Is it is Means or Mean? With an "s"? i A. It's Means. It's Professor Means with an ; "s".
>	Q. All right. I think 1 got that down. I’m
1 sorry if I confused you. Okay. Did you get the books i from Richard Means?
>	A. I have copies of textbooks, i Q. The whole book or just *■
A. Photocopies,
Q. Did you copy the whole thing or just the piecc that you want?
a. Photocopies of certain portions of the textbook, 1 do, I believe, have photocopies, however,
>	to the indices of these textbooks which show what the full content of the textbooks were and guarantee that
; all of the relevant sections arc copied or at least -•
| Q. Yeah. Okay. Have you looked at any of the i expert witness disclosures for this case? Do you know what that is?
A. Yes, 1 do. I have read quickly through one expert witness disclosure report,
Q. Which one was that? a That would be Mr. Fcineolri's.
q Okay, And did you have any ■■ when you read through Dr. Fcingold's report, did you make any notes about that report?
a No, I did not
Q Did you find anything in the report factually inaccurate?
MR KEARNEY: I object to the form of the question.
a Again, it’s been a while since I've read that, I recall having a fairly strenuous disagreement about some of the conclusions that were stated in that report.
q. Which ones?
A. Again, I'm reluctant to give you a specific answer without having that document in front of me to refer to.
q. Did you have disagreements with the medical conclusions?
MR. KEARNEY- Objection to the form of the question. Whateva those medical conclusions were, 1 can't understand how we could understand what you mean by that, But you can answer the question.
rage u
I would not have had an informed - or an opinion on purely medical conclusions.
Q Okay. Did you disagree then with certain conclusions on tlie section entitled ''Public Awareness of Health Risks"?
MR. KEARNEY; Objection to the form of the question. What conclusions are you asking this witness docs he agree with or disagree with?
MR WlLNCR- Well, I mean, if he's looked at it - you can show it to him if you want. We can go ahead, and I'll read the conclusions "a" through T on page -* 1 don't know what page. I'm sorry, it didn't get paginated but near •• the last page of his disclosure - I’m not trying to be cagey; I'm just tying to save time.
He’s seen the thing. You got it there. I want to point it out to him. I'll read the first conclusion, and we'll see what he agrees with.
MR KEARNEY- Okay. I think we have
answer be misconstrued.
MR WILNER' No, I understand.
It’s no problem, Do you have it, and you want to show it to him or should I - do you want me to go ahead and read it? It's just a little more difficult for him to hear it if I read it.
MR. KEARNEY: Despite what you
may think, Woody, I don't carry around Fe’mgold's expert witness disclosure,
MR. WILNER- Thai's all right,
MR. KEARNEY: I have it memorized, however.
MR. WILNER: Good. Okay. All right.
Q. So let me ask you since this is in the disclosure, and you read it, and I gather *■ I'm just - the reason I'm focusing here is just because I ** this concerns public awareness, and 1 think that's your area; so J'll go ahead and ask about this; all right?
It says: "It's not generally appreciated by the public of any of the following: a) that the risks of smoking are as serious as they
ftfA Am All ft I irtft +A * n’pV ftf nntmahiM /Inalti nf
Page 2‘
50 percent."
Alt right Let me ask you about that Do you agree with that or disagree with that?
A. I disagree with that statement.
Q. All right. So let me take it apart because it really has two statements. First, it says; "The risks of smoking are as serious as they are, amounting to a risk of premature death of almost 50 percent.*
Do you agree that the risks or smoking are of that nature?
MR KEARNEY: Objcct to the form You can answer the question.
A In my view, the public has a very accurate perception and awareness of the risk factors associated with cigarette smoking.
Q. Okay. Well, let me ask you, specifically, then Where has it been published for public consumption that the risks of premature death from cigarette smoking amount to SO percent?
A Almost every news story that are reporting scientific findings or interest group perspectives on this question gives some kind of figuie to suggest the strength of the risks That precise figure that you mentioned may or may not have appeared in any number
But, certainly, much of the information that the public has access to supports its contention that cigarette smoking is a risk factor in a number of diseases with some sort of backup information of that kind.
Q. Give ine - be as specific as you can - when the first time you believe that information was published to the public?
A Which information?
q. What we've been talking about *• that the risks of smoking are serious or about to risk premature death of almost 50 percent?
MR KEARNEY: I object to the fonn of the question. You can answer it.
A The fact that cigarette smoking can lead to premature death is a fact which the public has been aware of for a very long time.
Q. My question is: Tell me the eailiest publication of not just -- not the statement that it can lead to premature death, but that the magnitude -what this statement says: "that the risk of premature death amounts to almost 50 percent" or words to that effect. Tell me when that was -A. I wouldn't fo ahle to rccolW'.l with that
much specificity.
q. Well, recollect with whatever specificity you can when an equivalent magnitude of risk was published to the general public.
a From the very beginning of the appearance of scientific studies arguing that cigarette smoking was a significant risk factor for lung cancer and later for other diseases, from the very beginning, these studies reported results of research which suggested a substantial and significant magnitude of risk, so that would be, at the very least, from the early 1950s.
Q And can you tell me, specifically, what publication you're talking about?
A 1 believe with the beginning of when the Graham Study reported in 1950 and subsequent studies. The American Cancer Society Report of 1954 gave information of the type that you're referring to.
Almost every statistical study undertaken provided some type of information along those lines. This kind of information was certainly summarized in tin Surgeon General's Report in 1964 and so forth.
Q. In the Surgeon General's Report, are you ** was the Suigeon General's Report sent to the public?
A Excuse me? 1 didn't quite catch tlie
Q. Was the Surgeon General's Report sent out to the general public?
A. The Surgeon General's Report was published and available to the public through any library that receives government documents and probably given the prominence of that report to others that are not government document repositories as well,
Q. And how many copies of the '64 Suigeon General's Report were actually made or printed?
A. I don’t know.
Q, Well, libraries also contain medical articles or at least medical libraries do; don't they?
A. Yes.
Q, Those public by ■■ public could go in and read the Journal of the American Medical Association also. Couldn't the public do (hat?
A. The public could, in fact, do that,
Q. So is your analysis of what the public do based on what the public could have gone in and done, if it had decided to read medical publications?
A, No, it's not, First of all, the central findings of the Surgeon General's Report were not only published in ihe actual report, but reported in great volume and discussed with great vigor in the public Dress in almost every newspaper and maeazine in some
detail. You could be aware of those findings in some detail without ever looking at the Suigeon General's Report. They were also covered on television news broadcasts. There was one special, at least, referring (o ii. So there was an enormous amount of publicity associated with it.
Q, Did the cigarette industry take any public position regarding the Surgeon General's Report of 1964?
MR KEARNEY: Object to the form of the question. You talking about the cigarette industry? Could you define what you mean by the "cigarette industry" to answer?
MR.WILNER No. 1 can't define it. I just know it when! see it.
And your part of it.
Do you know what 1 mean by the cigarette industry?
MR KRARNBY: I assume ■■
MR.WILNER- Tobacco industry?
MR KEARNEY: 1 object to (he question. I assume what you mean is tlie tobacco companies in the *■
tnhiuv'A maniifnohiTArc in th* r-ioarMlA
well, what is the cigarette industry? Could you define it or -
MR. Wjlner: No, 1 can't define it. Do you know what it is?
MR KEARNEY: You asking me?
MR WILNER: No. I'm asking the witness. I enjoy talking to you, but I mainly want to talk (o him.
MR KBARNEY*. So the question to the witness is: Does he know what you mean by "cigarette industry"?
MR. WILNER: Right.
MR. KEARNEY: Okay. Do you know what Mr. Wilner means by the "cigarette industry"?.
A. I'm not sure that ] do. Could you clarify it in some kind of fashion?
Q Well, let me ask *• you (old us that you're not •• do you -• have you ever used the words "cigarette industry"?
A. I probably have, yes.
q. And you use them without knowing what they mean?
A. I need, in order to answer your question here, I need to know, specifically, what aspect you
might be referring to. 1 think I could probably answer your question if I could get a more precise formulation of it. I'm not trying to avoid
answering.
Q. All right. Well, let's start with the people who make cigarettes. How about that?
A Okay.
q. Let's call tliem a pan of the cigarette industry that I've asked about.
A Well, off the lop of my head, I'm not sure that I could say which - the executive of which tobacco manufacturers said exactly what.
The response of executives and spokespersons for the company was generally that the Surgeon General's Report simply compiled information [hat was already extremely well known and did not add any new information to the discussion or to ihe public.
Q. And, in addition, didn't the members of the cigarette manufacturers state that that information that you just talked about did not amount to proof hat cigarettes cause disease?
A To the best of my recollection, their >hrasing was something to the effect that the
ilalkliul DMnrifllinn (v:twnr>n r.ioamffe Knvitn’np «nrt
higher risk of certain diseases did not amount to scientific or medical proof that it was, in what 1 understand to be a formal or scientific sense, a cause of those diseases.
q. Did the cigarette manufacturers’ viewpoints *■ or were the cigarette manufacturers' viewpoints publicized by the media?
a The viewpoints that I'm discussing were, in fact, included in very illuminance reports about the Surgeon General's reports, chronicling the risk factors, mentioning the Surgeon General's conclusion that appropriate and remedial action was needed, and industry responses were usually included, the response of spokespeople were included in those accounts. As a general rule, there were occasions in which their comments were not included, but, as a general rule, they were.
Q. Did Ihe cigarette manufacturers oppose the Labeling Act of 1964, '65?
A The cigarette manufacturers felt and testified before *• along with many others - before Congress on that issue, that the Labeling Act was essentially redundant or unnecessary because everyone was so well aware of that information already.
Q. Did they - did the cigarette manufacturers
suggest that the inclusion of tlie label would hurl business?
A 1 actually don't recall that that was part of their testimony.
Q. Do you recall that the puipose or the reason that they opposed it was just because it was redundant?
A. 1 think that a fair characterization of their testimony, and 1 believe that was primarily by Bowman Gray of Reynolds, that a warning was unnecessary, that the information was already well known, and that seems to have been the essence of the objection that they stated before Congress.
Q And the fact that it's unnecessary would -without more -* would that make -* does that make sense to you as a historian to be an objection?
A Well, yes, I think it's not an illogical objection. There was an abundance of evidence that the public ~ given the level of public awareness of the risk associated with cigarette smoking at this time, I can certainly understand why somebody might make that argument, yes.
0	And what would be the harm of putting the caution label on, whether or not people were aware?
A Well, in mv personal view, there was no harm
to doing it, if that’s your question.
Q. What was the ham articulated by (he industry?
A. The industry essentially said that il was unnecessary, that people already had the information.
Q But if there was no harm, how was thal much of an objection?
A. I don't have really any way of reconstructing their reasoning for taking that position; I can only tell you what the public position they took was, and 1 think I've already done that.
Q. Your testimony is that you don't remember anything in the hearings that suggested or that stated that the industry argued that its business would be hurt if this labeling occurred. Just want to make that clear. You're not aware of that position?
a, To the best of my recollection, the central objection to placing the warning on the pack that manufacturing executives gave at the 1 tearing was that it was unnecessary, that it was redundant, that every news broadcast and every newspaper had been carrying that information for months, and that it was simply not necessary.
Q. I appreciate your answer. You said -■ you changed my question a little. You said, "the central
objection,” What 1 was trying to pin you down is whether or not you believed, based on reading the hearings, that the cigarette industry or members of it had said that the warning would hurt their business. That is my question. Not what you characterized the central argument, but whether they made that statement, if you know.
A. My •* again, my recollection, 1 just don't recall thal - a great deal of discussion of that off the top of my head. I'm not trying to say that 1 can recall all of the testimony at those hearings wilh great specificity, and that you might ask me if something's in there, and 1 can't say definitively that it's not, but I think that I am able to characterize that central thrust, and without reviewing the actual testimony, that's about as far as I can go.
Q. Did it hurl their business?
a. I'm not sure that I'm in a position to answer that question.
Q. Okay. Have you asked for internal sales records from any of the companies to decide whether or not specific activities like warning labels have hurt their business?
A I have not asked for anv information of that
kind.
Q. When was the first time that you can tell us that ihcie was a publication in a newspaper or magazine that smoking was addicting?
MR KEARNEY: I object to the form of the question and, specifically, to the ambiguity.
MR WILNER What ambiguity? I tried not to be ambiguous.
MR, KEARNEY: IT* term "addiction." You know that that -• there's a big debate over who means what by that and whether or not your meaning is the same as his meaning; so I object on the grounds of the form of the question.
MR. WILNER: All right.
Q. In order to clarify what 1 mean, I'm not -I'm just asking when the lerm "addiction" was used. However it was used at that time, we'll leave that open.
a. The word or phrase "addictive" or "addiction" was used and related to tobacco products in publications, really, since the turn of the century as those terms were understood and colloquially used
in the various~in the time frames that I'm discussing.
Q All right. Can you be more specific?
A Well, again, I can't, off the top of my head, provide you with a precise citation. But admonitions to young people in particular not lo smoke, not to start smoking, which are as old as smoking, itself, contained phraseology warning of it being habit-forming and addictive, as 1 say, since the early 1900s, and if rather commonly appears in discussions of cigarette smoking in the textbooks from North Carolina that I've reviewed and in the newspapers that I've reviewed as well. So I guess my answer is that I couldn't tell you when it was first used except to say that it ■* I've not found the lime period when it wasn't used at least on occasion.
Q How much money has theor did the manufacturers of cigarettes in the United States spend on advertising in 1954?
A I do not know.
Q. Is that something you have available and just don't remember, or you don't know at all?
A. To the best of my recollection, I don't have that information available unless it was reported in Ihc newspaper article that I have and that j simply
can't recall
Q. How many advertisements in magazines were circulated in the general population in 1954?
A I would have no way of knowing, giving a quantitative answer to that question. There were certainly advertisements that appeared in many magazines in that year.
Q. Did any cigarette manufacturers in advertisements assert that cigarettes were not harmful?
A Not to my knowledge.
Q. You've never seen cigarette advertisements thai suggested that cigarettes advertised are not harmful?
a No.
Q Would that be important to you if you'd saw that as to whether the public was exposed to that kind of a message?
MR KEARNBY: 1 object to the form of the question; it's hypothetical.
Q. Would that matter lo you, sir?
A. Repeat the question.
Q. Would it matter if the public was exposed to a message from the cigarette companies that said that
their product was not harmful?
MR KEARNBY; I object to the form of the question.
A I think I've already stated that I'm not aware that they were exposed to any such messages.
Q, Yeah, Than my next question was: Wouldn't it matter to you, if you're trying to tell us about public opinion, what the public was exposed to from the cigarette companies, themselves?
A I mean, I can give opinions where I have some evidence as a basis for giving, That would be an entirely speculative endeavor, and I have no way of knowing.
Q Well, have you looked to see what ads were communicated to the public in the 1950s to '60s?
A Yes. I have seen ads that were mining in the 1950s and '60s,
Q. By Liggett and Myers and others?
a, Yes.
Q. And you've seen advertisements -• let me get this straight. But the advertisements you have seen do not suggest that the product is not harmful; is that right?
a That's the position that I've so slated, ves
Q. That's the position you 're taking?
!	MR, KEARNEY; That’s not what he
i said. It's the-i	MR. WILNER' That's what 1
; thought he said,
i A. My answer is: Essentially, that to the best 1 of my recollections, none of the advertisements that I I've seen make the claim that you've asked about, i Q They don't make the claim. Well, 1 don't i want to be too literal now. I mean, are there advertisements you've seen that suggest that the ! product is not harmful, whether or not they actually i used the words "product is not harmful," do they make the suggestion that it's not?
:	MR. KEARNEY: 1 object to the
i form of the question. Unless you 1 define what you mean, I think it's an : unfair question. But you can answer ' it.
A I mean, again, I'm trying to answer a question here. I don't believe that any of the advertisements that I have seen attempt to claim that their -■ to make any claims about harm or lack ihereof regarding this, the product in question, i Q. Do you have a list of the ads that you've
I	seen’
l A. Not perse, I don't, no. The ads are part
>	or a large series of copies that I've collected, and t they are there, but I do not have a list or them.
5 Q. You have them in your materials, though;
5 right?
1 A. I have some of the ads that I have seen in i my material, yes
) Q. Have you seen any transcripts from Arthur ) Godfrey's radio show?
I A No, I have not
i Q. Do you know what Arthur Godfrey said about ) Liggett and Myers products on the radio?
I A I do believe that 1 recall from news J accounts that Arthur Godfrey's show was sponsored by a S tobacco company. I don't remember which one It 1 mighl have been Liggett, but I’m not -• don't remember I which one.
>	Q But you don't remember what he said?
) A Having ■■ not ofT the top of my head, I do I not.
I Q, Do you know whether Liggett might know what
>	he said about Liggett products?
I A I don't know for a fact 1 imagine they do 5 know.
Q. Who was Arthur Godfrey?
A. Arthur Godfrey was a prominent radio personality who had a radio show in the 1950s that continued into the '60s as I recall.
Q. What were his ratings?
A Again, I couldn't give you a precise answer. I would certainly accept the fact that it was a veiy popular radio show.
Q. Do you know whether there had been any surveys to determine whether Arthur Godfrey was a •• was thought by (lie public to be believable?
A. I mean, 1 do not know that such surveys were undertaken *• would not surprise me if they were.
Q. What other - what Hollywood personalities promoted L&M products?
A If there were any, 1 can't tell you off the top of my head,
Q. You mean don’t you think that public opinion is influenced by Hollywood and Hollywood personalities?
MR. KEARNEY; You mean today?
MR wilner- Today -MR. kearneY: Anytime?
Q. Hasn't it been for years?
A Ttv'.rft urn stlf.mntc to infliiftnre nuhlir.
opinion or make an impression on the public by a -from a variety of points of views using a variety of approaches; and Hollywood personalities and sports personalities are certainly part of that effort.
Q, How much money did Liggett and Myers spend to promote its products in any given year; do you know?
A. I do not know.
Q. Well, let me get this straight, You have made no systemic attempt to inquire about the promotion of Liggett and Myers products; is that true?
MR KEARNEY: I object to the form of the question by "systematic attempt."
Q. J can't think of a better word; so go ahead end answer.
MR KEARNEY; Well, I just don't know what you mean, but you can answer the question.
A What I have done is attempt to evaluate, in Ihe fullest context, information that became available to the public at various periods of time and over a period of time and how that information shaped their iwareness on - of (he relationship between smoking
have tried to consider advertising as a factor in shaping that awareness. 1 have not, sinoe I'm interested in what reached the public, attempted to delve into any particular corporation's advertising strategy, collect in an exhaustive fashion all of the advertisements or even text of all advertisements that any individual company ran.
Q. Wcli, you said were interested in what reached the public; right?
A Yes.
Q. All right. So did you try to find out how many advertisements had reached the public?
A In ihe -* in the literal sense of did I attempt to quantify how many ads reached the public, the answer is no, but I certainly made a qualitative effort to understand the kind of messages that were coming out through -■ in advertising and to understand that they are a part of the information that was available to the public and to understand how the public processed and understood that information.
q. How the public processed it?
A Well, yes, how the public received information.
Q. How do you know? -
A Well, there are a variety of ways of
knowing. Certainly, polling data is one source, commentary is another -- sort of the person-in-lhe-street interviews that one reads about in newspapers and magazines. There are a variety of ways of knowing how people understand information they've received and whai they do with i(, That is a historian really is what I'm trained to do is to make that evaluation.
Q. Did the -* and you went back to the polling data which is what we talked about earlier; right?
A. That was certainly one source that 1 consulted, yes.
Q. Now, any other polls beside the Roper and the Gallup?
A Again, maybe I need to clarify that. The Roper Center at Connecticut is a repository of polling data that includes polls taken by several organizations. And so, in addition to Gallup, any other polls that were available on the Internet, whether they were done by Harris or one of the network newspaper syndicates, if they were on deposit at the Roper Center, there's a chance that I may have looked at it.
So in a sense, I'm not confining it
I flgc H
1	has the longest running and most systematic set of
2	polling data of any organization, and probably they I ut disproportionately represented among polls I've i consulted, but that reflects their prominence as a
\ polling entity over time.
S	q. But you can’t list the exact polls without
I	having acccss to your notes? i A. That's correct,
) Q. Just a minute. Have you read any ) depositions in ihis case?
A Yes, J have.
! Q. Which ones?
> A. I read the deposition of the plaintiff, and
II	-- probably be fair to say J perused rather than
i read depositions of one or two family members of the ; plaintiff whose names 1 would not be able to recall.
1 Q. Anything else?
; A. Any other depositions? i Q. Right, i a. No.
Q. And you talked about an expert witness disclosure. Did you sec an expert witness disclosure for Richard Pollay?
A Nn 1 AiA nnl
Page4<
"Advertising Age"?
A. It is my recollection that I’ve either looked at or had my research assistants look at a few scattered issues of "Advertising Age” based on some information that showed up in some of the other sources we were using that there might be something interesting on ihis subject there, but I've not searched that journal systematically, nor do I recollect whether we turned anything up there that made it ultimately into my final collection of materials.
Q. How about "Printer's Ink"?
A No.
Q. Do you know what that is?
A. I believe that's a trade publication for the printing industry, but I'm not sure about that.
Q. How about the magazine or the "Beer and Alcohol of United Slates Tobacco" (phonetic) journal?
A I'm not familiar with that,
Q. So, you know, wc talked a little bit about some of the television shows. And I apologize if I didn't ask you clearly. Did you attempt to find out
rage 4
I Q. Or what was shown on those television shows I during the sponsorship? You didn't attempt to find J out that either?
I A. No, I did not,
i Q, But you talked about this Edward R. Murrow i show. How many times has it run?
I A I'm not sure. It was certainly aired once i and probably repeated in the manner that networks do, i but I don't know that for sure.
) Q. You can't really testify thal it was I repeated, can you? i A. No, I could not.
I Q. Do you know who George D. Allen was?
I A. Yes, I believe I do. If my recollection ; serves, he was -■ held a position with the Tobacco l Institute at one point; is that correct.
' Q. Yeah. Do you know who Clarence Cook Little i was?
' a. Yes, I do.
i Q. And have you received in your research any of the public statements of Clarence Cook Little?
A, Yes. Clarence Cook Little was quoted with some - on occasion in the public press.
O Da voii Itnnus whn flhsrlfts PumwiMi tint?
Page 4!
Q. Do you know who Joseph Heller was?
! A Yes. He was an official, I believe, for ths i National Institute for Public Health in the 1950s.
I Q. Okay. National Institute of Public Health? i A, That's my recollection, yes. i Q. Okay. Do you know who Michael Shinkin was?
A Off the (op of my head, that name does not ring a bell.
Q. Have you seen any public statements by Joseph Heller?
A. Yes.
Q. In what publications?
A In a variety of those newspapers and, as I recall, magazines as well that I've listed earlier.
He was quoted on several occasions. They were public discussions of research studies and smoking -Q. Do you know who Paul Hahn was?
A Yes. I believe he was an executive of one of the major manufacturing companies; I believe that was American.
Q Did you sec any quotations from Paul Hahn in
the 1950s in the New York Times?
i __1 _l!____ . . li .1
caused cancer was a bunch of loose talk?
A I recall that Mr. Hahn made a statement that there was a lot of loose talk going on regarding the issue. I don't believe that that was his characterization of the research efforts but instead of reports and claims that were being made by others about (he research effort.
Q. Do you ** have you seen a group of publications called "Research Reports on Tobacco and Health"?
a I do not believe so.
Q. And I guess I asked you earlier, but just because this question is more specific to avoid the possibility of misunderstanding, have you seen any of the annual statements to shareholders issued by Liggett and Myers?
MR. KEARNEY: 1 object to the question, but you can answer.
A No,l have not.
Q. Do you know who Dr. F.R. Darkis is?
a. Again, off the top of my head, that name does not ring a bell.
Q. If I tell you that he was in -• a director of research at Liggett and Myers, would that help
refresh vnnr recollection?
A. I don't recall that I've ever been aware of who was director of research at Liggett and Myers.
Q. Have you seen an advertisement by Liggett and Myers from 1954 that begins with a large copy that says: “Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company says"...
A With only that introduction, I couldn't recall that out of the laige body of materia] I've seen.
Q. Let me ask you further on that if you're aware of -- in this same -■ this same advertisement where it says the -* I'll read you the first few paragraphs:
“For more than 30 years, we have researched day in and day out, learning about tobacco and cigarettcs in the public's interests.
Continuously, we and our consultants have analyzed, experimented with, and smoked all kind: of tobaccos, especially Southern Bright, Burley, Merland (phonetic), and Turkish cigarette tobaccos.
Our own cigarettes and competitive brands have been submitted to the most exacting scientific scrutiny including thousands of analyses and millions of pounds of tobacco,"
Does that ring a bell?
* I	-___T
may have but even with you having read that portion *•
Q. Okay. Who was Arthur D. Little, Incorporated?
A. Again, I can't recall.
q. Do you know whether Liggett and Myers ever told the public that it had conducted scientific tests on its cigarettes?
A. Would you repeat that again?
Q. Do you know whether Liggett and Myers had ever told the public thal it conducted scientific tests on its cigarettes?
A. I don't know whether they did or did not.
Q, Do you know whether Liggett and Myers ever told the public that the ingredients in its cigarettes were harmful?
MR, KEARNEY; I think WC lost that question, Woody. Could you just •*
Q. All right. Do you know if Liggett and Myers ever told the public that the ingredients in its cigarettes were harmless?
a. To the best of my knowledge, 1 do not recall them making such a claim.
o.	Did you " were you aware whether Liggett
and Myers ever claimed that smokers who used his ! products would not have an adverse effect to their i nose, throat, and accessory organs? i A. I don't have a specific recollection about
■	Liggett and Myers, but I am aware that ihcre were a i series of ads that ran in the late 1940s and early 1 1950s, and then there were series of ads *• there were ; ads that ran over time, and 1 confess that my 1 periodization -- but I am aware that some company ran i ads making statements like that I don't remember that it was Liggett, but I'm aware that those statements were made. And I'm a little fuzzy on the i periodization of (hat righl at (his moment, i Q. Are you aware of whether those ads purported i to stale that a doctor had performed examinations of i the smokers and found, basically, thal there -■ were 1 not adversely affected by the cigarettes?
I	MR. KEARNEY: t object to the
>	form of the question and the accuracy i of your testimony in the case, but you can answer the question. i A. I do not recollect that, no.	.
i	Q. Let me get this straight. You're not aware of the advertising campaign conducted by - well,
!	AAmnnnit il man fLml	A
1	examined smokers of this product and said that they
2	were not adversely affected. Want to make sure of } that.
1 A In all candor, I do not recall seeing an
5	advertisement that made a statement like that. That’s i my best recollection of the material that I've ? covered,
3	the; WITNESS: Could 1 pause for a ) minute while you’re *•
) MR Wlt-NBR* All right, We'll I take five, and I'm almost done.
!	(Off-the-record).
\ Q. I just have a few more questions, and we'll I be done. Did any of your research reveal whether or ! not the public at any given time believed (hat filter
>	cigarettes were better for them than nonfilter
I	cigarettes?
! A My research revealed that the public
>	increasingly began to prefer filter tip cigarettes to
) cigarettes without filters in (he course of (he period that I was studying. But the thrust of the evidence ! that I’m aware of that appeared in the material that I
i	consulted was that this was a matter of smooth taste; so I guess the answer to your question is no, I'm not : aware that thev had (he belief that vou iust outlined.
Q Did you say - 1 just didn't heat exactly.
Did you say that the crux of the material was that the public shifted to filters because of what? Taste, did you say?
A. Smooth taste,
Q. Smooth taste? Okay, What evidence is thal that you're relying on that says that the public went to filters because of smooth teste?
A. It seems like that was the -■ there was, as you're probably aware, a trend toward increased consumption of filter tips in the '50s, and there were a number of stories in the newspapers about the popularity of filter tips, and that was a source, of course, one of the items mentioned.
Q Can you be specific about what newspaper you're talking about?
A I ** I cannot, no. No, it's a general impression through I'm familiar looking -■
Q. All right. Are you aware of whether the public was ever told by any source that filter tip cigarettes were safer to use than nonfilter cigarettes?
A I'm trying to recall. There was, in the 1950s, a particular good bit of discussion as some of
*
1	for, as some people put it, making cigarettes safer,
2	And there were people not associated
3	with the industry who asserted that filter tips might
4	be developed that would make cigarettes safer, so,
5	yes.
6	I mean, I do recall the discussion of
7	thal issue, and in all candor, however, that was
8	discussed primarily, if not exclusively, by people not
9	associated with tobacco manufacturing companies or
0	with the Tobacco Institute or representative of the
1	industry in any way thal I'm aware of.
2	Q, All right. So your testimony is (hat the
3	industry did not tell customers that its filter tip
4	cigarettes were safer than its unfilter tip
5	cigarettcs?
6	A. That's my recollection as ] understand the 1 usage of "safer."
8 Q. That you understand what?
} A. As I understand your usage of the term ) "safer," that's my recollection, yes.
I Q. J didn't mean to have any specialty meaning l attached to "safer" other than less likely (o cause t disease. Is that what you understood it to be?
I A. Yes.
I	0. So vou don't think tha( (he cigarette
rage:
1	industry ever told the public that its filters were
2	safer? Just want to make sure that-that you put a
J qualification on my word. I just want to make sure w<
4	both understood each other.
i a It is ■■ I don't recall the industry making
5	those ** making such a claim.
1 q. All right. Then let me ask you it this way j that we're not bound by the precise language that I ) suggested since 1 used a general expression about ) telling them if their filters were safer, I want to I ask you in a more general fashion.
!	In your research, did you find that the
I industry, in communications to the public, made the l suggestions in •• by using one manner or the other of
>	words or imagery ihat its filter cigarettes were
>	safer?
' A. It is my -• the best of my recollection,
1 that based on the evidence I've seen, the tobacco i manufacturers marketed their filter tip products in i advertisements claiming that they were milder, that they would give smooth taste, that (hey were ! conveniently packaged, and that type of thing.
Q. And, likewise, just so my question is completely dear: Did you find that the cigarette
J -i.	i.ji.	j ,	|	j	|
imagery or both, in such ways to suggest that some of its products were safer than other, perhaps competitors, products?
A My recollection is that while companies certainly touted tlteir brands as preferable on some grounds to other companies grounds that ~ not that ihey were •• not that they were safer.
Q. Okay. Have you ever smoked cigarettes yourself?
A I’ve never been a smoker, but, yes, I've smoked some cigarettes.
Q. What do you mean by that? Do you smoke occasionally, but don't -•
A Okay. I'll clarify. When I was a freshman in college in 1970, or it was probably '71, actually, when ] tried this, I smoked cigarettes for *■ some number of cigarettes a day *• for, 1 don't know, four to six to eight weeks and ■* but I didn't like it, and 1 dropped it,
Q. Are you prepared to offer testimony as to whether advertising is or is not effective in producing a change in consumer behavior?
MR K BARNEY: lobjcct 10 the form of the question. You can
Answer.
A. I'm prepared to ■* I'm prepared to offer testimony regarding the overall public awareness of cigarettes, health risks associated with the smoking of cigarettes, and to the extent that advertising is one avenue in which the public receives information about cigarettes, J'm prepared to testify about that information environment, about public awareness, and advertising as a part of that overall atmosphere or environment,
Q. Right. But as to whether advertising affects consumer behavior?
A. I'm not claiming to be an expert in advertising strategy, advertising psychology.
Q As to whether *- how about advertising effectiveness?
MR KtJARNiSY: Object to the
form. You can answer.
A I'm just not sure what you mean by "effectiveness," and I think that in the end, I can offer testimony that shows to what extent advertise -•
I mean -* excuse me, I misspoke (sie) myself. I think I can -- what 1 can tell you is what public opinion and public awareness and public information was.
I	think 1 can tell you the result of
iL‘ .. ..... i < i. i ____ il . j «	i j '.I .
qualitatively or quantitatively separate out what the precise influence of advertising is or is not, but 1 can tell you, 1 think with some accuracy, what the public -- what the resulting public thinking is after they have heard all messages and absorbed all information available to them.
Q. How many cigarettes were purchased in the United States in 1930; do you know?
A No, I don't J've seen that figure as reported in the newspapers with some regularity on a yearly basis, but I don't recall them off the top of my head.
Q. Do you have access to that?
A. I'm sure you would find those in some of the newspaper accounts that I have, yes,
Q. How about the aggregate cost of ** or purchase price of these products?
A I do not believe I have information on that in any systematic way,
Q. You have done research on the history of the tobacco industry in general?
A Yes. Yes.
Q. So you've researched how the tobacco industry has influenced the economy of the American South?
A. Yes.
Q. What *• when did the first slaves, first human slaves, come to this countiy?
A That's a question that historians debate all the time. The first load of the first Africans arrived in Virginia in 1619. There is still a debate over, you know, among historians, over whether or not the first Africans were slaves upon their arrival or whether that process where they sort of came as indentured servants as many Europeans did and became slaves over lime, but certainly slavery was flourishing #s a labor system in Virginia by the 1630s.
Q. What fraction of the slaves worked in the tobacco plantations, early 1630s?
A Well, the overwhelming majority of them.
Q. The *■ in the tobacco industry, who were the main tobacco growers just before the Civil War?
a. In the time just before the Civil War?
Q. Right.
A Tobacco was grown in a variety of places in the United States in that period in what we would now call Southsidc in Chesapeake area in Virginia and portions of Northeastern and Eastern North Carolina.
iverc grown in portions of Kentucky and Tennessee. It was most important as a cash crop I would say in Virginia, North Carolina, and Kentucky. And, of course, there was tobacco grown for home use; that is, people either chcwing, dipping, or smoking their own in a variety of plaoes.
Q. How much money have you charged to do this project so far?
MFIDENTIAL MATERIArREDACTED
Q. How much have you charged?_
ONFIDENTIAL MATERIAL REDACTED
Q And you've been where? On what trips to do this project?
A Give me just a second. I'll have to think about that. 1 have been to Vanderbilt University; the Charlotte Public Library; and, of couise, I've done pesearch in Columbia, South Carolina, at the University of South Carolina, which is where I've done ny most extensive work. I visited the Libraiy of Congress, but, actually, 1 was working on a research iroiect of mv own and simnlv decided to see what thev
lad on (his subject. 1 believe that's a list of the esearch trips that I’ve made, but I might be leaving )ne out.
MR. WILNER: Okay. That’s all I have.
MR. KEARNEY; Thank you Very much, Woody.
(The deposition recessed at 11:45 a.m.)
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA )
: C-E-R-T-I-F-l-C-A-T-E
COUNTY OF RICHLAND )
1,	Vanessa L. Bartley, Court Reporter and Notary Public, certify that I did have Mr. Lacy Ford to appear before me at 10:15 o'clock, a.m., on Friday, September 20,1996, at the Embassy Suites336tel, Stoneridge Drive, Columbia, South Carolina; that the witness was duly sworn and cautioned to tell the truth, the pages constitute a true and accurate transcript of the testimony given at that time and place.
I	further certify that I am not of counsel or kin to any of the parties to this cause of action, nor am 1 interested in any manner in its outcome.
in witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal this the 23rd day of September, 1996.
Notaiy Public for South Carolina My Commission expires: 05/15J56