FOR THE DISTRICT OF SOUTH CAROLINA CHARLESTON DIVISION
SUZANNE Q. little, individually	:
and as Personal Representative of
the Estate of SAMUEL MARTIN	.
LITTLE, Deceased,
Plaintiffs,
CIVIL ACTION
vs.
PILE NO. 2:98-1879-23 BROWN Ec WILLIAMSON TOBACCO	,
CORPORATION individually and as	.
successor by merger to THE
AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY and	^
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY,	'
Defendants.
DEPOSITION OF LACY K. FORD, JR., Ph.D.
March 24, 2000 9:20 a.m.
3500 SunTrust Plaaa 303 Peachtree Street Atlanta, Georgia
Alexander J. Gallo, CCR-B-1332, CRR
ill
Source: http://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/tob
1	APPEARANCES OP COUNSEL
2	.
3	On behalf of the Plaintiff)
4	JERRY HUDSON EVANS, Esq.
5	Ness, Motley, Loadholt,
6	Richardson & Poole
7	28 Brideside Boulevard
8	Mount Pleasant, South Carolina 29465
9	.
10	On behalf of Brown 6 Williamson Tobacco
11	Corporation:
12	WILLIAM E. HOFFMAN, Esq,
13	S. STEWART HASKINS, Esq.
14	King & Spalding
15	191 Peachtree Street
16	Atlanta, Georgia 30303*1763
17	.
18	On behalf of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Cotqpany*
19	PAUL D. KOETHE, Esq.
20	SHANNON "A.J." SINGLETON, Esq.
21	Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
22	3500 SunTrust Plata
23	303 Peachtree Street
24	Atlanta, Georgia 30308-3242
25	.
Deposition of Lacy K, Ford, Jr., Ph.D.
March 24, 2000 LACY K, FORD, JR., Ph.D., having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as followst
MR. EVANS: Good morning,
Dr. Lacy. We met when I came in the door.
I am Jerry Evans representing the plaintiff in this case. I am from Charleston, South Carolina. It is good to see you this morning.
I	would like for counsel to introduce themselves on the record, please.
MR. KOETHEi Paul Koethe with Jones, Day representing R. J. Reynolds.
MR. SINGLETON: Shannon Singleton with Jones, Day, also representing R. J. Reynolds Tobacco.
MR. HASKINS: Stewart Haskins with King & Spalding representing Brown &
Williamson.
MR. HOFFMAN: Bill Hoffman with King & Spalding representing Brown &
Williamson; however, Mr. Haskins will be representing Brown & Williamson at this
1	deposition. I will be leaving in about 35
2	minutes or so and leaving the deposition to
3	him.
4	mr. evanss Dr, Ford, I would
5	like to have the court reporter mark a copy
6	ot the Notice of Deposition Duces Tecum,
7	please, and, I apologize, 1 am going to ask
8	him to use your copy.
9	(Plaintiff's Exhibit-1 was marked
10	for identification.)
11	EXAMINATION
12	BY-MR.EVANS:
13	Q.	Let me aBk you, Dr. Ford, have
14	you seen this before this morning?
15	A,	Yes, I have.
16	Q.	Are you here today pursuant to
17	this notice?
18	A.	Yes, I am,
19	Q.	On Page 2 of this notice is a
20	page that is called Schedule A. Do you see
21	that?
22	A.	Yes, I do.
23	Q.	And it is a list of documents
24	that you were asked to bring to your
25	deposition this morning.
Let me ask you, have you brought any documents with you today?
A. Yes, I have.
MR. EVANS: is counsel prepared to turn over those documents at this time?
MR. KQETHE: We have, Jerry, a number of things we can turn over, some of which, if you want copies of, we will need to get copied for you.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, counsel has handed me a 15-page document entitled Little Deposition LiBt.
Can you describe for me what this
is?
A. This is a list drafted really to the best of my ability which lists specifically materials of various kinds that
I	have relied on in forming my opinions in this case.
And in some cases where the list is more generic, I believe those are areas in which I have provided copies, or you have actual documents here. Z don't have all of the actual documents on this list here today, but ones that I believe are not specifically
1	listed that, to the best of my ability, are
2	to say at this point are the ones I am
3	relying on for my testimony in this case are
4	what we have here.
5	Q.	Are you saying that the ones that
6	you brought copies of are, from this list,
7	the ones that you are particularly relying on
8	for this case?
9	A.	No, no, that is not what I am
10	saying.
11	I believe, if you will check this
12	list, for example, if you go down to entry
13	583 and 584, it says various North Carolina
14	newspaper articles, various South Carolina
15	newspaper articles. Where there is not
16	really a fairly specific thing listed, I
17	tried to provide the actual document there.
18	In other cases, these are all
19	items in the public domain. They are simply
20	listed here on this list rather than me
21	having actually brought them here today.
22	Q.	Okay, Thank you.
23	MR. EVANS: I would like the
24	court reporter to mark this as Exhibit 2,
25	please.
1	(Plaintiff's Exhibit-2 was marked
2	for identification.)
3	q.	(By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, is that
4	a document responsive to Item 1 on Schedule
5	A, a list of all documents, journals,
6	articles, et cetera, relied on or referenced
7	by you in the formulation of each of your
8	opinions?
9	A.	Yes. That is responsive to that
0	request.
1	Q.	Are there any other documents you
2	have for me today that are in response to
3	Item 1 on Schedule A?
4	A.	I don't believe so, no.
.5	Q. Item 2 says, Documents which
.6	counsel provided the deponent that pertain to
.7	the subject matter of deponent's expected
.8	testimony.
.$	Do you have any documents that
!0	would be responsive to Request Ho. 2?
>l	A. I do not have those documents
12	with me. I can tell you what they are.
23	Q.	Please do.
24	A.	The documents provided by counsel is	that would pertain to Section 2 or Request 2
1	would be the Amended Complaint in this case
2	and depositions of Martin Little; of Suzie
3	Little; and four additional depositions on
4	Mr. Little's sister; on attorney from
5	charleston, Steven Schmutz; Lloyd Pearson; and
6	I believe another friend of the plaintiff's,
7	Dr. Arana. To the best of my recollection,
$	those are the only documents that were given
9	to me by counsel in this case. And Z do
10	not have copies of those with me.
u	Q. That's okay. Thank you.
12	Dr. Ford, Item Ho. 3 says,
13	Documents which the deponent has specifically
14	reviewed in preparation for his testimony in
15	this case which relate to his testimony in
16	this case.
17	Now, other than the documents that
18	would be included in Item No. 1 or 2, are
19	there any additional documents that would fit
20	into Request No, 3?
21	A.	Again, as I understand that
22	question, that's simply the materials I have
23	listed here in this deposition list and the
24	ones that are available here in my materials
25	that I brought today.
Item 3 and Item 1, there is a lot of overlap there, as I understand them, in terms of my testimony, at least.
Q. Are there any documents that you have reviewed specifically in preparation Cor this deposition today, again, other than the items that form the basis of your opinion and are described in No. 1?
A. In other words, in preparation for the deposition as opposed to relying on in forming my opinions?
Q. That is correct.
A. Well, other than looking at this request and the expert report, no.
Q, Item No. 4 says, Documents prepared by the deponent in connection with his or her testimony in this caBe.
Now, I will ask you more specifically about your expert report. So excluding your expert report, are there documents that you have prepared in connection with your testimony in this case?
A. I haven't prepared any formal documents in connection with my testimony in this case. I did make a few written notes
1	from the depositions that I read, which I
2	believe I have here with me, if you would
3	want to see those.
4	Q.	Yes, I would. Are you prepared
5	to turn those over? '
6	A.	Yes. These are basically the
7	notes I took after reading some of the
6	depositions.
9	MR. EVANS: Thank you. I will
10	ask the court reporter to mark this as No.
11	3, please.
12	(Plaintiff's Exhibit-3 was marked
13	for identification.)
14	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford* if you
15	would, take a look at what we labeled as
16	Exhibit 3. That appears to be six pages of
17	notes.
16	Is that your handwriting, sir?
19	A.	Yes, it is.
20	Q.	I say six pages. It appears to
21	be six separate sheets, some of which are
22	written front and back,
23	A.	Yes. It might be.
24	Q.	Have I miscounted?
25	A.	It might be seven.
Q. Seven. I can see from where you are holding that it is, in fact, seven.
These are notes that you have made while reviewing materials for this case; is that correct?
A. These are notes that I made while reading depositions of plaintiff's witnesses in this case, yes,
Q. Returning to Schedule A, Item No.
5, it says, Medical or scientific articles that deponent presently anticipates referring to his during direct testimony.
Do you have any documents in response to that?
A. well, as you doubtless know, I am not a medical or scientific expert in this case, and there may be some occasions actually where in my own research, I have been pointed to something that appeared in something that might be classified as a medical or scientific journal. But if that is the case and it is anything I am intending to rely on, it is listed here, to the best of my ability, on thiB list. So I have nothing to add to that deposition list.
1	Q.	When you say "listed here," you
2	are referring to what we marked as Exhibit
3	2?
4	A.	Yes, what is titled the Little
5	Deposition List.
6	Q.	Item 6 says, All correspondence
7	between defense counsel and deponent,
8	including billing records in connection with
9	this case.
10	Do you have any documents in
11	response to that?
12	A.	The only correspondence I had with
13	counsel in this case are the billing records,
14	and I do have those this morning.
15	Q.	Okay. If I could see.those,
16	please.
17	A.	There.
18	MR. EVANS: If I could have the
19	court reporter mark thiB as No. 4.
20	(Plaintiff's Exhibit>4 was marked
21	for identification.)
22	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Dr. Lacy, 3 will
23	show you what we marked as Exhibit 4 and ask
24	you to just describe that for me.
25	A.	These are bills for fees and
L expenses involving my work in this case that ! I have sent to defense counsel in order to ) he paid and reimbursed.
l Q. Are these bills that you prepared? i A. Yes, they are.
>	Q. Does this reflect up-to-date
' billing for the work that you have done on i this case?
>	A. That reflects billing, the most
i recent billing I filed, which would cover . through the end of February. i Q. Do you anticipate filing I additional invoices with defense counsel?
A. Well, I have done work in the i month of March, and at the end of the month,
: I will submit a bill for that,
Q. Can you estimate for me today the amount of work that you have done in the
1	month of March?
A. I believe it is about 15 hours.
Q. Item No. 7 on Schedule A, Dr.
Ford, says, List of deponents' prior testimony in smoking and health litigation. Do you have anything in response
to that?
1	A.	Yes, I do. This is a list of
2	my prior testimony, which includes -- and it
3	includes both deposition testimony and trial
4	testimony.
5	MR. EVANS; I'll ask the reporter
6	to mark this as No. 5, please.
7	(Plaintiff's Exhibit-5 was marked
8	for identification.)
9	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) As I look at
10	this list, Dr. Ford, it appears that the
11	most recent testimony, excluding your _
12	appearance here today, in tobacco litigation
13	would have been your trial testimony in the
14	Gilboy case; is that correct?
15	A.	I believe that is correct, yes.
16	Q.	Did you give deposition testimony
17	in Gilboy as well?
16	A. No. That was simply trial
19	testimony.
20	Q.	Finally, are there any other
21	documents that you have brought with you
22	today that would be responsive in any way to
23	schedule A?
24	A.	No, I don't believe there are.
25	Q.	Thank you. I wanted to get that
inventory of documents out of the way.
Now, let me make some more sort of general introductory remarks. I know you have been deposed before. We just talked about that, but I do want to say that if at any time you don't understand what I am asking you, to please let me know. If I don't hear from you otherwise, I will assume that you have understood my question and are answering it to the best of your ability.
A. I understand.
Q. If you need a break for any reason whatsoever, please let me know and we will be happy to accommodate you.
A. I will.
Q. Are you in good health as we sit here today?
A. Yes, to the best of my knowledge,
I	am.
Q. Any condition or medication or anything that might impair your ability to understand my questions or give answers today?
A. No.
Q. Are you a smoker, Dr. Lacy?
1	A.	No, I am not.
2	Q.	Have you ever been?
3	A.	No, I have never been.
4	MR. EVANS: I would like the	‘
5	court reporter to mark this as 6.
6	{Plaintiff's Exhibit-6 was marked
7	for identification.)
8	Q.	(By Mr. Evane) Dr. Ford, could
9	you look at Exhibit 6.
10	is this a current curriculum vitae
11	for you?
12	A.	Yes. This lodks like the most
13	recent one I prepared.
14	Q.	Row recently was this particular
15	CV prepared?
16	A.	You know, I don't recall the
17	exact date. It looks like, just based on
18	some of the things that are on it, it must
19	have been --it probably was prepared in
20	December or perhaps very early January.
21	December of 1999 or very early January of
22	2000.
23	Q.	Under education on your CV, it
24	lists three degrees from the university of
25	South Carolina.
Have you had any other formal education from any other institution?
A. Certainly not after high school, no.
Q. That iB what I meant. Thank you.
Your teaching career has been at the University of South Carolina, except for one year at the University of California in ' Berkeley? is that correct?
A. That ie correct, yes.
Q. You list under skills,
I
quantitative methods and Russian.
Could you describe for me what ; you mean by "quantitative methods"?
; A. As you may be aware, although ; very slightly from graduate program to ' graduate program, there is usually some sort t of language or method requirement that goes
>	along with receiving a Ph.D. In other
i	words, a lot of departments require either a . reading knowledge of two foreign languages or ! their equivalent.
(	I chose to substitute for one of
t my foreign languages in meeting my Ph.D. some
5	training in quantitative methods, at that
1	time quantitative and computer methods. Thie
2	was in 1983, and computers were not used as
3	widely as they are now. And so there is some
4	specific training involved. And that is what
5	that refers to.
6	Q. Give me a little bit more of a
7	definition of what quantitative methods is
8	the study of.
9	A. Well, basically, at least in terms
10	of my training here during the graduate
11	program, it involved learning how to collect
12	data for quantitative analysis, learning some
13	basic techniques of quantitative analysis, and
14	learning to use the appropriate conqputer
15	programs to conduct that kind of quantitative
16	analysis.
17	Q. Are you currently teaching classes
18	at the University of South Carolina?
19	A. Yes, I am.
20	Q. What classes are you currently
21	teaching?
22	A. Can 1 ask for a clarification?
23	Do you mean what courses am Z teaching this
24	semester?
25	Q. I do mean this semester.
A. I am teaching two classes at the University of South Carolina this semester. The history of South Carolina since 1B65.
It iB 400 -- History 410, a 400 level course. That is a course aimed at upper level undergraduates.
I	am also teaching a course that we call the sections in the nation. That is a history of the United States from 1626 to 1861. It is labeled History 403 at the University of South Carolina, and it covers the Jacksonian Period and the coming of the Civil War. It too is, like the other 400-level course, aimed at upper level undergraduates, so juniors and seniors.
Q. Have you ever taught a class that was on the subject matter of public knowledge or common knowledge about any topic?
A. Well, that is a difficult question to answer in that certainly I haven't taught a class that would have that in the title or would be that exclusively. But, of course, in many classes that I teach on issues of public awareness, public knowledge come up from time to time in relation to a variety
1	of questions and are taught. But it would
2	be not in a class of its own but under a
3	--as something that comes up as part of
4	another class I would teach.
5	0.	In the classes that you described
6	that you are currently teaching this
7	semester, could you give me an example of
6	where you would talk to your students about
9	common knowledge or public knowledge?
10	A.	Well, we haven't quite gotten to	v
11	this point yet this semester; but based on
12	what I have done in the past, yes, I think
13	I can give you *• just one example would be
14	on the public awareness laws in the American
15	south in the circumstances surrounding Abraham
16	Lincoln's election to the presidency in the
17	fall of 1860.
16	That is information that came into
19	the public domain about his election and his
20	planned action very much and how the public
21	received that information was a very crucial
22	issue. And I think that it would --it might
23	not be the best example if I had more time
24	to think about it, but it would be one
25	example of when issues like the ones you are
1	referring to comes up in courses that I	L
2	teach and probably will come up this semester
3	in a few weeks.
4	Q.	If you don't mind, let me break
5	this down specifically, Would you cover the
6	awareness of, say, South Carolinians of the
7	fact that Lincoln was elected?
8	A.	Yes.
9	Q.	What sources would you 90 to in
0	talking about that, awareness of the fact
1	that Lincoln was elected?
2	A.	The -• certainly probably the best
3	source for that and the source that I would .
4	-- would be the public newspapers of that
5	era.	■
6	Q.	Now, how about would you cover
7	the public's reaction to the election of
8	Lincoln?
9	A.	Yes.
0	Q.	What sources would you go to in
1	discerning that?
2	A.	Well, again, I think that
3	historians don't tend to rely solely on one
4	source, but a variety of newspapers were
5	published in that era would be probably the
1	most important source. Election returns would
2	be certainly something to look at once you
3	know that the issues are framed around a
4	response to his election, Those election
5	turns could be had and through the newspapers
6	or through different other public documents
7	published by the state legislature after a	elections are held. So those would be the
9	types of things I would look at.
10	Q.	How would the election returns
11	give you information on the public's reaction
12	to the election of Lincoln?
13	A.	Well, used in conjunction with the
14	newspaper information -- and perhaps I should
15	clarify that you have to use all of these
16	sources in context, in conjunction with one
17	another. You often know -- well, just to
18	give you a fairly specific exan^le, in
19	campaigns for the South Carolina state
20	legislature in 1860, there were people who
21	took the position that if Abraham Lincoln
22	were elected and nothing but elected,, then
23	the state should immediately consider seceding
24	from the union.
25	Other candidates said no, that
would not be an appropriate response to	,
Lincoln's election and instead a different course of action should be taken. .
And one can certainly gauge in studying election returns how people in an individual district or county responded to those messages. And you put that in the context, though, of how the local newspaper in this county has been -- the information they have been giving the public about Lincoln's election and their reports about his intentions.
Q. You said you certainly can gauge in a particular locality people's reaction.
I	believe that is what you said a moment ago.
Again, particularly what sources would you go to to gauge a public's reaction?
A. Well, again, I think the sources that I already mentioned. There was often time -- there is certainly commentary in the newspaper, not only news, but editorials.
People wrote into the newspaper and responded. And then when you have an issue
1	defined as thac one was, the vote often, I
2	think, is maybe not a perfect indicator, but
3	it gives you some indication of how people
4	were responding to the information that they
5	received.
6	Q. You have on your CV a list of
7	articles and essays. Xf 2 could just ask
8	you to refer to that, tell me if there are
9	any articles or essays listed here that deal
10	with the topic of the public's knowledge or
11	common knowledge of an event.
12	A. Well, again, I think X would have
13	to give an answer to that question similar
14	to the one 1 gave earlier* I don't believe
15	there was an article in there which focuses
16	centrally and specifically on the public’s
17	knowledge of, awareness of* or response to a
18	particular event. But certainly embedded
19	within these essays are instances where being
20	able to evaluate that is important,
21	Q. Let me ask you to give me just
22	one example. Take any of these articles
23	that you wish and explain to me how that
24	evaluation of the public knowledge would have
25	played a part.
A. Well, to at leaBt Borne extent, it would be true for a lot of them. Just to pick one, 90 down to the fourth one down on the list. Well, let's do something differently.
In the book, the first book that is listed there under publications, origin of southern radicalism, there is certainly a section in that book that deals with the issue of what we were talking about, how	■.
citizens of South Carolina responded to the presidential campaign and their knowledge of Lincoln's election in the fall of I860.
That example I used before would apply there. And then there was some discussion in that of what their response Was based on the information that they had.
Q. so that is the same example you had given me earlier, the same subject matter regarding the election of Lincoln*
Can you give me any other example, say, more recent than the election of Lincoln where you have -- where one of . your articles or books would have included a discussion of the public's knowledge?
1	A.	By "more recent," do you mean
2	something I have written about more recently
3	or something that occurred later than i860.
4	Q.	I mean, something you have
5	written. But when I said "more recently,H Z
6	meant more recently than I860, yes.
7	A.	In probably a somewhat smaller way
8	than the first example, if you will go down
9	to, I believe it is, the fifth article
10	listed under articles, the personal journalist
11	social critic Ben Roberts in the early
12	Twentieth Century south. Writing of that
13	article certainly involved on my part some
14	analysis or some ability to analyze from
15	sources consulted the public information about
16	and response to new deal policies in actually
17	the great depression before the new deal.
18	Again, that article has a
19	different focus, but there are small sections
20	in there that would require me to do that
21	sort of analysis.
22	q.	What sources did you go to in
23	evaluating the public's knowledge of certain
24	new deal policies?
25	A.	Again, in that particular case, it
1	was newspapers. Mostly, not exclusively, but
2	mostly South Carolina newspapers. Also, some
3	information from magazines, as I recall.
I	Q, Did that include any analysis.of
3	how widely read or received that information
5	was?
7	A. Well, it certainly included an
}	analysis of how widely publicized things were
?	in South Carolina or, in particular, among
)	people in -- well, in South Carolina,
L	Q. When you are discerning how widely
!	publicized something wae, how would you go
i	about that? Would you start with determining
I	how many articles on » given topic were
>	published?
>	A.	No, 1 don't think 1 would
i	approach it that way exactly. What X would
4. .	.
i	do is I would try to think about and
>	identify the potential sources of information
>	that the public has at its disposal. In .	other words, what ways Is information
i	presented to the public at this particular
i	time and place. And where is the public
i	likely to look for information on this
;	particular subject.
1	And then once you identify those
2	sources, you consult with them and see if
3	they covered -- and I guess to some extent
4	too how prominently and regularly have they
5	covered the issue you question. Evaluate the
6	quality of the informations presented, how
7	thorough is the account, how detailed. Does G	--is the information that is presented to
9	the public consistent with other information ,
10	that you are aware of, consistent with the
11	information that is given to the public in
12	other times and places about that event.
13	.	All of those things, I think, go
14	into evaluating public information.
15	Q.	Does that include an evaluation of
16	any public reaction to that information?
17	A.	Yes, it does. I mean, you have
18	to -- certainly -- well, it depends on the
19	particular question you are asking, but
20	sometimes you are just sort of aware of the
21	information, what information reached the
22	public. But certainly if there is a public
23	response to that information, you can
24	consider that in conjunction as well.
25	It is yes. It is ” bo in
't
some instances it clearly does.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit-7 was marked for identification.)	-
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, I asked the court reporter to mark as Exhibit 7a report prepared by you in this case.
First of all, let me ask you If, in fact, Exhibit 7 is the report you prepared for this case.
A. Yes, it appears to be a copy of the report.
Q, There is a cover eheet which has your name on it and says, To satisfy hie obligations under local rule 26.90b for disclosing Lacy Ford, Ph.D., R. J, Reynolds submits the expert report prepared by Dr. Ford himself for the Little case.
Let me ask you if, in fact, you
1	prepared this report yourself? i A. Except for that cover eheet, I did not prepare that cover sheet, yes.
i	Q, So your report consists of pages : 2, 3, and 4 of what we marked as Exhibit 7;
: correct?
>	A. Yes. Just glancing at it, that
1	seems to be the case.
2	Q.	Did you draft the language uBed
3	in this report?
4	A.	Yes, I did.
5	Q.	is this language that you have
e	used in other expert reports in other cases
7	you testified in?
8	A.	It is similar to language.
9	Q.	Similar to. But did you »•
10	A.	The form is. Of course* the
11	content is different, but the form of the
12	presentation is very similar.
13	Q.	But the content is language you
14	prepared specifically for this case; is that
f
15	correct?
16	A.	Yes, that is correct.
17	Q.	After identifying yourself as a
18	historian, the third sentence of this report
19	says, I expect to testify about the history
20	of tobacco and tobacco use in the United
21	States.
22	Have I read that correctly?
23	A.	Yes.
24	Q.	Will you also be talking about
25	the, more specifically, the history of the
cigarette in the United States?
A. Certainly I should probably say up front that I have not discussed the Specific context of -- content of direct testimony, but certainly the history of the cigarette would be something that I have reviewed and,
I	believe, would be qualified to testify about, yes.
Q. Approximately when was the cigarette, as we know it today, available in the United States?
MR. HOFFMAN) I am going bo object to the form of the question. I think as "we know it today" is vague and ambiguous.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) If you understand my question, I will ask you to answer it.
A. I will ask you to clarify what you mean by "as we know it today.11
Q. Can you tell me when a cigarette, ae a commercially packaged tobacco vehicle became available widely in the United States?
A. Well, I mean, I think I can answer that question in a couple of parts. Cigarettes in one form or another were
1	available well before the Civil War. And
2	some of those were packaged, although, to my
3	knowledge, some of them were not.
4	During the 1860s, there was a
5	shift in the way cigarettes were produced to
6	being mostly produced by hand to being more
7	heavily produced by machines and packaged in
8	a way that we might sort of recognize as
9	similar to cigarette packages in the 1960s.
10	Not --of course, there would be great
11	changes of packaging over a period of time,
12	but it was really in the 1860s that the mass
13	production of large numbers of cigarettes
14	packaged for widespread distribution and sale
15	reaches a sort of critical mass or begins to
16	develop into a significant national business.
17	And certainly by the early 1890s
18	and the early first two decades, the
19	Twentieth Century, the product of cigarettes
20	was widely marketed and widely consumed In
21	the United States. But I certainly want to
22	make it clear that there were cigarettes
23	available before this process.
24	Q.	Do you know who the leading
25	commercial manufacturers of cigarettes was In,
say, 1900?
A, In 1900, the American Tobacco Company, which was the Duke family's operation, was, I believe, the leading commercial producer of cigarettes.
Q, Turning to the third paragraph of your expert report, it says, I also expect to testify that, throughout this century, information that cigarette smoking could be hazardous to health, that it could lead to BeriouB injury, including death, and that, for some smokers, it could be difficult to quit was widely disseminated to the general public and was common knowledge.
Now, first of all, have I read that correctly?	‘
' •	A	.
A. Yes, I believe you have.
Q. At this time, and in the context of this sentence, would you give me & definition of common knowledge?	.
A. In the definition of common knowledge here is that information addressing the fact that cigarette smoking was harmful or potentially harmful or hagardous to health was information that was widely disseminated •
1	and broadly shared in the public domain in
2	the early, the very early part of this
3	century.
4	Q,	The next sentence goes on to talk
5	about ways that it was disseminated, and you
6	have listed several, educational courses in
7	the schools; activities/ educational campaigns
8	and publications of private, health, civic
9	and religious organizations; books and reports
10	in newspapers and magazines and other media
11	and later on television; activities and
12	official literature of state and national
13	governmental bodies; and various other
14	sources.
15	Have I read that correotly?
1$	A. Yes, you have.
17	Q,	Can you describe for me your
18	research into educational courses in the
19	schools disseminating information on cigarette
20	smoking?
21	A,	Yes, I think I can. That process
22	would, of course, begin with identifying what
23	the sort of state education requirements
24	were, generally, and particularly with regard
25	to health education. And then after
1	establishing that there were, in fact, such
2	requirements, looking to see how those
3	requirements were fulfilled and what was
4	actually done. And that Involves looking at
5	the health education requirements and the
6	school curriculum, teacher's guides, work
7	books, study guides that were prepared (or
6	health courses in the schools, not only in
9	South Carolina, but in other states as well.
0	And also an examination of textbooks that
1	were used at various points and various
2	periods of time of state approved textbooks .3	that were used in schools of various states ,4	over a very long period of time.
5	Q. Would you go a level deeper and
,6	try to determine if, in fact, material that
.7	was in a textbook was actually presented to
.8	students in the classroom?
.9 A. While there is certainly evidence
!0	from a variety of sources, that evidence was
!l	presented in the classroom. It's certainly
12	not possible to be so specific as to say
13	this was presented in this classroom on a	. !4	particular time. That certainly is not
!5	possible.
1	But what is possible is to know	.
2	what the requirements were, to know what
3	sources -- what information was available,
4	what teachers were instructed to do, the fact
5	that teachers were supervised and
6	certification was in question as they did	,
7	that. And actually evidence that you do
8	encounter where people say later-in response
9	to newspaper interviews, well, of course, we
10	were taught this In school years ago.
11	Clearly, it was a message that was widely
12	disseminated.	.
13	Q.	You began your answer by saying,
14	"While there is some evidence of what was
15	actually taught to the students," is that the
16	sort of things you were then describing in
17	the latter part of your answer, or did
18	A.	I didn't understand. I am Borry.
19	I didn’t understand the question.
20	Q.	Well, can you give me an example
21	of the sort o£ evidence that would indicate
22	that particular material in a textbook was
23	taught to the students,
24	A,	Well, certainly there was evidence
. ■ ■ ■ ■ .
25	from the earliest time that people are
surveyed or discussed these issues that they
are receiving information. And often the
kind of information that they discuss is the	*
very type of information that was being
presented in the school textbooks.	.
it is, of course, less common for -- you know, to go to a specific individual and say they were taught this; but it is very clear that this instruction was going on in classrooms throughout the country and including South Carolina, certainly from the 1920s forward and in some cases even earlier.
And it was required the textbooks have very ample material in this. From the early going, there are excellent materials prepared by state education departments and other groups for use on the smoking and health issues in the classroom.
So certainly this information was available and widely disseminated, to the	.
best of my ability, to ascertain that.
Q. Would you include someone's comments that, yes, I remember hearing that in school -- you referenced that earlier -would you include that comment aB part of	.
1	the body of evidence to suggest that material
2	was taught?
3	A.	That would be part of the body of
4	evidence. It might be a small part, but
5	that would be part of the body of evidence.
6	Q.	Let me skip down to the last of
7	the various sources that you have listed in
8	this sentence. It says activities and
9	official literature of state and national
10	governmental bodies *
11	Can you describe for me the
12	examples of the literature of state and
13	national governmental bodies that you
14	researched in connection with this case?
15	A.	Well, there will probably be some
16	overlap there between state education
17	departments, things they produced for school *
16	instruction. Public health departments,
19	certainly, produce literature on this subject
20	as well.	.
21	Q.	What Bort of literature?
22	A.	A good example of that would be
23	the state of Florida published a journal
24	called Public Health Notes that was very
25	broadly disseminated in the medical and
health community in Florida beginning in the early part of this century that would, with some regularity, discuss smoking and health issues.	'
Q. How did they go about disseminating it or distributing it?
a. i believe in that particular case they sent --it was a state-wide publication that was sent to all county boards of public health and to all doctors and I believe to schools and other public libraries, and it may have been available to others for purchase and subscription, although I am not sure about that.	;
Yes, I would add that, in the early part of the 20th century, county boards of health were probably a more important source of information about medical matters than we might perceive them to be today in the sort of absence of the large number of doctors in the concept of a personal family doctor in, say, 1910 versus in 1990.
And so they were -- I am sure that they engaged in this kind of activity even today, but it was probably even more
1	central in the early part of this century.
2	Q.	What evidence do you have that
3	that played a more central role in the early	.
4	part of the century than it does now?
5	A.	Well, I think that there were, in
6	1910, perhaps fewer other organ!eations. You
7	have a number of public health organisations
8	now that engage in extensive fund raising to
9	get their meesage out, the American Cancer
10	Society, the American Heart Association. And
11	while certainly, at least in South Carolina,
12	the state public health officials are always
13	putting out information about health. It is
14	not that they stopped doing it, but it stood
15	out more clearly, was more in the e&rly part
16	of the century than it does today.
17	Q,	Well, there were certainly fewer
18	voices in the earlier part of the century;
19	is that correct?
20	MR. KOETHEt Object. X am going
21	to object to the form of the question.
22	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) You described
23	there being more avenues o£ information now,
24	I believe.
25	A.	well, I would probably say that
there are more public health entities as opposed to the state --
Q. Okay,
A. Certainly there were public health entities other than state boards of health even early in the century, and there were private organizations, as there are in later periods, very early in the Twentieth Century talking about the health hazards of smoking.
The National Anti-Cigarette League was very active and was probably pretty close to being a counterpart in some ways to the activities of modern public health, of privately'funded health organizations.
0. I am asking you to give me some . evidence of why you said that the county	t
board of health or the county organisations would have played a more important role earlier in the century.
A. Hell, I think I am relying to a degree on that and to my underlying expertise as a historian on my knowledge of the early Twentieth Century, the progressive era. And particularly in the south in those eras and people who have written about health-related
1	questions have maintained — have talked
2	about the level of activity and the
3	centrality of county boards of health to
4	health services and information in that era.
5	And I think that that sort of is
6	a generally accepted proposition in what we
7	call the historiography of the literature,
8	historical literature written about the early
&	Twentieth Century,
10	Q. Can you cite any sort of text in
11	your general expertise as a historian that
12	would back you up on that?
13	A. There is a book about •-called
14	The History of Neglect about health care
15	among textile workers in the eouth that I
16	think would be consistent with the position 1
17	have taken here.
18	There are sections in a general
19	survey in a book by William Link on southern
20	progressivism. The exact title of that
21	escapes me at the moment, but it certainly	,
22	has those two words in it. You wouldn't
23	miss it if you looked it up. He discusses
24	health issues at that period of time and
25	also makes that point.
And, frankly, my own sort of primary source of research in matters, other -than public awareness, the health hazards of smoking, also tend to confirm the proposition of the centrality of state and county boards of health in the early Twentieth Century.
Q. In the sentence we have been discussing that lists various mean* of disseminating Information, you conclude by saying "various other sources*" I would just like to ask you if you can for me today name other sources other than the one* you listed there.
A. I certainly tried, in making this out, to list things specifically if I ‘ possibly could. And I included that lest * phrase just to make sure that if there was something that, you know, I -- I don't have such a high opinion of my recollection, and
I	can absolutely guarantee I named everything else specifically.
So if there is something I reviewed that I am relying on that doesn't fall into one of those categories that covers
i	it. I don't know that I can pinpoint a
1	specific example right off the top of my
2	head.
3	Q*	Well, let me suggest one other
4	source, Dr. Ford. What about cigarette
5	manufacturers? Would that belong in that
6	sentence anywhere?
7	A.	Well, as I -- let me ask you to
8	clarify that. In what way do you mean about
9	cigarette manufacturers in that sentence?
10	q.	well, taking the language of your
11	paragraph, the first sentence, "information ■
12	that cigarette smoking could be hazardous to
13	health, that could lead to serious injury,
14	including death, and that for some smokers it
15	could be difficult to quit and was widely
16	disseminated to the general publio and was
17	common knowledge." ,
16	Then after that, you listed a
19	variety of means through which that
20	information was disseminated.
21	Would you include cigarette ,
22	manufacturers as one of the sources of that
23	information?
24	A.	Well, there was certainly '
25	information presented in the form of
1	statements and comments from cigarette
2	manufacturers that reached the public through
3	these sources. And certainly I reviewed that
4	and took that into consideration in forming
5	my opinion, And there may have been -- I
6	am trying to think.
7	There may have been an occasional
8	publication in the form of a pamphlet or
9	something that was distributed by cigarette
0	manufacturers that came into the public
1	domain, and I had evidence was in the public
2	domain, that 1 have looked at; but 1
3	certainly have not -- all of the information
4	that I have reviewed is information that came
5	into the public domain.
e	And overwhelmingly, I think it
7	came into the public domain through the
6	category of sources that I have listed here.
9	Q, Well, I note that you do
0	specifically say the activities, educational
1	campaigns and publications of private, health,
2	civic and religious organisations.
3	Is there any reason you did not
4	include the pamphlets you described a moment
5	ago from cigarette manufacturers?
1	A.	Okay. Well, I should probably
2	clarify. There may be a slight
3	misunderstanding, and it could, Z suppose,
4	grow out of my wording of this. Again, I
5	looked at the publications, information that
6	came into the public domain from private
7	health organizations, civic groups, religious
8	organizations, but by looking at information
9	that was in the public domain. I have not
10	undertaken to make a systemic examination of n	all material that may have been prepared that
12	I didn't encounter in examining the public
13	domain.
14	And the same really would apply
15	to tobacco manufacturers as well.
16	information from manufacturers or manufacturing
17	companies as a source that came into the
18	public domain, I certainly looked at, read,
19	and paid attention to.
20	As I said, there may have been an
21	odd pamphlet or two that fell into that, but
22	I certainly didn't ask -- I didn't ask
23	tobacco manufacturers for information they
24	prepared, and 1 didn't ask the American
25	Cancer Society that. I tried to take what
l	came into the public domain and examined it.
!	And certainly there was information from
t	tobacco manufacturers that came into the
1	public domain through this variety of	.
>	sources, overwhelmingly or primarily, and I !	reviewed that.
i	Q. So you did review items that went
i	into the public domain generated from tobacco
>	manufacturers; is that correct?
)	a. Yes, or statements made by
L	representatives of the Industry and that .sort
!	of thing as they appeared in these sources.
(	Q. I would like to turn to the next
1	page of your disclosure, the paragraph which
>	begins actually at the bottom of the previous
>	page and then continues on, at about five 1	lines down. You state, Since 1964, the
)	issue of smoking and health has continued to
)	receive extensive coverage in a variety of
)	public forums. All levels of government have
L	engaged in increasing efforts to regulate the
i	marketing, sale, and use of tobacco products.
1	And then you conclude that
1	paragraph by saying, In addition* government
j	and private organizations continued and
1	intensified their educational and regulatory
2	efforts,
3	Can you discern from the
4	information you got from government and
5	private organizations why they were continuing
6	and intensifying their educational regulatory
7	efforts concerning tobacco?
fl	A. Well, yes. I think certainly to
9	some extent I can, The report of the
10	Surgeon General's advisory committee, which is
11	referenced in the previous section, made a
12	report pointing out what it believed at that
13	point were the health hazards or health risks
14	of smoking, and then urged, in conjunction
15	with that report, that the nation take what
16	it termed appropriate remedial' action.
17	There ensued a very active public
18	and ultimately political debate over exactly
19	what sort of remedial action or what sort of
20	action should be taken by the government.
21	And one of the things that
22	emerged from that public discussion and that
23	political debate and ultimately the split
24	decision -- of course, political decisions
25	are ongoing. They are being remade all the
.	time. But the political decision was that
’	education, continuing to inform people of the
t	health hazards of smoking, and that findings
i	of the Surgeon General's report and any fcew
>	studies that are done publicizing those was
>	really the best approach to take to address l	thie public health problem.
j	And I certainly think,
i	particularly in the years following that
)	report, that was a big impetus to this
L	continued and intensified activity. .
I	Q. Nell, have you seen any indication
l	that government or private organizations have
i	concluded that it is no longer necessary to
5	continue their educational efforts?
5	MR. KOETHEt Could you read that
7	question back for me, please?
s	(The record was read by the
9	reporter.)
0	the witnessi Well, certainly
1	educational efforts are ongoing. Z have
2	certainly seen statements made by people in
3	public health organizations and government
4	officials saying that the information on
5	health hazards of smoking is widely
1	available, and everybody has access to it.
2	But that is not accompanied by a statement
3	that there should be cessation in educational '
4	efforts.
5	So I guess the answer is I don’t
6	recall anybody recommending *- and there has
7	been discussion that at some point -- you
8	know, how much you spend on education versus
9	other things are debatable issues. But 1
10	don't ever recall anybody taking the position
11	that continued education wasn't advisable.
12	No, I don't think so.
13	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Hell, Dr. Ford,
14	you are opining in this report that
15	information that cigarette smoking coUld be
16	hazardous to health has been widely
17	disseminated to the general public and is
18	common knowledge; correct?
19	A.	That is correot.
20	Q.	in your opinion, are any more
21	governmental efforts to educate necessary?
22	A.	I guess, and I am not sure now ■
23	whether you are -- that may be a question
24	that falls outside my area of expertise. It
25	seems to me that an opinion that I would
L	have in the year 2000 about what the
I	government should be doing is essentially a
J	personal opinion. And if you want/ if it is
\	appropriate for me to offer a personal
5	opinion, I guess I would be happy to do so,
S	but I don't know that 1 would set n\yself up
7	as an expert on what ought to happen in
B	terms of education.
9	Q. well, let me aek you this* In
0	connection with the language you have used
1	that information that cigarette smoking oould
2	be hazardous to health has been widely
3	disseminated to the general public and was
4	common knowledge, would it be your opinion
5	that it is adequately disseminated to the
6	general public?
7	A. Yes. I think the public is now
6	and has been for many decades well informed
9	about the health risks of smoking.
0	Q. Well, let me extend that then to
1	would you regard continued governmental
2	efforts to educate the public as redundant?
3	A. Well, I think that there is
4	certainly a way in which ongoing efforts to
5	inform --to give the public information
1	about the health hazards of smoking is, in
2	fact, redundant. You are telling them over
3	and over again something that they already
4	know and know well.	'
5	That doesn't mean that from some
6	perspective, those efforts are not useful.
7	Certainly public awareness and common
6	knowledge are cumulative, They are passed
9	down to some extent from generation to
10	generation; but, nonetheless, I think it
11	remains important that there ie evidence that
12	has been accumulated over a long period of
13	time and is well known and would be passed
14	on to future generations through school and is	education programs. So you would certainly
16	want to continue doing those. '
17	So, I mean, again, I think in
16	many cases the public is being told over and
19	over again something that it already knows;
20	but I think that it can, in fact, be
21	valuable to tell them that,
22	Q.	So you are hot advocating that
23	any of these sources of information stop
24	their efforts to educate on smoking and
25	health; ie that accurate?
A. Again, without setting myself up as a public policy expert in this area, somebody who has to make decisions about what the best allocation of limited resources are,
I	would say, again, that ongoing educational efforts are, in my personal opinion, sound public policy.
Q. continuing on to the next paragraph of your statement which lists some of the bases for your opinions, you include	.
polling and survey data, media coverage, cigarette smoking prevalence, popular culture, and public and governmental reaction.	,
How does cigarette smoking prevalence enter into your opinions on how
widely disseminated the information is?
• . . i •
A. Well, certainly there was a good bit of Information out there in the public domain about cigarette smoking prevalence.
And it was discussed in the public media, especially at times the number of people who were former smokers who had qtuit at some time were cited in the public media as examples that the impact of some of this health information and the information about
1	the health risk was having on the general
2	public.
3	And certainly I considered that as
4	one kind of evidence during this period. X
5	don't consider any kind of evidence in a
6	vacuum, but I think that it does -* it is
i	fairly convincing when you have a large body
8	of evidence about the health risks of smoking
9	emerging and constantly being enhanced and at
10	the same time a sort of gradual diminution
11	in the portions of Americans who smoke. That
12	is something that has to be considered as
13	part of the larger position.
14	Q.	Would a leveling off of smoking
15	prevalence or a rise in smoking prevalence,
16	and I am just asking you hypothetically,
17	would either of those have formed your
18	opinion on the dissemination of information?
19	A.	There are many factors that go
20	into individual decisions about whether or
21	not to smoke. And certainly I think that
22	people have this information about the health
23	hazards; and many people, a declining portion
24	of people, but many people, continue to make
25	that decision to smoke in spite of the
information that is available to them.
So, again, I think I would claim that I can't really say why any individual makes a smoking decision; but I think that it ie significant that there has been a downward trend in the proportion of people who smoke, you know, since 1950.
I	think there was another part of your question, when you said if it had been something else, you know, that is essentially counter factual. There may very -- that is not what happened, at least to the best of my ability to obtain information.
So it would seem to me it would be idle speculation to say that *• based on what did happen, I see this as, within the
pi
larger body of evidence, something of a very consistent practice.
Q. In your report, you say, and X am reading from approximately the middle of this paragraph, that you expect to testify that, quote, the ordinary consumer with knowledge common to the community during the period of Samuel Martin Little's life would have been aware that cigarette smoking could be
1	hazardous to health, et cetera.
2	What, to your recollection, was
3	the period of Samuel Martin Little's life?
4	A.	Well, 1 believe I had notes on
5	that that gave -- l think he was born in
6	1945 and died within the last 12 months or
7	so.
6	Q. And the language the ordinary
9	consumer had knowledge common to the
10	community, did you choose that language, or
11	did someone else draft that language?	'
12	A.	I ueed that language in this
13	report. I believe that that is a rough
14	approximation of language that I have read in
15	regards to a sort of legal standard which I
16	don’t claim to be an expert on. So my use
•	' •
;	r
17	of that knowledge was probably shaped by that
18	familiarity; but, yes, this is -- I wrote
19	this.
20	Thisismy language on the
21	typical or the average consumer, consumer
22	without any special knowledge, but especially
23	with knowledge available, a common knowledge
24	widely shared throughout this community is
25	what I intended to convey there, and that
seems like a clear expression of it,
Q. At the bottom of this second page of your report, you list a number of national and regional newspapers and also some magazines.
Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Are articles or stories that come from those newspapers or magazines, are those among the things that are reflected on what we earlier marked as Exhibit 2, a list of publications?
A. Yes, they are.
Q. Do these include any discussions of the public's knowledge or awareness of cigarette issues, or are these stories reporting on health aspects of cigarette use? First of all, do you understand the distinction I am making in that question?
A. I am not sure I do.
Q. Let's take two types of stories, a story that reports that tests have shown cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health or this governmental agency has reported . > tests showing that cigarette smoking 1b
1	hazardous to your health. Let me call this
2	one type of information.
3	The other type of story I am
4	talking about is a story that reports that
5	the public ie well informed of the health
6	risks of cigarette smoking.
7	Now, are you talking about/ and
6	are these articles and newspapers you are
9	citing, are they stories that fall in my
10	first category or stories that fall in my
11	second category?
12	A.	They are stories that fall into
13	both of those categories, as J understand
14	your description of them.	.
15	Q.	Can you give me an example of my
i€	second category, a story that Is reporting on
17	the public awareness?
16	A.	oh, yes, I can.
19	Q.	If you could, do that, please,
20	A.	Probably the best way to do it
21	would be generically. . There were several
22	types of that story that fall into that
23	category. Public opinion polling responding
24	to that question was pretty regularly
25	reported in newspapers as well as commentary
on that polling data. And those stories
appear with some regularity.	.
■ ' \
There are sort of interview
stories, you know, newspaper reporters interviewing people in the street,	.
individuals, doctors, you know, smokers, as there are major newspaper stories that appear concerning the health risks of smoking.
People would go out and talk to people and at least get a response on the people, and those are included in the reports and are included in editorial opinions about how information was coining to the public, how ‘ valuable it would be, and that was in those newspapers that I looked at.
And there would be another category of, not simply editorial opinion, but columnists, specialty columnists, advice columnists, political reporters, people who -syndicated columnists who wrote analyzing public response to various issues, not just this one, but all kinds of issues that address this question from tlmS to time.
And those pieces of information, those articles would be included in what X reviewed
1	and from the sources indicated here as well,
2	yee.
3	MR. EVANSi It is about 10i30.
4	I would like to take about a five-minute
5	break.
6	MR. KOETHEi Sure.
7	(A recess was taken.)
6	Q. (By Hr. Evans) We are back on
9	the record, if everyone is ready.
10	Dr. Ford, would you say currently
11	that there is any controversy over the health
12	effects of cigarette smoking?
13	MR. KOETHEj Object to the form.
14	THE WITNESS > I am not a medical
15	or scientific person. I don't think I would
16	really be qualified to answer that.
17	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Is there still
16	public debate over the health effects of
19	smoking?
20	A.	There are very seriouB and
21	significant health risks associated with
22	smoking, and those are well known. There
23	may be -- there are specific issues related
24	to specific diseases or things that do seem
25	to be or does seem to be difference of
L	opinion as discussed in the public press from
l	time to time.
J	Q. You provided us with some invoices
l	here which show a billing rate of $100 an
>	hour.
s	Has that been your billing rate
7	since you have been working on tobacco cases?
3	A.	Yes, that ie correct, it has.
?	Q. You provided the number of hours
0	you spent working on this case.
1	Would the documents you provided
2	that we marked as Exhibit 4, would the
i	addition of the information you gave me on
4	your hours in March, would that reflect the
5	total amount of time that you dedicated to
6	this case?
7	A,	Would you repeat the question just
8	to make sure?
$	Q. Sure. The documents we marked as
0	Exhibit 4, which are your invoices, plus the
1	information you gave me about your hours for
2	the month of March, would that reflect your
3	total time commitment to this case?
4	a.	i certainly believe that It does,
f	-
5	yes.
1	Q.	Can you give me any estimate of
2	the amount of time, say, during 1999 that
3	you spent working on tobacco and health
4	litigation, because I see you have at least
5	a couple of examples of trial testimony here?
6	a.	1999, I believe, was the busiest
7	year in terms of my work in tobacco
8	litigation, and I probably spent soiftething
9	like between 300 and 350 hours, I believe,
10	in 1999 working on tobacco litigation related
11	issues.
12	Q.	That was billed at a hundred
13	dollars an hour?
14	A.	That was billed at a hundred
15	dollars an hour, yes.	.
16	Q.	Has that In all cases' been In
17	connection with your work with Jones, Day?
18	A.	All of that work done in 1999 was
19	with Jones, Day, yes,
20	Q.	Have you ever been retained by
21	any other law firm in connection with smoking
22	and health?
23	A.	Yes, I have.
24	Q.	who would that be?
25	A.	in the *■
...........-h—I -	-------------
q. If you want to look at the list of cases to refresh your memory -*
A. Actually, this initial case here, Clark versus R. J. Reynolds, I was* in fact* i designated as an expert by Jones, Day on behalf of R. J. Reynolds in that case. And my recollection -- this iB all beyond my i area of expertise, but for some reason i Reynolds was dropped out or was dismissed
>	from that case and Liggett became the
. defendant, and they had a different law firm, ! Latham and Watkins, which had a New York i office. And even though I had begun working i and had done work on Clark, at the request
>	— in consulting, at the request of Jones,
>	Day, when they were no longer involved but 1 yet the case was fairly far along towards
] trial, I continued upon agreement, I agreed
>	to it, to continue with the new law firm
3	that was in charge of the defense in that L case.
i	Q. Other than that Instance, has all
S	your involvement in the tobacco litigation
1	been in connection with R. J. Reynolds?
5	A. Again, I think currently I have
1	been disclosed as an expert in a case where
2	Brown & Williamson is the principal defendant
3	and I believe the King & Spalding law firm
4	is representing Brown & Williamson in that
5	regard in that case.
6	it Is a case involving an
7	individual, individual plaintiff in
8	Jacksonville, Florida, where f have done a
9	tremendous amount of research. So 1 agreed
10	on that basis to undertake to consult with
11	them on that case. And I believe that X
12	have been disclosed as a possible witness in
13	that case. I certainly prepared a	v
14	disclosure.
15	Q.	But you have not given any
16	testimony in that case yet?
17	A.	I have not given any testimony in
18	that case.
19	Q.	Of all of the cases listed there,
20	was it in connection with R. J. Reynolds,
21	with the understanding that, in the first
22	case, you later became involved with Liggett? <
23	A.	Yes. That is correct. There may
24	have been codefendants in some of these
25	cases, but my involvement was as a consultant
I	and later witness in conjunction with the
i	Jones, Day law firm representing R. J.	'
I	Reynolds.
1	Q. Have you worked as a consultant
5	in cases for which you never gave any
5	deposition or trial testimony?
7	A. Yes, I have,
b	Q. Can you tell me what those cases
9	were?
0	A.	Yes. There were the Keegan caBe
1	in Jacksonville, Florida; the Ball case in
2	West Virginia; the Wagner case in
3	Jacksonville, Florida; the Whipple case in
4	Jacksonville, Florida »« all of! which are	.
5	individual cases; the Montgomery case in the
6	Washington, D.C, jurisdiction; and the Aksamit
7	case, which is a class action case in South
8	Carolina; are all cases in which I have
9	consulted with Jones, Day but not given any,
0	at this point, either depositions or trial
1	testimony.	/ ,
2	Q.	Did you include your work on
3	those cases when you gave me an estimate of
4	about 350 hours for the year 1999?
5	A.	Yes, yes. That was all of the
1	work I did in 1999.
2	Q. And I believe you described 1999
3	as probably your busiest year in terms of -*
4	A. That's right.
5	Q. -- expert consulting?
6	A. That's right. In terms of the
7	amount of time spent, certainly that was the '
8	case.
9	Q. When were you first approached to
10	give testimony in a smoking and health case? n A. it was late spring or early .
12	summer of 1995. I was contacted by a lawyer
13	with the Jones, Day law firm and then asked
14	if I had any interest in undertaking research
15	into this issue, I don't recall the exact
16	date, but it was May, around May of 1995,
17	approximately.
16	Q. Has that specifically in .
19	connection with the Carter case?
20	A. I have not been -- I don't
21	recognize the Carter case.
22	0. X may be using the wrong name.
23	I am sorry. The first case that is listed
24	there.
25	A. The Clark case.
Q. Clark,
A. No, it was not. In fact, I am not sure that the initial case, the initial contact, was related to a specific case.
Q. Okay.
A. It was simply whether I would be interested in undertaking work on this subject.
Q, Do you have any idea why they approached you in particular to do work on this topic?
A. My recollection is that I had been recommended to them by other historians in the profession that I knew who thought I would be well qualified to undertake the kind of research and the type of project that they were interested in having done. Thete may have been other reasons, but I think that is my recollection of when 1 asked essentially that same question, that was the answer.
Q. Previous to that had you done any research on tobacco issues?
A. Yes, I had. Tobacco was one of my -- one specialty I have is I am a
t ' • ' ■ -
1	historian of the south, and tobacco has had
2	a significant role in the history of that
3	region, indeed the history of the entire
4	United States from the colonial times down to
5	the present and are changing. Andr yes, I
e	had hooked into a number of tobacco related
7	issues in my own research prior to being
8	contacted. And that general background could
9	conceivably have been a reason that I was
10	contacted. I don't recall whether that was
11	indicated to me or not.
12	Q.	Do you recall if they mentioned
13	to you at that time that they were familiar
14	with any research you had done In the case?
15	A.	I don't recall that. They may
16	have or may not have.
17	Q.	Had any of that research Involved 16	the health effects of American tobacco?
19	A.	l do want to be clear about this.
20	Some of that work certainly took into --
21	involved issues related to the fact that
22	there were health risks associated with
23	smoking, and the public was aware of those;
24	but it was not the type of research that I
25	have done, which my testimony is based
specifically on the public awareness of health hazards of smoking. 1 do, in fairness, want to make that clear.
But I was certainly aware of the larger parameters of this issue before undertaking that specific research project.
Q. In your academic career, have you ever received any grant money from a tobacco company?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Has the department you work for at the University of South Carolina* do you know if they received any tobacco grant money?
A. To the best of my knowledge* they have not.
Q. Do you have a research assistant or research assistants that helped you in getting information you reviewed for this case?
A. I have employed research assistants since the time I began working in 1995, yes.
0. Are those people connected with
i	the university, or do you independently hire
1	tnese people? how aoes that worK?
2	A.	I think there have been probably
3	both cases. I have certainly used people
4	who were, at least initially/ graduate
5	students and history Ph.D. candidates in
6	history at the University of South Carolina.
7	Some of them have since graduated and
6	continued to do some work on an occasional
9	basis, some research work for me on an
10	occasional basis.
11	And also I had to do some
12	research in the Miami, Florida, area in which
13	I employed or used as researchers, and for
14	very brief periods of time, projects, people
15	who were students at, I believe it is,
16	Florida International University that were
17	recommended to me by a historian I knew in
18	that area and who did some work for me down
19	there. And they were not affiliated with
20	the University of South Carolina to complete
21	my answer to your question.
22	But that is the -- and -- yes.
23	I think I answered that question.
24	Q.	Yes. Andin the case of the
25	assistant from Florida --or was it, more _-;-;---:-
than one assistant’down in Florida?
A. I believe it was two, yes.
Q. Did you select those two assistants from a list of recommendations from someone down there?
A. My recollection is that 1 talked to the historian down there that 1 knew and asked -- told him what I needed. It was a really fairly specific Bort of thing. And he recommended and described to me two or three individuals and their qualifications.
So I told him to find one that was available to do it in the very nearer term. And he did. So I relied on his recommendation in
that case.
q. Have you ever used an assistant at the recommendation of a law firm?	.
A. No, I have not.
Q. Do you ever bill for your research assistants' time to the Jones, Day law firm?
A. would you clarify that question?
Do I -- I am not sure I understand it exactly.
Q. Hell, who, if anyone, is paying
1	for their time spent by the research
2	assistants?
'	v
3	A.	I understand your question now.
4	They are paid by the JoneB, Day law firm,
5	and they -- I actually send the bills off,
6	and they are in a form they are formatted
l	like mine are, but they, of course, know how
6	many hours they worked and prepare them.
9	Q. So that would be a separate
10	statement from the statements that you
11	provided here; is that correct?
12	A.	That is correct.	1
13	Q.	Do you have any Idea of how much
14	time research assistants have spent Working
15	on this case, the Martin Little case?
16	A.	Let me think about that for a
17	minute, I can probably give you a rough IB	estimate.
19	Probably in the range of 40 to 60
20	hours. Almost all of it, the great bulk of
21	it, devoted to the collection of newspapers.
22	Q.	And the newspaper articles that
23	they collect, do you ask for,specific
24	articles or are they selecting articles and
25	bringing them to your attention?
A. Hell, the way that process works is that basically I describe the sort of research protocol, essentially asking for them to provide --to search papers for certain periods of time for any articles relating to smoking and health or issues related to those two issues and to make copies of what they find and to bring them to me.
It really -- their role is simply a data collection role, not in an analytical or interpretive role.
Q. when they copy an article and give it to you for your review, is it just a copy of the text of the article, or do you see it as it appeared in context? Let	'
me explain. Z mean, where it appears on the page, that sort of thing.
A. Well, that is probably a two or three part answer to that question, I have done -- I don’t, because of time constraints, don't do it all, but I do some of it and have done a good bit of this data collection myself, and I try, in any newspaper that I researched to do some of it myself, to get a sense of those very things that you are
1	talking about, what the newspaper was like
2	generally, where these stories appear, and
3	that sort of thing.
4	so I feel like, based on the fact
5	that i do some of the actual data collection
6	myself, in most cases that 1 have a good
7	sense of it. But it is also possible, based
8	on the material, the copies that are given
9	to me, usually to see the page number and
10	some context on the page. It is not -- the n	copies aren't bo narrow in most cases to get
12	only the article. So you get a pretty good
13	sense of that even from the copies.
14	And 1 think combined with the
15	actual newspaper work that 1 personally have
16	done, rather than to rely on assistance to
17	do it, I have a pretty clear sense of that
18	in most cases.
19	Q,	I take it in general when the
20	research assistant brings you the articles,
21	it is just of the article itself?
22	A.	Yes. But usually those -- just
23	to be clear, the copy, the article and the
24	size of the page aren't usually co-terminus,
25	and it 1b always labeled with a date, and
1	frequently the page and section number Is on
2	the copy. Mot always, as I recall, but
3	frequently.
4	Q.	What about television or radio
5	reports; is that some of the material that
6	you consider?
7	A.	Yes, it is.
B	0. How do you review those?
9	Let's take television, for *
0	example. Would you see videotape, or Would
1	you read a written script? How would you
2	review television?
3	A.	The majority of the work I have
4	done into television was done at the
5	Vanderbilt television new archives in
*
6	Nashville, Tennessee, and they have actual
7	video clips of television news and special
8	report-type things which you can call up from
9	their archives just like you call up books
0	at a library, and they have equipment for to
1	you sit there and essentially review those.	.
2	They do also have finding aides
3	which list -- give you a brief summary of
4	what that clip is about. And in order to
5	-- in my work at Vanderbilt, I try to watch ,
1	all of the longer stories, say 30 seconds
2	and above, that were on television news, and
3	t read the descriptions of most oC the
4	shorter ones, which were five, ten, or IS
5	second things because that would have been
6	almost too voluminous to do in the time I	*
7	was there.
8	The Vanderbilt television news
9	archives also has selected video disks of
10	special reports, things that were on like CBS
11	reports and that weren't just part of the
r	-	-
12	nightly news. And it seems like I reviewed
13	some of those there as well.
14	I think that there may be some
15	other -- 1 certainly have read about
16	television, their stories and reporting in
* . . .
17	the print journalism as well, And I would --
16	when I talk about television, some of the
19	information that X have gleaned was from
20	reading about it, but knowing it was on
21	television or had a story about it on
22	television. But probably the majority of my
23	work was done at the Vanderbilt television
24	news archives that 3 described.
25	Q. When you would see a clip from
the Vanderbilt news archives, would that be presented in context of the program in which it appeared, or would that just be a video clip of the story itself?
A. with the exception of some of the special reports, it was usually a clip, just the clip from the show. It wasn't -- you didn't have the whole show. But to coiqplete the answer, I believe in most cases where in the news broadcast the story appeared was indicated either by a time or some indicating mechanism on the finding aid, like this was the lead story or this ran at 16 minutes into the telecast, but you didn't see -- so you did have some indication where it came in the news cast, if that is the kind of information you are asking about.
Q. Yes. So you would know what time in the news cast it would have occurred; correct?
A. That's right, what time in the news cast it occurred, I believe, at least on a number of occasions. And how long the story was, was it 30, 60, 90, or maybe a
fewer, two-minute section.
1	Q.	But I take it you would not have
2	known what any of the surrounding stories
3	would have been from that information?
4	A.	There were probably some cases
5	where you had that, but as a general kind,
€	the majority of the time, no. You probably
7	sometimes there was a sort of transition
8	that you could hear so you could know what
9	they had reported. But, no, it was focused
10	pretty much on the smoking news story.
n	q. You mention in the materials that
12	you have reviewed in preparation for this
13	case deposition testimony of Martin Little
14	and Suzanne Little.
15	Taking the deposition of Martin
16	Little, what in particular are you relying on
17	from his testimony that supports your
18	opinions in this case?
19	A,	Could I have my -- or your copy
20	or the copy of those notes?	.
21	Q.	Certainly. ’
22	A.	The reason that I suggested to
23	defense counsel that it is valuable for me
24	to read essentially fact depositions about
25	plaintiffs is that I do get a sense of the
tragic story of their lives. Since I have to testify about levels of publio awareness in the community, that were common to the community, the various communities in which people live is an important thing to know.
it ie also helpful to know what particular kinds of information, what sources of information these individuals used for their general awareness of things; although,
I	am not really confining myself, of course, by any -- the standard is I am interested in information that is widely disbursed in the community, not just that any one individual saw some specific piece of information, but what information was out there in the entire community. So these depositions primarily help me get a sense of the life story of this individual and where they lived and what times and maybe where they went to school and those kinds of things.
Those are primarily what X am looking for when I read these depositions. There may occasionally be some other information that is useful to my research, but that basically is what I am interested
1	in learning from reading those.
2	Q.	Well, now, are you going to be
3	offering any opinion as to Martin Little’s
4	specific awareness of the health hazards of
5	cigarette smoking?
€	A. I think, as I suggested earlier,
7	I have not discussed with anybody the exact
8	content of my testimony in thiB case, other
9	than it will cover these general areas that
10	we are talking about. The -- I suppose you
11	can't entirely rule out the possibility that
12	I might make some reference to something or
13	that attorneys, in asking questions, might
14	make some reference to some statement that he
15	made in his --or somebody else made in
16	their sworn testimony, but it would just be
17	to rely on that as a factual statement.
18	Q.	Okay. Vou are not bringing any
19	analysis as a historian to Martin Little's
20	testimony, I take it. Vou are just
21	gathering, getting factual information about
22	where and when he lived; is that correct?
23	MR. KOETHEs I object to the form
24	of the question.
25	THE WITNESS* Could you clarify
that? I am confused by that question. I am sorry.
Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Hell, it was an
unclear question because I was just trying to
< ■ clarify your last answer.	<
It is your understanding that your testimony is going to be about the dissemination of information to the general public/ is that correct?
A. And the availability of that information to the public and information indicating the public had received that information, all those things, yes.
Q. Let's take a bit of that information, an article, a news story. Hill you also testify that, based on your research, Martin Little saw that story?
A. Probably the best answer I can give at this point is that certainly there are -- I guess 1 still have to answer that in kind of a general way. Certainly there are things that either Martin Little in his deposition or testimony and comments of others that were indicated that were sources of information that he used.
1	Well, I may very well have talked
2	about information that came into the public
3	domain from those very sources that Mr.
4	Little mentioned and things that, certainly
5	by hie testimony, he would appear likely to
6	have seen or maybB in some cases did see.
7	But I also won't be confining myself to
6	that, to those sources of information. It
9	is just the fact that, in presenting my .
10	testimony about public awareness, X would
11	fully expect to present the type of coverage
12	these issues received in Time and Newsweek.
13	And I believe in glancing my notes, I
14	believe he indicated he read Time and
15	Newsweek.
16	So I can't say -- there clearly
17	could be some overlap between what-he
18	acknowledged looking at and what I am going
19	to present. But I am looking at it from
20	these are the types of information that was
21	received in the communities in which Martin
22	Little received.
23	Q.	Let me ask you the same sort of
24	question about the deposition testimony of
25	Suzie Little.
Is there anything in particular from the deposition of Suzie Little that you rely on to form the baBis. of your opinions?
A. Hell, again, she provided information that Martin Little read the Sunday New York Times and the Charleston News and Courier and Newsweek ahd Time magazine, certainly the -- and certainly I am liking to present information from those sources. Traditionally, the focus of my direct testimony has been from a much earlier period than Suzie's knowledge of Martin Little oomes from,
So without knowing exactly what questions I am going to be asked in direct examination, it's really hard to say* but certainly I might present some material from these sources, but I am not sure that I would be relying on her indication that he read those, it is sort of hypothetical at this point, and it is hard to say.
Q. You mentioned four other depositions. The deposition of Martin Little's sister. Would that be Virginia Canon?
A. Yes, I believe that is oorrect.	,
1	Q.	And also Steven Schmutz, Lloyd
2	Pearson, and Dr. Arana. Is that the four
3	you mentioned?
4	A.	Yes.
5	q.	Did you select those four persons
6	that you wanted to read deposition testimony
7	of, or were those provided by defense
8	counsel?
9	A.	Well, I requested defense counsel
10	to provide me with those depositions, and the
11	way I requested them was, you "know, any
12	deposition that is essentially a deposition
13	about the facts of the plaintiff's life as,
14	you know, not, I guess, expert testimony and
15	that sort of thing, but any sort ofthing
16	that is about -- the depositions that are
17	about the facts in the plaintiff's life/ and
16	those ** they said these are the witnesses
19	that fall into -■ or people that we
20	interviewed that fall into that category,
21	And they have sent those.
22	If there are others -- I would	‘
23	presume that Z would receive those if there
24	are any others. So it is just sort of a
25	standing request to receive any deposition
that deals, basically, with the facte of Martin Little's life, if that is a distinction that makes any sense.
Q. Is there Anything from those four depositions that you can recall that you are particularly relying on in this case?
A. Well, I mean, I should probably say that, in some ways, I Am not sure X Am relying on these depositions for the content of my opinions in general. I rely on depositions to provide facte that take me in certain directions for research. So it ie not that I am relying on them basically for a basis of opinion,
It does seem to me that I got/ and I will say up front, I don't remember exactly what, and I did not take notes on those depositionsi it seems to me that the deposition of Mr. Schmutz, 1 believe, An attorney who is a friend of Martin Little, had some Information that was useful to my research. I believe that -- I don't recall much information in any of those other depositions that was particularly useful to me.
1	Q.	What was the information in Mr.
2	Schmutz' deposition?
3	A.	Well, as I was indicating, I
4	really don't recall it specifically; but it
&	does seem to me that he had known Mr. Little
6	at an earlier time in his life. It wasn't
7	just recently. And that I got some
8	confirmation from that about, you know, where
9	MR. Little's parents lived, where
10	he was at certain times. Not that that
11	information, I guess, waB available in other
12	depositions as well, but sort of
13	confirming-type information.
14	Q.	Have you done any research or
15	study about public knowledge or awareness of
16	any consumer product other than cigarettes?
17	A.	No, I have not undertaken a
18	systematic and thorough study of, as I
19	understand your question, about products other
20	than cigarettes. I have certainly seen in	.
21	my research in cigarettes conparisons made
22	-	between it and other products of all kinds
23	and over a long period of time; but I have
24	not, certainly not, undertaken research into
25	them in the way that I have cigarettes.
Q. What is a product you have seen . it compared to?
a. Alcohol, alcoholic beverages specifically, would be one example.
Q. And was the comparison done to public awareness of dangers of alcohol?
A. Yes.
0. Have you read any studies, or can you name any studies or articles that dl6cus6 public awareness or common knowledge about the dangers of alcohol?
A. Any studies of that kind that 1 have encountered in my research would have been studies that I discovered doing research on public awareness of the health hazards of cigarette smoking, which included the type of comparison that we were just talking about/ not independent of those, no.
. Q. But do you recall any? I mean, did you run across some?
A. Hell, certainly, for example, when you say studies, if you mean systematic, scientific studies, that would be another ;	*
question; but certainly 1 ran into a number of comparisons between cigarettes and alcohol,
1	both of some more sort of impressionistic and
2	some more systematic, but I have not
3	encountered and not looked for, since I am
4	not a scientific expert, some sort of
5	scholarly literature comparing the health
6	risks of alcohol to the health risks of
7	smoking, if that is the nature of your
8	question.
9	Q.	Not exactly, I do want to focus
10	on public awareness of the health riake, and
11	I wondered had you come across any scholarly
12	--we will just say scholarly article
13	regarding public awareness of the health
14	risks of alcohol?
15	A.	With the qualification scholarly
16	article, 1 don't recall and don't believe
17	that I have read such a study.
18	Q.	Can you name for me a scholarly
19	article or article that would appear in, say,
20	a peer review journal on public awareness of
'	■ * ,
21	any other consumer product, the public's
22	general awareness of the topic?
23	A.	Again, working from a
24	recollection, I don't recall seeing any such
25	comparison in a peer review journal that I .
have consulted. That is the best answer,
' It is possible, but I don't recall.
Q. Do you think tobacco might be unique in this analysis?
A. What analysis are you talking of?
Q. An analysis, a scholarly analysis of the public's awareness of the risks of the product.
A. I am not sure that Z have the expertise to answer that question, I have	,
researched the public awareness of tobacco and the health risks associated with its yse. i would assume that there might be litigation involving other products and similar research might be done or have been done, but --so
I	wouldn't have any basis for saying tobacco is unique. What my research has been into is the question of what was the public awareness, what was the public's common knowledge about the health hazards of cigarette smoking.
:	And I couldn't really offer an
i	informed opinion about whether there is , anything unique, except to say that compared ; to -- I certainly could do this and have
1	done this, if this what you -- maybe I
2	misunderstood your question and, therefore,
3	have not answered it in a straightforward
4	fashion, but certainly I have undertaken a
5	sort of comparative study of knowledge about
6	the health risks of smoking versus knowledge
7	of any other number of things in the same
8	period of time. And certainly I could say
9	that public awareness of the health hazards
10	of smoking is among the highest levels of
11	public awareness of anything that surveyors ,
12	ask questions about. I might not go so far
13	as to say unique, but it was certainly among
14	the highest. It was right up there with the
15	problems of polio in the 1960s when polio
16	was one of the scourges of American society.
17	So in that sense, yes, I have
18	looked at that conduct of comparison; but,
19	no, I have not undertaken the same sort of
20	systemic study of alcohol that I have of
21	tobacco.
22	Q.	I understand the comparisons you
23	may have done in your own work, but we began
24	by talking about anybody else1& work, and 1
25	take it you are not familiar, you cannot
cite to me any scholarly articles written by anybody else on the topic of the public's general awareness of any consumer product	.
other than tobacco.	.
A. in order not to mislead you, I don't want to make a blanket statement that
I	have not seen any such thing; but I certainly have not undertaken to make a systemic analysis o£ that literature.
Q. So then would it be fair to say that you have not compared the methodology you have used on tobacco with anyone elee's methodology on another consumer product?
A. Well, I have used the methodology
in developing my opinions on tobacco, on
. ' * * historical public awareness that historians
used aB we talked about very early in this
deposition in determining the public's
knowledge of a variety of things and In the
historical context. And in that sense, X am
certainly using a common and shared and
broadly used methodology.	.
But I have not, to the best of my recollection, compared it to work on another consumer product.
1	Q.	Okay. Now let's,return to
2	tobacco,	.
3	who else besides yoyrself has
4	published research concerning the public's
5	awareness of the hazardous of tobacco?
6	A.	Let me clarify the question. Are
7	you saying am I relying on the work of other
8	scholars?
9	Q.	No, that is not my question. I
10	am asking about your awareness of other
n	scholarly work on this issue of the public's
12	awareness of tobacco.
13	Can you cite for me published
14	studies on the public's awareness of the
15	health risks of tobacco?
16	A.	l guess a two-part answer to
17	that, because I want to make it perfectly
18	clear that I am basing my answers in this
19	case on the research I have done myself and
20	my evaluation of that data that has been
21	done, not exclusively, but primarily on what
22	historians would call primary source material.
23	I am not aware -- well, there is
24	an account, which I want to indicate I am
25	not relying on it, but there is an account
of public awareness of the health hazards of
t
cigarette smoking in a book called A Dread Disease by Professor James Patterson, which ie one of the -- who features at one of the prominent New England schools. It is a study of cancer in American society, and it includes a section in which he discusses , public awareness of the health hazards of smoking.
So that would be one example of a work by a historian that has been peer reviewed and published.
Q. I am sorry, the book was called A Dread Disease. What was the author's name?
A. James Patterson.	'
Q. That, I take it, though, is not a book that you have listed as one Of your reliance materials; ie that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Well, are you familiar with the 1989 Surgeon General's report?
i
A. Yes, 1 am familiar with the 1989 Surgeon General1s report. There is a sense in which the Surgeon General's report is not really a primary source for the period in
1	which my research was focused on; but it	'
2	reprints some data, so it was a convenient
3	compilation of data that is otherwise
4	available, and you can get, and in most
5	cases I have, in some cases anyway, I have
6	gotten otherwise; but there is some data in
7	there that I have used.
8	Again, I am not sure that there
9	is data in there that I rely on that is not
10	available elsewhere, but I do sometimes
11	reference that. I am familiar with it, yes.
12	Q.	Are you familiar with the chapter
13	that concerns the public's awareness of the
14	dangers of cigarettes?
15	A.	YeB, 1 am familiar with that
16	chapter.	,
17	Q.	Have you listed that as one of
18	the things you rely on?
19	A.	To the best of my recollection,
20	in developing that lieti no. For pretty
21	much the reason I was trying to suggest
22	earlier, that I tried to rely, whenever
23	possible, on primary sources that 1 collected
24	myself and were in the public domain at the
25	time my research focused on.
And so there is some data that is used in that chapter that is data that I have relied on, but I wouldn't say I have relied on that chapter, if you understand what I am saying.
Q. Yes. That will answer my question.
But there is data that was used in the Surgeon General's report that you have also relied on?
A. Yes. And usually it was data that was available to me elsewhere as well as in the 198? Surgeon General's report.
Q. Just as you sit here today/ can you give me any specific data that is reported in the Surgeon General's report that you also independently looked at?
A. Yes. There is some *• well, at	=■
least is my recollection of the -- I really don't want to give you misleading answers.
I	would probably need to see that chapter to give you a reliable answer.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit'd was marked for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, please
1	take the time you need to just familiarize
2	yourself with what I have given you. Let roe
3	represent that this is Chapter 4 from the
4	1989 report of the Surgeon General, and the
5	chapter is titled Trends in Public Beliefs,
6	Attitudes, and Opinions About Smoking.
7	What I am asking you to do is	,
6	give me examples of source material in this ,.
9	chapter that you also relied upon in coming
10	up with your opinions. And again, certainly
11	take all the time you need.
12	MR. KOETHEr Just for the record,
13	did we specifically identify what this
14	exhibit was? This appears to be just a
15	portion --
16	MR. EVANS 1 This is just Chapter
17	4 from the 1969 report of the Surgeon
16	General.
19	THE WITNESS! On -• well, just
20	for an example, on page 176, there are two
21	surveys referenced, the audits and surveys
22	for 1964 and the audits and AUT6 for 1966.
23	These were public opinion surveys conducted
24	by a wing of the United States Government,
25	and l believe I did use those surveys in the
formation of my opinions. I believe I had found those Burveys in the government document section of our library, for example, And they, of course, are used here by our Surgeon General, and that ie a very good example of what I wap try to 90 refqrto.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Now, would I find reference to this adult use of tobacco survey In this list of reliance materials you have given me?
A. I believe that you will. On Item 439, Item 439 on the list, I believe that ie referring -- certainly in identifying those two in this report, it is my intention that they are referring to those two.
Q. Are you familiar with a study that is often called the Pishbein Study, Fiehbein? Is that familiar to you?
A. I certainly don't recognise it by that title.
Q. Hold on one second. I don't think we need to mark this. Let me just show you that.
I	am showing you a report called Consumer Beliefs and Behavior With Respect To
1	cigarette Smoking, A Critical Analysis of the .
2	Public Literature put together by Martin
3	Fishbein, Ph.D., and it is subtitled A Report
4	Prepared for the Staff of the Federal Trade
5	Commission.
6	I am just asking you if you have
7	seen this document before.
6	A. I have no recollection of seeing
9	this document before.
10	Q. Okay.
n	MR. koethei Are we going to mark
12	this, Jerry?
13	MR. EVANS: NO.
14	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Not to state the
15	obvious, but if you are not familiar with
16	having -- if you don't recollect having seen
17	the document, X take it this is not an
18	article that you intend to rely on to form
19	the basis of your opinions?
20	A.	Certainly with relationship to
21	that specific article. I would want to add
22	to that sort of stipulation that, having not
23	read that, there certainly may be material in
24	there that is similar to material that 1
25	relied on or that may use identical material
in iti but I am certainly not familiar with that report as that report, if that is a clear answer.
q. i take it you will be relying on polling data. We have discussed that earlier, and you have listed some polling data in here; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct*
Q, Are you an expert on polling?
A. As do other historians who do research in area where polling data is available, I use polling data as one of the sources as a formation of my opinions that, presenting here and -- would and have done so in other research.
t am certainly trained to, X think, adequately for a historian, interpret and understand polling data. X would not say that I am a person who would claim that
I	have expertise in designing and setting up and actually conducting a poll, a poll from that sort of logistical end of itt but I certainly believe I have a historian's expertise in understanding polling data.
Q. But you have not conducted any
1	polling on your own on this topic* correct?
2	A.	That is correct.
3	Q,	Would you consider yourself an
4	expert in statistics?
5	A.	Well, as I testified earlier in
6	the deposition, I did do quantitative
7	analysis as not a Ph.D. language for that.
8	And actually in 1983 and 1984, I audited two
9	graduate level statistics courses, polling --
10	let me say this precisely. Political science
11	courses which were focused on statistical
12	analysis that were taught by tenured faculty
13	members there at USC, and I audited those
14	courses. So 1 think with my training in the
15	graduate career and in the continuing
l€	education I undertook, I am certainly well
17	prepared to evaluate polling data and
18	interpret it.
19	I would not -- I do not have a
20	Ph.D. in mathematics and statistics.
21	Q.	Have you ever taught any courses
22	on statistics?
23	A.	No; however, in graduate level
24	courses at USC, I did engage a bit in
25	training graduate students about simple
statistical procedures on an as-needed basis for theses and dissertations. But these are pretty simple kind of statistical methods.
Q. But do you intend to interpret polling data as part of you** polling opinion, or have you made independent interpretations of polling data in formulating your opinions?
A. Polling data is one source among many I have used in reaching my opinions about public awareness of hazards in smoking. And I am using my interpretation of that polling data based on polls at any point by reputable polling organizations whose method is well explained and certainly appears to meet basic standards for reliability.
1	do, in fact, intend to use that as one type of material that discusses public awareness and addresses the issues of the public awareness on the aspects of smoking.
0. So are you able to evaluate the methodology used in a poll to come up with your own assessment of the poll's reliability?
A. i think there is a two-part answer in this case. In the first place, I
1	have attempted to only use polls that were
2	conducted by reputable polling organizations
3	and ones generally perceived in the field of
4	history and other fields as being reputable
5	polls and organizations and where you were
6	able.to obtain an understanding of what
7	method they had used. And based on my
8	training and experience, those did seem to be
9	--if those were reliable methods, then those
10	would be the sort of polls X would uee.
n	Q. Are you relying on polls, any
12	polls conducted by the Roper Organization?
13	A.	I would have to check, The Roper
14	Organization maintains at the University of
15	Connecticut an archive of polling data which
16	includes a wide variety of polls done by a
17	number of polling entities and organizations.
18	And certainly it is part of my research, and
19	you can view these on line. X subscribe to
20	the Roper Polling Center and looked at a
21	nurrtber of the polls that were in the archive
22	of the Roper Polling Center.
23	Off the top of my head, t don't
24	recall that any of the polls which X have
25	listed here, although I can stand corrected
if I want to go through every item, is specifically a poll conducted by the Roper Polling Organization. But in the interest of giving you all of the information, some of the polls I did access through this Roper Center for polling*
Q. Did you consider any of the polls that the Roper Organization performed for the Tobacco institute in forming your opinions?
A. in forming my opinion, I didn't consider any polling data that wasn't available in the public domain, either in some form or fashion. And it wasn't made available with reasonable promptness after it was done. There was an abundance of polling
* ■_
available, data available in the public domain. So, no, if it was an internal poll taken for anybody, I don't think that I have relied on it in forming my opinions.
q. Were you aware of polling done for the Tobacco Institute?	-
A. In trying not to make -- well, let me just give you the phrased answer the beet way x can, I am certainly aware from two or three sources that there were polls
1	taken. I can't recall off the top of my
2	head whether they were done for the Tobacco
3	institute or for individual tobacco
4	manufacturers or perhaps another entity, but
5	I am aware that there were polls done.
6	In fact, the Surgeon General's
7	report of 1989 -- that is one way that I
8	know about this is that references polls they
9	requested from the tobacco industry. My only
10	hesitation ie I don't know whether it was
11	from the Tobacco institute specifically, but
12	certainly -- and they did -- in at least
13	one, if not two, was a Roper poll from the
14	Surgeon General -- that was requested at some
15	point and turned over to the government and
16	are used in the Surgeon General's report of
17	1969 in that chapter that we talked about. ie	So on that basis, I have that
19	knowledge that they were done* yes.
20	Q,	you do list some Gallup polls,
21	and you include some Gallup polls at any
22	point in 1964. Can you tell me specifically
23	if this is information you are going to
24	specifically rely on for your opinions in
25	this case?
A. Certainly polls that I have listed iere on this list are polls that I would peeifically rely on for my testimony in this ase, yes.
Q. Did you prepare a response, any ort of written response, to the Gallup rganization's criticism of your use of the ,
954 polling data?	‘
A. Specifically what criticism are ou referring to?
Q. Are you aware of an article by he Gallup organization that was critical of	,
our testimony in a case in the way you were nterpreting the Gallup polling data?
A. Again, what sort of article or hat are you referring to specifically?	'
Q. Well, I will be glad to show it a you.
(Plaintiff's Exhibit-9 was marked ?r identification.)	,
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Are you familiar Lth the document we just marked as Exhibit t
A. The beet answer I think on this that the content of this artlole is
1	something that I am aware of. The cover
2	sheet may not be something that X have seen
3	before.
4	Q,	But you are aware of the content
5	of this article?
6	A.	Yes. X received a copy of this
7	article from the assistant editor of the
8	journal called Public Opinion Quarterly, I
9	believe, in July of 1996. And that is how
10	X have seen this document.
11	Q.	Did you ever prepare any sort of
12	response to this article?
13	A.	The request to me from the, X
14	believe it was, the assistant editor, X
15	believe Mr. Peter Miller was hie name, of
16	the Journal of Public Opinion Quarterly was
17	to ask me if I would serve as a referee for
18	thie article since it addressed my expertise.
19	And he sent me a copy of this article.
20	X read it, thought that, while I
21	found it full of inaccuracies, I thought it
22	would be inappropriate for me to serve as a
23	peer reviewer on it, and I informed Mr.
24	Miller that X did think' it would be
25	inappropriate for me to serve as the peer
And in doing so, I told him what some of the problems that I saw with the issay in this form were, and I believe that [ did write Mr. Miller. Yes, I did write Mr, liller a letter outlining, both explaining ;hy I didn't think it would be appropriate :or me to serve as a referee, and what I thought some of the problems with this article in this form were.
So, yes, I did respond to this in :hat form in terms of a letter to the issistant editor of the journal to which it lad been submitted for consideration for >ublication.
Q. To your knowledge, was the letter rou wrote ever published?
A. To my knowledge, it was not, nor ras the -- and I would add that peer eviewere rejected this essay as not being icceptable for public education and public •pinion,
Q. What editors rejected it?
A. Editors of the Public Opinion quarterly.	1
1	Q.	Could you point out to me what
2	you consider to be factual inaccuracies in
3	this?
4	MR. KOBTHE; Hey, Jerry, this
5	might be a good time to break. That
6	question could take a long timfe to answer,
7	and it is a little a£ter 12i00.
8	MR. EVANSs That is fine with me.
9	MR. KOETHE: Do you want to take
10	a break for lunch?
11	MR. EVANS: No problem.
12	(A recess was taken.)
13	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Welcome back,
14	Dr. Ford. I hope you had a nice lunch.
15	When we left off, I was asking a
16	question about a paper from the Gallup
17	Organization entitled The Tobacco Industry
18	Summons Polls to the Witness Stand.
19	I had asked you a rather
20	open-ended question about factual errors in
21	this. Allow me, if I can, to speed things
22	up. I will just ask you, as a result of
23	this paper, which you said you did read at
24	some point in time, did you alter or change
25	any of the opinions you had formed up to
that time?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did anything in this paper cause /ou to re-interpret any of the polling data ^ou had looked at previously?
A. Well, I certainly, with regard to treading this paper, took another look at all d£ the polling data that I had reviewed,
4
tfhich was substantial, and I concluded that ny findings, in my opinion that I testified. :o, was, in fact, justified by it.
So, no, it did not. It did lead ne to review the primary evidence of -- once again, as I think any scholar would do, I determined my opinion had been accurate.
Q. We talked a little bit about this sarlier, but let me ask more specifically, in ;erms of the articles and news items on the lealth risks of tobacco, how can you . ; letermine what any member of the public understood or retained from a particular news story article? What sources would you go to Eor that?
A. Your question is how people might react to a particular story?
1	Q.	That ie correct. The public's
2	understanding or retention of the material,
3	not just the fact that the story appeared.
4	A.	I think that it is, as a general
5	proposition, very difficult to ascertain what
6	influence one particular story might have,
7	and certainly with regard to a specific one
8	particular story to a specific individual is
9	not the kind of analysis that I am
10	undertaking.
11	What I am trying to determine is
12	what was common knowledge in a community,
13	what information was available to people in
14	that community.
15	Q.	Are you going to testify at all
16	about the comprehension or understanding of
17	that material?
•18	A. Hell, my testimony will include,
19	you know, not only what information was
20	available to the public, but in various ways
21	that 1 can tell that the public as a whole,
22	opinions they held based on the total
23	information at their disposal. It is not
24	necessarily one particular article or one
25	particular piece of information. Doss that
inswer your question?
Q.	I am not sure. Could Z have the
inswer read back? I am sorry.
(The record was read by the ■eporter.)
q. (By Mr. Evans) Okay. So your estimony will include opinions that the iublic held. From that, will you make a ■oncluBion about their comprehension or inderstanding of material that was presented
o	them?	.
A. I -- the best way X can answer hat is I will certainly testify about what he public was aware of, what it knew, and I lay offer some testimony, as I have in the >ast, about not only what was common ;nowledge in the community but a little bit bout the public's evaluation of that mowledge in terms of whether or not they lecided to believe this or that was, in act, risky behavior.
I	don't know whether you could :all that comprehension of the artioles. I hink it is a reflection of what ie common :nowledge in the community. So it is
1	comprehension and evaluation of a wide
2	variety of information from a wide variety of
3	sources, all of which I am going to attetnpt
4	--or most of which I will attempt to
5	testify to some extent.
6	Q.	Have you done any studies of the
7	awareness levels of particular sub groups of e	the general public? Let me give you a
9	specific example. Have you done a study of
10	the awarenesB level of 15 year olds to the
11	issues of smoking and health?
12	A.	certainly I have seen data on the
13	awareness of different categories of people.
14	' Not usually so specific as simply 15 year
15	olds, but youth, say 9th to 12th grade, 15
16	to 18 or 14 to 18 is usually specified.
17	So, yes, I have seen some breakdown of the
18	population and to other sub groups, yes.
19	Q.	Do you also break down according
20	to time periods, say, what group of people
21	were aware in 1960 versus what a group of
22	people were aware in 1970?
23	A.	Certainly there will be -- there
24	has been ** I made some analysis of
25	responses to polling questions over time, and
hat would seem to fall in the general ategory embraced by your question.
0. Let's take the youth group and ascribe it as 14 to 18 year olds, which you we as an example of a way you had seen suth groups. Is it your opinion currently)
3	we sit here in the year 2000, that the
1	to 18 year-old group have a high level of rareness of the risk of cigarette smoking? A. Yes, it certainly is.
Q. Is it your opinion that, in 1975, id if you want to shift that a year or to, but let's take 1975 as a general sriod, that the group of people age 14 to » had a high level of awareness of the ske of cigarette smoking?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Is it your opinion that, in i960,
i	to 18 year olds would have had a high svel of awareness of the risks of cigarette
aoking?
A. Yes. There is certainly data, >rtainly data available that suggests that inior high and high school students in that ■a had a high level of -- they were well
1	informed on the medical findings, a very high
2	level of awareness of the risk that
3	scientific studies were associating with
4	cigarette smoking at that time.
5	Q.	So is it your testimony that a 15
6	year old who started smoking in 1960 was
7	making an informed choice to do so?
8	A.	It 1b certainly my testimony that
9	a 15 year old in 1960 had abundant
10	information about the health risk of smoking.
11	The health risk was aware of -- well,
12	categorically the community was aware of the
13	health risks of smoking, and any decision
14	that that individual made was not in the
15	absence of health risks, of the health risks
16	of smoking, even though they were only 15
17	years old.
ie	I would add to that that a 15
19	year old who was -- almost anyone who was
20	making that decision in 1960 was choosing to
21	do -- sales to minors were forbidden in most
22	states, so there was, 1 think, a strong
23	reason other than health risks to know that
24	they were making a decision that involved a
25	judgment on their part to sort of go against
what society considered had brought us along to what was considered. But certainly they were not making that decision in the absence of the awareness of the risks of smoking.
Q. That judgment they were making was an informed judgment, in your opinion?
A. in the sense that 1, as a historian, would use the word informed, they certainly had been informed of the health risks of smoking, yes.
q. And that is what you are here as, is as a historian; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q, Has it common knowledge in i960 what components of cigarette smoke had been classified as carcinogenic?
A. There had been widespread publicity about various ingredients in cigarettes that might be carcinogenic and about the results that was ongoing. There was also widespread publicity that the specific ingredients were embraced or included in the more sort of lay or non-chemist description of cigarette tars pnd that cigarette tars were being broken down and
1	analyzed by scientists in the search for
2	possible carcinogens. And some of these
3	specific substances had been identified and
4	publicized a great deal in the press as
5	these studies were underway.
6	Q. And that would fit your
7	understanding with the common level they were 6	publicized?
9	A. They were certainly issues that
10	the public was aware of.
11	Q. Was it common knowledge in 1960
12	what the ingredients, other than tobacco* in
13	a cigarette were?
14	A. There had been publicity
15	indicating what ingredients of cigarettes were
16	in at least at a general level that there
17	was some sort of moisturizing tobacco and
18	moisturizing agents. So there was a great
19	deal of publicity about that.
20	Q. If there was common knowledge as
21	far as the ingredients, other than tobacco in
22	cigarettes in I960, then I assume that it is
23	your opinion that that common knowledge
24	existed in 1970 as well?
25	A. Well, could you clarify, perhaps,
to help me clarify what you mean by "ingredient117
Q. Well, whether there were ingredients other than tobacco and, if 00, what were those ingredients other than tobacco in a cigarette, was that common knowledge?
A. I guess I would have to give a sort of multi-part answer to that. Certainly in this time period there was an unawareness that, based on the publicity -- well, there had been widespread publicity. I don't know that I have seen polling data on the level of this, but there was certainly widespread publicity that the information was broadly and publicly available that moisturizing agents were used in cigarettes. And, of course, there were menthol flavorings in the time period that we are talking about.
The other part of the answer would be, and I do want to be clear about it, I am not saying that the public can identify every possible, you know, chemical compound that might be in cigarette smoke.
I	know that would not be the case. But
1	there was a general knowledge that there were
2	lots of compounds in cigarette smoke, and
3	those were generally referred to in the lay
4	press as tars. And as a non-chemist myself*
5	that is about as far as I can even go into
6	analyzing that.
7	Q.	Was there a common knowledge of
8	what the term tar meant? Again( let's stick
9	with 1960.
10	A.	Well, there had been for a nuriber
11	of years a lot of publicity about the, you
12	know, product of burning of tobacco,
13	cigarette tobacco, and that tare were part of
14	the by-product of this process and were
15	included in cigarette smoke.
16	And at least in terms of
17	information that was disseminated to the
18	broader general public, this was the category
19	of materials which scientists were interested
20	in analyzing, the health effects of cigarette
21	tars.
22	Q.	Have you seen any studies or data
23	that suggests otherwise? Have you seen
24	studies or data from the 1960s or 70s that
25	suggests that the consumer has very little
knowledge about what cigarette tar is?
A. I would have to answer that by laying it would really depend on what you iccept as the definition of cigarette tar.
think there was a broad public inderBtanding that these are a number of rhemical compounds that are produced in the •roceBS of burning tobacco and that the >ublic was certainly aware by this time, you now, that many people felt and many people n the public health community as well that here should be the -- that the development f lower tar cigarettes would be a positive evelopment. It wouldn't be as good as topping smoking altogether, but that tar was - tar embodied within it a lot of the risky otentially dangerous material in cigarettes nd that levels of tar were worth knowing bout.
I	think that information was roadly disseminated to the public in the ime period you are asking about.
Q. Well, my question was: Can you ecall having seen any study or Information hat suggested that the public did not have
1	a high appreciation of what tar was?
2	A.	i may well. Z couldn't identify
3	a single source for it right now, seeing
4	information that would suggest that the
5	public couldn't give a really scientific or
6	chemical definition of tar, but that the
7	public understood that tar was a product of
8	cigarette smoke that was widely perceived by
9	health officials and many scientists as being
10	dangerous. I would say that information, in
11	its generic sense, was, in fact, broadly
12	available,
13	Z don't think I have seen
14	anything that really disputes that contention,
15	but I do think it is possible that certainly
16	the public didn't have an expert's
17	understanding of tar. And I may have seen
18	some comment to that effect.
19	Q.	He have talked about newspaper
20	articles and advertisements and such. Let me
21	just ask you some general questions about
22	your area of expertise. Are you an expert
23	in communications?
24	A.	I am a historian, and historians,
25	as part of their expertise, have to be aware
and familiar with their strengths and weaknesses of various forms of communication. But I am aware that there are at least, at some schools, academic disciplines and communications. Some of them are evolutions of schools and journalisms or additions to. And; no, I am not an expert in that. q. How about psychology?
A. Ho, I am not a psychologist.
Q. Consumer behavior?
A. Well, again, I think it Is important to point out that the role of the historian as to talk about what people do and decisions people make has historical kind of evidence, not the kind of evidence that perhapB a psychologist would get by sitting down and conducting a sort of clinical --in a clinical setting with a patient or that, as I understand it, consumer behavior experts would do by taking surveys and those sorts of things.
So any comment I would offer in those areas would be from the perspective of a historian, not claiming a special expertise in either psychology or consumer -- I forgot
1	exactly what you said, consumer something.
2	Q. Behavior.
3	A. Consumer behavior.
4	Q. How about marketing or
5	advertising, any expertise in there?
6	A, Certainly 2 am not an expert in
7	marketing. In advertising, advertising was
8	information that came into the public domain
9	that I certainly included in my analysis. I
10	tried to understand what *- how advertising
11	fit into the larger picture of information
12	that was available in the public, but I am
13	not an expert in advertising in that the
14	design of advertising caiopaigns, the
15	construction of specific advertisings would be
16	things that are not part of my expertise.
17	0. I take it you are not an expert
18	in medicine?
19	A. No.
20	Q, Do you claim to have any
21	expertise in addiction?
22	A. Well, again, a public awareness of
23	the habit forming or addictive or the fact
24	that the nature of cigarettes or the fact
25	that cigarettes can be difficult to quit,
towever you want to phrase that, ie the
ilstoncal dimension of that awareness is
tomething I have studied and would offer
jpinione on; however, I am hot neither a
aedical nor a psychiatric expert on
iddiction.	-
Q, Your opinions relating to iddiction would be confined to the public's iwareness of it; ie that correct?
A. That is correct, yes.
Q. I am looking for the disclosure.
A. My expert report, is that what rou are looking for?
Q. Yes. Thank you.
You mentioned seme magazines, and :he oneB you mentioned specifically by name tre Reader's Digest, Life, News Week, and rime; ie that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you studied the demographic >rofiles for the readership of those rt&g&zinee, in other words, what segments of ;he population read those or subscribe to
;hem?
A. I have not undertaken a systematic
1	study of that; although, I certainly do have
2	some information about the level of
3	circulation and the raw numbers of
4	circulation and probably some impressionistic
5	data from other sources about the kinds of
6	people in households that read those kinds of
7	magazines.
8	Q. Would you have information on the
9	readership among teenagers, for exarqple?
10	A. I don't recall having that
11	information, but I don't want to say
12	categorically that I don't have it at my
13	disposal. I don't recall it.
14	Q. Have you done any research on
15	what percentage of people who see a magazine
16	or see an article actually read the entire
17	article?
18	A. Again, other than to know from,
19	again, material that Z encounter in my
20	research that certainly some people look at
21	titles and don't read the article and others
22	do read the entire article, so knowing that
23	there is a difference, yes. But I don't
24	have precise data on that question.
25	Q. Have you ever conducted any
research into that distinction of someone just glancing at a headline versus reading an article?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Do you know or have you done any research on differences in reading habits between adolescents and adults?
A. Again, I have seen some information about that, but I have not conducted a systematic research of that question.
Q. Earlier I asked you about if you had broken down the general public into certain sub groups, and I mentioned specifically teenagers. Let me ask you a few other subcategories like that.
Have you considered what the common knowledge or the common appreciation of knowledge is to smokers versus non-smokers?
A. Certainly I have seen breakdowns dividing up the public into smokers and non*smokers, and that is a category 1 encountered in my research,
Q. Is this something you have seen
1	in polling data?
2	A.	I have seen it in polling data
3	and in other kinds of surveys, yes,
4	Q.	Any independent research on your
5	part in determining how a smoker might react
6	to information versus a non-smoker?
7	A.	Wellf again, I just need to be
8	clear with you. 1 think that certainly the
9	*- while as a general rule the same sort of
10	information, the same knowledge is available
11	to smokers and non-smokers. Z am certainly
12	aware that sometimes they make different
13	decisions about that, and, yes, I have
14	studied that to some extent.
15	I haven't gone out and done any
16	independent " as I think 1 Indicated earlier
17	in the deposition, I haven't done any other
18	polling and would not do that. But in using
19	the work of people who have broken that
20	down, I have evaluated that, yes,
21	Q.	I am especially curious to know
22	if you have done this considering some of
23	your other areas of expertise. Have you
24	broken the public down into regions of the
25	country like Southerners versus non-Southernere
Ln terms of their common knowledge?
A. I am trying to remember. I >elieve I -- yes, i have seen some data ibout region. I have seen some data about >ccupation, you know, as well, which has a tort of regional component to it.
Q. Again, is this polling data that rou have seen?
A. This is primarily, maybe not sxclusively, but primarily polling data that : am referring to.
Q. Related to geography, how about ;he public in tobacco producing states versus ion-tobacco producing states?
A. How about them with regard to rtiat?
Q. Had you done any studies or seen iny results of studies that suggest a lifferenee in the common knowledge of people /ho reside in tobacco producing states versus :hose who reside in other states?
A. Well, it actually has been one of :.he sort of findings of my research, is that lealth related -- that the related health riBks of smoking and the studies that are
1	appearing on those are usually discussed even
2	more in more frequency and greater detail in
3	tobacco producing and manufacturing areas or
4	in states where tobacco is economically
5	important. They get not less coverage, but,
6	if anything, more.
7	It gets so much coverage
8	everywhere, it is hard to say that, but it
9	is certainly --it certainly doesn't get any
10	less attention in those areas. And certain
11	types of stories are run even more frequently
12	in those areas than they do elsewhere.
13	Q,	What type of story would be run
14	more frequently?
15	A.	Well, for example, in South
16	Carolina and North Carolina newspapers, there
17	are stories in August of every year about
18	the opening of the tobacco markets. And
19	most of those stories, if they are coming at
20	a time when there has been a reasonably
21	recent study of some significance like an	.
22	American Cancer Society statistical study on
23	the health rates of smoking, will often
24	reference this latest information and raise
25	the issue of whether it will have an intact
on the tobacco market that year; whereas, if you are looking at a, say, Ohio or Detroit newspaper, there is probably not going to be that reference to the health risks of Bmoking.
Q. Ohio is a big tobacco producing state, isn't it?
A. I looked at some Ohio newspapers, and I don't recall seeing those types of stories. I may have missed them.
Q. Is it common knowledge among the	'
general public that filtered cigarettes are 9afer than non-filtered cigarettes?
A. I would have to say that there las been -- there was an abundance of publicity on that very issue about whether filtered cigarettes were, in fact, safer or :ould be made to make cigarettes safer, and ;here was a great deal of coverage and discussion over it. And there was really widespread disagreement among experts over whether that was the case.
Some people who were very much	.
Lnvolved in medical research believe that filters could be valuable. Again, not --
1	everybody would always state and did state
2	that it was better not to smoke at all, but
3	the Surgeon General commented on several
4	occasions in the 1950s that they had no
5	evidence that filters helped with regard to
6	the health risks. E. Collar Hammond of the
7	American Cancer Society was commented to that
8	effect as well, But there was a great deal
9	of discussion of that very issue, So it was
10	out there. But I don't believe that there
11	is evidence that that conclusion that you
12	stated was something that would be common
13	knowledge.
14	what you could say is that there
15	were people that were suggesting indeed their
16	filters were or could be, if they were
17	properly constructed, or constructed with that
18	end in mind.
19	Q.	You would not say the conclusion
20	that filtered cigarettes are safer than
21	non*filtered has entered the common knowledge;
22	is that correct?
23	A.	I would say that there is a great
24	deal of discussion in that question, and 1
25	am not sure there was a consensus on what
:he answer to it was.
Certainly that ie true in late L950s and into the 1960s, At some point the juestion of filters also becomes intertwined fith other issues about lower tar as well.
5o it becomes even more complicated.
Q. Let me ask you, in your opinion,
Ls there a consensus that cigarette smoking :an cause disease? Is there a consensus on ;hat?
A. Yes, there is.
Q. So the amount of information or ;he quality or amount of information on that .s different than the quality or amount of .nformation on the filter question?
A. I don't think necessarily that the :ey difference lies in amounts.
Q. Explain to me the difference,
A. It seems to me that there was a .ot of publicity about whether or not filter ;ips were of any value in reducing the lealth risks of smoking. And it is my recollection, based on going through the lata, that probably the preponderance of that evidence from medical and scientific people
1	was that there was no clear evidence that it
2	was -- that it did reduce the risks.
3	Certainly people like Ernest
4	Winder, who was one of the leading scientists
5	in the cancer and lung research, argued
6	repeatedly that he believed filters could be
7	constructed that would, in fact, help. And
8	people were, I think, aware of this.
9	But I don't believe that there
10	was a belief among the public that 1 could
11	argue from.
12	Q.	Is the reason that you don't
13	conclude there is a consensus because you
14	encountered information on both sides of the
15	issue?
16	A.	Hell, it is not -- no. It is
17	certainly not simply that. 1 think, if
18	anything, over time there emerges the notion
19	that filters in and of themselves don't
20	reduce the risk of disease. And that was
21	not -- you were asking the question in the
22	other direction, and I was having to say -•
23	having to give a different answer. The
24	public was certainly aware there were people
25	out there maintaining that filters either did
or could reduce the risk, but that waB not something that they believed on a widespread basis.
Q. Is it common knowledge among the general public that low tar, low nicotine cigarettes, are safer than regular cigarettes?
A. Once again, there was really, since -- and most of the period I studied and certainly from the mid 1950s on, a great deal of discussion of this issue that since potentially harmful ingredients in cigarettes were often believed to be in cigarette tars, that low tar cigarettes would be an improvement. They would not protect your health in a way that not smoking can help it, but that it would be better if you were going to smoke, it would be better to consume lesB tar rather than more.
So, yes, there was a great deal of public discussion about that. And from the very beginning, people pointed out that this, you know -- certainly initially it was a logical proposition. It hadn't necessarily been sustained. At least in the public information, Ernest Winder maintained that it
1	would probably be true, but he admitted it
2	hadn’t been substantiated by research, and
3	you can easily undermine the value of low
4	tar if you smoked more of low tar
5	cigarettes, that it was their consumption of
6	tar that mattered, not how much was in any
7	given cigarettes.
8	So all of that information was
9	abundantly discussed in the press in the late
10	1950s and 1960s.
11	Q.	Was a consensus reached?
12	mr. KOETHEs 1 am going to object
13	to the form of that question.
14	THE WITNESS; I think the public
15	was broadly aware of the fact that many
16	people believe that reducing your tar intake
17	was, while it might be -- it might
18	contribute to reducing health risks# and
19	eventually that position is taken, I believe,
20	by official government entities.
21	So, yes, that was knowledge that
22	was out there and was broadly available to
23	the public.
24	q.	(By Hr. Evans) Go if I heard
25	your answer correctly, many people believed
:hat many people were aware that low tar cigarettes might be safer?
A. I didn't mean to -- I don't think :hat is exactly what I said.
Q. Okay, Do you know what the term compensation means in the context of low tar cigarettes?
A. Again, with the caveat that I lon't claim to be a medical or scientific ixpert on that, I do understand that if you nnoke low tar cigarettes, but smoke more than rou would have otherwise or otherwise have inhaled more deeply, if things like -- there ire a variety of ways in which people can ;ompensate for low tar. And if they do :hat, they have -- they are likely to negate my reduction of risks that might be obtained from simply smoking low tar cigarettes,
Q. This is a notion that condensation " fould negate any reduction of risks. Is ;hat common knowledge, in your opinion?
A. Yes. It was widely discussed, lot necessarily using that terminology, as sarly as the mid to late 1950s and continued :o be discussed through the 1960s. Again,
1	Ernest winder, who was one of the first
2	people to sort of bring this up, he was a
3	research scientist, cancer specialist. He
4	constantly argued for the value of a lower
5	tar value was quick to point out that people
6	couldn't take a cigarette that had half as
7	much tar as another and smoke twice as many
8	of them and be better off. So I think that
9	argument was widely in the press, widely
10	disseminated, permeated the media coverage of
11	that issue throughout this period, yes.
12	Q.	Do you have a general opinion ae
13	to what point in time you could describe it
14	aB having entered the common knowledge?
15	A.	Well, there certainly had been
16	some knowledge of it from almost the very
17	beginnings of the cigarette. One person as is	far back as the 1890s was recommending
19	punching a hole in the filter of cigarettes
20	to let more air in to dilute the smoke
21	because that reduced the intake of what the
22	scientists believed were the hazardous
23	ingredients of cigarettes.
24	So there certainly has been I
25	don't want to imply that there had not been
jome concern about that for a very long :ime, but certainly beginning in the mid .950b, I don't want to be off the top of my lead have to pick a particular year, as :here began to be discussions of the >ossibility of reducing the amount of tar in :igarettes as a way of reducing the health risks, though certainly not eliminating them, 'hat issue got widespread coverage, and >eople who were aware -- the awareness of hat was just as broad as the awareness of he health risks because they were contained n the same stories often.
Q. Do you know the procedure for letermining and reporting what tar and kicotine levels of cigarettes are?
A. Could you be more specific?
Q. Well, do you know anything about iow you come up with the numbers that are eported as levels of tar and nicotine for :igarettes?
A. Well, again, 1 am not a technical ixpert on this, but I am certainly aware hat different entities have attempted to do his, and it has proven somewhat difficult to
1	do. Private entities did it for magazines
2	like consumer Reports and Reader's Digest.
3	The FTC, I believe it was, attempted to do
4	it to determine levels that could be made
5	known to the public.
6	But it generally involves the test
7	smoking of cigarettes by machines and
8	measuring quantities from that. And that
9	technique was described in detail in
10	newspaper and magazine articles as during the
11	period that I have been discussing.
12	Q.	Well, would you consider that
13	method of determining tar and nicotine levels
14	to be common knowledge?
IB	A. There was certainly a substantial
16	amount of publicity as to how that wae done.
17	Q,	Enough publicity that you would
18	conclude that that is in the common
19	knowledge?
20	A.	It was certainly information that
21	was distributed widely in the public domain.
22	Q.	Is it likely, if I were to walk
23	out on the street and find somebody, that I
24	would find somebody who could tell me how
25	tar and nicotine levels are measured in
cigarettes?
A. Again, that would be speculation on my part about what kind of answers you would get.
Q. But -A. I could say that information was certainly readily available in the 1960s in newspaper articles discussing it.
Q. But if I understand it correctly, sir, you are not only stating that the information was available, but also giving the opinion that is common knowledge; is that correct?
A. I am certainly Baying that the information was distributed in the kinds of --in magazines and newspapers that kind of the broad general public read on a regular basis. And I think that exactly what sort of detail people would be able to give, if they were questioned in some detail about it, is another issue; but it was not a process that it was in any way not explained to the public by the mass media. And that is what
I	am saying.
0. Have vou seen any studies or
1	scholarly articles on the subject of the
2	public's awareness of tar and nicotine levels
3	in cigarettes? Again, 1 stress I am not
4	talking about the public's awareness of tar
5	in particular -- I said that wrong. I am
6	not talking about studies of the tar and
7	nicotine levels in cigarettes. I am talking
8	about studies of the public's awareness.
9	A. I have certainly seen some data
10	asking certain kinds of questions about those
11	issues and reporting public responses, and I
12	am not Bure that I could cite them to you
13	off the top of my head, but I think that I
14	may well have seen some information like
15	that? but I couldn't tell you off the top of
16	my head where I have seen it.
17	Q. But you believe this is data that
18	supports your opinions about the common
19	knowledge?
20	A. Certainly I think that there is
21	nothing inconsistent in that data with my
22	opinion that low tar cigarettes and their
23	potential value as reduction in health risks
24	was widely discussed in the public in the
25	late 1950s and 1960s. -
Q. If someone said in 1972 that there is low awareness of tar and nicotine levels in cigarettes and no comprehension of what those numbers mean, you would disagree	1
with that statement, I take it?
A. Well, let me try to explain that.
I certainly think that, you know, the public is not going to have an expert's level of knowledge if they are not going to be able to maybe tell you exactly what some number regarding tar and nicotine means. What I	.
think the public knows is that there exists a substantial volume of information out there suggesting -- not everybody agrees with it, but suggesting that lower tar cigarettes may be -- may reduce the health risks of smoking to some degreef and that the measures of them can allow you to distinguish low tar brands from higher tar brands. That is the information that Z believe the public is widely available in.
I think you can ask the public all sorts of more technical questions. And
I	don't know that I have the information at my disposal to know how much of that kind of
1	information; but m terms of the sort of
2	basic core information, is it conceivable
3	that low tar cigarettes can reduce health
4	risks if you don't smoke more of them or
5	smoke them differently than you smoked other
6	cigarettes? Yes, there is abundant
7	information out there if they are aware of
8	it, and that they knew that the numbers
9	which they -• when they had numbers available
10	to them, from whatever source, will enable
11	them to identify the'low tar brands and
12	compare tar levels across cigarettes as they
13	were measured by whatever entity did that
14	measure.
15	Q. So a study from the 70s that said
16	the public has no comprehension of what tar
17	and nicotine levels means, that would be • 18	inconsistent with what you have learned?
19	A. Hell, again, it depends on what
20	you would mean by comprehension. I think
21	that there was certainly probably aspects
22	about tar levels, you know, that the public
23	was not going to be able to understand or
24	explain very well; but I think those basic
25	propositions that I have stated a couple of
times now the public was aware of and had good information about.
Q. Did the tar and nicotine numbers that are published regarding smoke, do they measure the content of the cigarettes or the delivery of the cigarettes?
A. It is certainly my recollection that those figures were determined by -- in most of the instances that I am aware of, which was research that was done for Reader's Digest, for Consumer Reports* and by a FTC approved process, involved, you know, actually having machines smoke the cigarettes and collect the tars.
Q. So does the distinction of my question have any meaning to you, the content of the cigarette versus the delivery of the cigarette?
A. I am not sure that it does.
That is why I tried to give you the answer as I understood it without using either one of those terms to avoid confusion.
Q. Then I take it you wouldn't be of the opinion that it is common knowledge, the distinction between tar content or tar
1	delivery of a cigarette?
2	A.	Certainly as you have just stated
3	it there, I am not sure that that is a way
4	in which it was generally expressed in the
5	period that I have done the most research
6	on.
7	What was, I think, known, and as
8	I already indicated, that an individual
9	person's actual intake of tar depended on how
10	many cigarettes they smoke, how deeply they
11	inhaled, if, whether they did anything, they
12	altered the cigarette in any way to prevent
13	more air from getting in or something like
14	that.
15	They were certainly aware that
16	there were ways that any potential advantages
17	of low tar cigarettes could be circumvented, IB	that was widely publicized. I am just not
19	as familiar with the terminology that you
20	seem to be using here.
21	Q.	I believe you stated earlier that
22	you had not considered any documents or
23	reports generated by tobacco manufacturers
24	that were not made available to the public;
25	is that correct?
A. That is, co the best of my recollection, correct, yes.
Q. So ie it true that you have not considered any documents that might have described the way that a tobacco manufacturer was attempting to counter information on the ill effects of tobacco?
A. Again, as 1 said, the information that I have considered was information that came into the public domain. Some of these Btories or reports included analyses written by journalists for the most part of at least what their perception of the industry's response was. But I have not reviewed any internal -- any kind of coiqpany documents and, therefore, on the basis of my opinion,
I	-*■ and, therefore, I have not -- unless the document came into the public domain or was written about in the public domain, it was not part of the body of information I used to base my opinions on.
0. You don't consider that to be important information that you needed to form the opinions yourself?
A, My opinion, my area of my
1	research, was on common knowledge, what the
2	public is aware of. You know, almost by
3	definition I am interested in the information
4	that reaches the public, the result of the
5	process, not any process that produces that
6	information.
7	Q.	Let me ask you about an ad that
8	did appear that was disseminated to the
9	public, and ad by the Tobacco Institute which
10	bore the headline The Question About Smoking
11	and Health Is Still a Question.
12	Do you recall having seen an
13	advertisement like that?
14	A.	Can I see it? I would say that,
15	yeB, I do believe I have seen this
16	advertisement, or certainly -- this doesn't
17	have a date but not an exact source where it
18	reached the public domain. It says reprinted
19	from the Washington Post. I believe I have
20	either seen this or seen one very close,
21	very similar to it.
22	Q.	If I could have that. I just
23	want to ask you a question about that
24	headline, The Question About Smoking and
25	Health Is Still A Question. Let me
represent to you the date that this document indicates that this was published was December 1, 1970.
As of 1970, do you agree or disagree with the sentence that is the headline of this ad, The Question About Smoking and Health Is Still A Question?
MR. KOETHB; I am going to object to that question. Again, I guess -- I am going to object if you are asking for an expert opinion from this witness on the meaning of that statement.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Well, I am going to ask my question because I think it seems to me to pertain to your area of expertise, Do you agree or disagree with the headline that reads The Question About Smoking and Health Is Still A Question?
A. Well, again, I will have to answer it with the caveat that I am not a medical doctor or a scientist who could answer a question about causation one way or the other.
What I can say is that certainly at that point the opinion expressed in that
1	headline is not the -- it is unusual in the
2	public media. But I think if you look at
3	the substance of it beneath the headline, it
4	maintains the position, which was, in fact,
5	reported fairly regular, that in -- and I
6	believe by some people other than the Tobacco
7	institute -- that the cause and effect
8	mechanism between smoking and disease had not
9	been discovered, that statistical data
10	overwhelmingly showed that there were
11	significant health risks of smoking, that
12	smoking shortened lives; but they made a
13	distinction between health risks and
14	causation,
15	And that was something that was
16	well publicized, yes. But I have not -- I
I
17	can't medically or scientifically say that,
18	whether I agree or not --
19	Q. Whether you would agree or not.
20	A.	Whether I agree or disagree with
21	the expertise. But it was not -- it was an
22	unusual -- it was ** and, of course, it
23	wasn't a headline as an advertisement.
24	Q.	Do you recall in your survey of
25	articles and news reports, coverage of the
publications of the 1979 Surgeon General's	j
report?
A. I recall coverage of it. I don't recall a great deal of specifics about the coverage of it. The focus of my research has ?een on 1969 and earlier, and I have done some research, as I said, in the 1970s and JOs, and I recalled some publicity, fairly jonsiderable publicity, not about that report,
>ut about the activities of Joe Calfono in ^he care of the Secretary of Health,
3ducation, and Welfare in this period of '76 ind 79.
So, yes, I do recall that there /as a lot of publicity. The details of it [ don't recall as readily off the top of my lead.
{A recess was taken.)
THE WITNESS: The defense counsel jent me one deposition in addition to those [ mentioned earlier. It was the deposition >f Kathy Bates, I believe.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) All right. Dr.
J'ord, from our earlier discussion of tobacco Industry documents that you had seen or not
1	seen, you made clear you had seen those
2	things that may have been disseminated to the
3	public but not internal documents, have I
4	characterized that correctly?
5	A. Yes, essentially.
6	Q. Is it true then that you are not
7	going to testify one way or the other on
8	whether the defendants in this case tried to
9	influence or shape common knowledge?
10	A, Well, my testimony will be about
11	common knowledge and how the information that
12	came into the public domain did shape public
13	awareness and common knowledge. And since
14	some of the information that came into the
15	public domain did, in fact, come from the
16	companies, I couldn't agree with the
17	proposition as you stated it.
18	Q. So to the extent that publicly
19	available documents from tobacco companies may
20	have shaped the public knowledge, you will ,
21	testify as to that; correct?
22	A. Yes, that is correct.
23	Q. But if there were internal
24	documents that discussed attempts, successful
25	or unsuccessful, attempts to influence or
shape common knowledge, you won't be discussing those; ie that correct?
A, I could only discuss what actually :ame into the public domain and what public awareness and response was.
0. Did you consider the effect of cigarette advertising in formulating your opinions on common knowledge?
A. Cigarette advertising was Information that was in the public domain, md it was included in the material that I reviewed, yes.
Q. when you reviewed articles in magazines, for example, did you also take Into consideration how many cigarette idvertisements were in that given issue of ;hat magazine?
A. Yes. As we looked, as we tearched for articles and other information,
?e tried to be aware -- consider advertising hat were in those same publications.
Q. So this would be an instance of /here you looked at the entire magazine as >pposed to those occasions where one of your ■esearch assistants merely copied the article;
1	correct?
2	A. That ie correct. That is
3	correct.
4	Q. Is it reasonable to conclude, Dr.
5	Ford, that the defendants in this case had
6	access to any information that the general
7	public had access to?
8	A. Yes. I think that is — my
9	definition was public information. Cigarette
10	manufacturers had information to public
11	information just as everybody else did.
12	Q. Would you conclude, therefore,
13	that they were aware of the risks of
14	cigarette smoking at least at the same time
15	as the general public was aware of those
16	concerns?
17	A. Again, as you state in your same
18	question, all of the information that I have
19	evaluated came into the public domain. And
20	while I don't have *• as I indicated, I
21	haven't attempted to look inside the
22	companies, but certainly it was out there.
23	It was public information. It was knowledge
24	that the companies had access to, yes.
25	Q. Do you believe that the defendant
cigarette companies and the executives had greater or more sophisticated knowledge regarding cigarettes in general than the average citizen would?
A. That wouldn't be a question I could answer based on the research that I have done.
Q. You said earlier, I believe, that there is now a consensus in the general public that cigarette smoking causes disease.
A. I don't recall actually whether I said exactly that or not, but 1 would certainly agree with the proposition that the public is well aware now and has been for a very long time that there are significant health risks of smoking which include life threatening, life shortening diseases,
Q. At what point in time should the defendant cigarette companies have recognized the consensus that cigarette smoking causes disease?
A. I don't -- again, I don't know that I can answer that question as you phrased it because it would call on me to speculate about people who I haven't
1	researched; but certainly there has long
2	been, really from the moment that cigarettes
3	began, mass production, as we talked about
4	this morning, of widespread information to
5	the general public that they were a health
6	hazard and shortened life.
7	Some of the specific nature of
8	that information has evolved over time, but
9	it long has been out there. And certainly
10	cigarette makers have had access to that
11	information.
12	Q, well, if we charge a member of
13	the general public with knowledge that
14	cigarette smoking causes disease at a certain
15	point in time, shouldn't we at least at that
16	point in time also charge the cigarette
17	manufacturers with that same knowledge?
18	MR. KOETHEs Object to the form
19	of the question.
20	THE WITNESSj Well, I am
21	certainly saying that cigarette manufacturers
22	are part of the general public, and the
23	general public has been aware of this health
24	risk, and that they would be included in my
25	statement that the health risks of cigarette
smoking were well known.
Q.	(By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, if the
president of a tobacco company gave testimony in 1980 that cigarettes are not injurious to health, would that testimony be at odds with common knowledge?
A. If that occurred, that would, in fact, in my opinion, be at odds with common knowledge of the health risks of smoking. There might be details in that testimony that could explain that difference, but it would, as simply as you stated it, appear to be at odds with the fact that by that time the health risks of smoking were certainly very widely known.
Q. Well, could there have been, in 1980, an honest disagreement or an honest difference of opinion on that as far as being injurious -A. I think you might be asking for a scientific or medical conclusion that is beyond my expertise, as I understand the question.
Q. Let me show you an article and have the court reporter mark this, please.
1	{Plaintiff's Exhibit*10 was marked
2	for identification.)
3	Q.	(By Mr. Evans) I will ask you
4	to take the time you need to look this over,
5	but I do want to aek you if you are
6	familiar with this article.
7	A.	What was the question?
8	Q,	Are you familiar with this
9	article?
10	A.	Yes, I have seen it. I am
11	familiar with it.
12	Q.	Let me just state for the record
13	this is a copy of an article from the
14	Columbia Journalism Review dated summer 1963.
15	The headline is Smoking and News, Coverage of
16	a Decade of Controversy.
17	In the italicized subheading, it
18	says, it poses the question, Has American
19	Journalism given a full, fair, and
20	intelligent account of the complex debate
21	over the effects of smoking on health. Have
22	I read that correctly?
23	A.	Yes.
24	Q.	This article gives, basically, an
25	analysis of news coverage between 1953 and
1963, and it does come to some conclusions.
I	would like you to turn to the last page of the article, the last column states, Conclusions, and about halfway down it says, To the questions posed at the begin of this article, the answers would appear to be, and then it says No, 1.
Would you read the paragraph marked No. 1 there?
A. The beginning coverage?
Q. Yes.
A. Coverage has been sufficiently fragmented, uneven and affected by publicity efforts on both sides to cause confusion, bn important place for clarifying confusing needs, the editorial page, has been little used. Only a few individual organizations ^ave come close to giving the issue with the fcind of in-depth accounting that would seem to be owed the public. Here journalism has Eailed to assume the kind of initiative that it has shown in many other issues of public lealth,
Q. Let me ask you, Dr. Ford, based :>n your research and the opinions are you
1	offering today, would you disagree with the
2	conclusions reached in this article?
3	A.	I would certainly disagree with
4	the one I just read, yes.
5	Q.	Would you agree that an analysis
6	done in 1963 of the period '53 to '63 is a
7	more contemporaneous review than one
6	undertaken in the 1990s?
9	A. Yes, it certainly was donef and
10	this one was done in the 1960s, certainly.
11	Q.	1 would like to show you another
12	article and have the reporter mark this,
13	please.
14	(Plaintiff's Exhibit-11 was marked
15	for identification.)
16	Q.	(By Mr, Evans) Let me state for
17	the record, this is a book entitled
18	Cigarettes, What the Warning Label Doesn't
19	Tell You, It is subtitled The First
20	comprehensive Guide to the Health Consequences
21	of Smoking. The copyright date is 1996.
22	And I have copied through the forward of
23	this text rather than bringing the entire
24	book.
25	First of all, let me ask you if
you are familiar with this book.
a. To the best of my recollection, I have not seen it.
Q. Are you familiar with the American Council on Science and Health?
A. Yea, I am. X don't have -- I can't give you a great deal of information about it, but I believe that it is an organization, maybe even a for-profit organization, in which a person who has served as an expert for plaintiffs in other similar cases plays a large role; but Z don't know a great deal to tell you about it.
Q. Do you have an opinion that the American Council on Science and Health is in any way aligned with the plaintiff's bar# so to speak?
A. All X know is that Elizabeth Whelan has testified for the plaintiffs in cases, but I wouldn't make that statement in fact.
Q. I would just like to refer you to some language on page Roman Numeral VIII in t-hfi forward.
1	A. I am on Roman Numeral VIII.
2	Q. Read from the second sentence at
3	the top of this page.
4	A. ACSH believes that in 1996,
5	American smokers and non-smokers alike have
6	the most cursory understanding of the extent
7	and magnitude of the health risks associated
8	with cigarette smoking as compared with other
9	alleged health risks in the environment.
10	Q. Let me ask you, based on your
11	research and the opinions you are offering
12	today, would you disagree with the conclusion
13	or the statement in the forward to this text
14	that you just read?	*
15	A. Based on the information I have
16	here, I strongly disagree in it. In 1996,
17	Americans are not overaware of it, but
18	overwhelmingly believe in the 97 percent that
19	cigarette causes lung cancer and that lung
20	cancer can kill you. Those are the
21	significant and pertinent pieces of
22	information, and I think the public is
23	extraordinarily well informed about them.
24	Q. And this ie not a book you have
25	reviewed or plan to rely on for the
testimony you are giving in this case; is that correct?
A. I have not reviewed it, and it certainly doesn't seem like one I would rely on. I may review it, however, since you have called it to my attention.
MR. EVANS: I think I am juet about finished. If you can, give me a two-minute break to look over my notes.
MR. KOETHE: Sure.
THE WITNESS* Can I ask counsel a question about one of my answers? Zs that permitted?
MR. EVANSi The simple answer to that is no, but I don't want to -THE WITNESS: Can I clarify? 1 think that Q. (By Mr. Evans) Please, if there is any answer you want to add to or clarify in any way, you certainly may do that,
A. I may have answered this accurately already. I believe you asked me early in the questioning today if the number of hours I gave you that I worked in 1999 included any case I consulted with or just
1	the two trials that I was involved in, and
2	the answer I intended to give was yes, the
3	figure I gave you included everything. And
4	I got concerned that maybe that was not the
5	answer I gave. If it is, my previous answer
6	was accurate. But the fact is that everything
7	was embraced in that figure I gave you.
8	Q.	I appreciate that clarification.
9	I think that may have been the way you
10	answered it.
11	A.	Okay.
12	Q.	Let me just follow up by saying
13	you had given me a total estimation of about
14	350 hours of work done for 1999; is that
15	correct?
16	A.	Between 300 and 350, and that
17	would embrace both Ingle and Gilboy and any
18	other cases that I consulted with.
19	Q.	So that would be the total period
20	of work done?
21	A.	That would be the total period of
22	work done.
23	Q.	Thank you for clarifying that.
24	(A recess was taken.)
25	MR. EVANS I All right. I have
no further questions for you, Dr. Ford. I appreciate your time. It was a pleasure to meet you and speak with you.
MR. SINGLETON; We have no questions.
MR. KOETHE: No questions here
either.
(Deposition concluded.)
1	STATE OF GEORGIA!
2	COUNTY OF PULTON:
3	I hereby certify that the foregoing
4	transcript was reported, as stated in the
5	caption, and the questions and answers
6	thereto were reduced to typewriting under my
7	direction; that the foregoing pages represent
8	a true, complete, and correct transcript of
9	the evidence given upon said hearing, and X
10	further certify that I am not of kin or
11	counsel to the parties in the case; am not
12	in the employ of counsel for any of said
13	parties; nor am I in anywise interested in
14	the result of said case.
15	.
16	.
17	.
18	.
19	.
20	.
21	.
22	.
23	.
24	.
25	.
Disclosure Pursuant to Q.C.G.A. 9-11-28
(d) !
The party taking this deposition will receive the original and one copy based on our standard and customary per page charges. Copies to other parties will be furnished based on our standard and customary per page charges. Incidental direct expenses of production may be added to either party where applicable. Our customary appearance fee will be charged to the party taking this deposition.
ALEXANDER J. GALLO, CCR-B-1332 My commission expires on the 17th day of March, 2001.
1	CAPTION
2	The Deposition of Lacy K. Ford,
3	Ph.D., taken in the matter, on the date, and
4	at the time and place set out on the title
5	page hereof.
6	It was requested that the deposition
7	be taken by the reporter and that same be
8	reduced to typewritten form.
9	It was agreed by and between counsel
10	and the parties that the Deponent will read
11	and sign the transcript of said deposition.
12	.
13	.
14	.
15	.
16	.
17	.
IB	.
19	.
20	. '
21	.
22	.
23	.
24	■
25	.
CERTIFICATE
STATE OF	•
COUNTY/CITY OF	:
Before me, this day, personally appeared, Lacy K. Ford, Ph.D., who, being duly sworn, states that the foregoing transcript of his/her Deposition, taken in the matter, on the date, and at the time and place set out on the title page hereof, constitutes a true and accurate transcript of said deposition.
Lacy K. Ford, Ph.D.
SUBSCRIBED and SWORN to before me this day of	, 2000 in the
jurisdiction aforesaid.
My Commission Expires Notary Public
1	DEPOSITION ERRATA SHEET
2	.
3	RE:	Alexander Gallo & Associates
4	File No.	1062
5	Case Caption: Little v Brown & Williamson
6	Deponent;	Lacy K. Ford, Ph.D.
7	Deposition Date: March 24, 2000
8	.
9	To the Reportert
10	I have read the entire transcript of my
11	Deposition taken in the captioned matter or
12	the same has been read to me. I request
13	that the following changes be entered upon
14	the record for the reasons indicated. X
15	have signed my name to the Errata Sheet and
16	the appropriate Certificate and authorize you
17	to attach both to the original transcript.
18	.
19	Page No,/Line No. Reasoni
20	_;_
21	__
22	__
23	_,_ _
24	______________
25	_
• ■
SIGNATURE s	DATEl_
Lacy K. Ford, Ph.D.

AS'



*

in

14




































































3D

*





i





cu ri i
a
I
!


I


CR


me


o
fR

j r iH


























































