DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA #99-CV-02496
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
Plaintiff,	)
)
vs.	)
)
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et ai, )
Defendants.	)
_)
VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION of ALLAN M. BRANDT, Ph.D, called as a witness by and on behalf of the Defendant, Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, before P.
Jodi Ohnemus, Notary Public, Certified Shorthand Reporter, Certified Realtime Reporter, and Registered Merit Reporter, within and for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, at the offices of G&M Court Reporters, 42 Chauncy Street, Boston, Massachusetts, on Thursday, 15 August, 2002, commencing at 9 a.m.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE BY: Stephen Brody, Esq.
Tobacco Litigation Team 1331 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Suite 1150
Washington, DC 20044
KIRKLAND & ELLIS BY: Douglas G. Smith, Esq.
200 East Randolph Drive Chicago, IL 60601
for Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.
(VIA TELEPHONE) HUNTON & WILLIAMS BY: Cindy Gantnier, Esq.
951 Byrd Street Richmond, VA 23219 for Philip Morris, Inc.
ALSO PRESENT:
Paul Duchaney, Videographer
INDEX
TESTIMONY OF:	PAGE
ALLAN M. BRANDT, Ph.D.
(BY MR. SMITH)	7
EXHIBITS EXHIBITS DESCRIPTION PAGE
(There were no exhibits marked.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: We are now recording and on the record. My name is Paul Duchaney. I am a Legal Video Specialist for National Video Reporters. Our business address is 58 Batterymarch Street in Boston, Massachusetts. Today is August 15th, 2002, and the time is 8:58. This the deposition of Allan Brandt in the matter of United States of America versus Philip Morris Inc., et. al. in US District Court for the District of Columbia, 99-CV-02496.
This deposition is being taken at 42 Chauncy Street, in Boston, Massachusetts, on behalf of the Defendant. The court reporter is Jodi Ohnemus. Counsel will state their appearances, and the court reporter will administer the oath.
MR. BRODY: Stephen Brody, for the United States.
MR. SMITH: Doug Smith, for Brown & Williamson.
MS. GANTNIER: Cindy Gantnier with Hunton & Williams, for Philip Morris.
ALLAN M. BRANDT, Ph.D., having first been duly sworn,
testified as follows to interrogatories BY MR. SMITH:
Q. Good morning, Professor Brandt. Have you ever worked as an expert witness before in any prior litigation?
A. No, I have not.
Q. This is the first lawsuit in which you have been retained to work as an expert?
A. Lawyers have called me in other lawsuits, and I’ve talked to them about cases, but I’ve never really had the role of an expert witness in any case prior to this.
Q. And you haven’t testified as an expert in any prior litigation?
A. I've never testified as an expert in any litigation.
Q. And that includes deposition testimony?
A. I've never given a deposition before this morning.
Q. Okay. Have you personally been involved in any litigation in any capacity?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. Have the government lawyers explained to you what happens during the deposition?
A. Yes, they have.
Q. Okay. So, you understand I'm going to ask you a series of questions, right?
A. I understand you will be questioning me.
Q. And if you don’t understand any of my questions, you’ll let me know, right?
A. I will.
Q. Okay. You submitted an expert report in this case, true?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Have you come up with any new opinions since you submitted your expert report?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you done all of the work necessary for you to offer expert opinions in this case?
A. I have.
Q. All of the opinions you plan to offer today are contained in your expert report?
A. I assume that's true, although I may be able to expound or expand on certain aspects of the report, which were obviously limited by the length and scope of the report.
Q. But all of your basic opinions are contained in the report, is that true?
A. Yes, they are.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any of the deposition testimony in this case?
A. No, I haven't seen any of the depositions in the
case.
Q. You haven’t reviewed any of the depositions of tobacco company witnesses in this case?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. You haven't reviewed any of the testimony by any of the government’s witnesses in this case?
A. I have not.
Q. All right. Have you reviewed the Complaint in this case?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Okay. When was that?
A. Mr. Brody provided me with the Complaint in January or February of this year, and I read it at that time.
Q. Okay. Do you still have a copy of the Complaint? A. I could have a copy.
Q. Okay. Are there any documents that we haven’t gotten a copy of — did you make any —
A. I see you have the Complaint.
anything like that?
A. I did not make notes on it.
Q. Okay. Did you make notes contemporaneously with reviewing the Complaint?
A. I didn’t make notes at that time.
Q. Have you made any notes in connection with your work on this case?
A. Well, yes, I have made notes.
Q. And do you still have copies of those notes?
A. Yes. I — some of them, I still have some notes.
I don't preserve — as they move through — drafts or other things. But I have some notes I have made, of course.
Q. Okay. Could you preserve those and perhaps give them to Mr. Brody to give to us?
A. Sure.
Q. Okay. But there are some notes that you've discarded during the course of your work?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes. There are some materials that are working drafts, things like that, that, obviously, in the course of the process of preparing a detailed expert statement like that, I have discarded.
any prior drafts of your expert report?
A. It’s possible I have a prior draft. But given the way I was working on it on the computer, changes would be entered onto the next draft, and often the previous draft, then, was discarded.
Q. Okay. Are there any documents other than the Complaint that you’ve reviewed that, to your knowledge, have not been provided to us?
A. No, I think all the documents that I’ve reviewed in preparation of the expert statement were provided to you.
Q. Okay. And what efforts have you taken to make sure that’s the case?
A. Well, I was very scrupulous in making sure that all of the material cited in the expert report was copied, sent to Mr. Brody at the Department of Justice for forwarding to Defendants, and, then, in addition to that, there were some additional materials I consulted in preparing the expert statement, which were also provided.
Q. Okay. And did Mr. Brody tell you that he turned over all those materials to the tobacco companies?
A. I have assumed that he did so.
any of the pleadings in this case?
A. The pleadings? I'm not sure I understand what that is.
Q. Have you submitted any kind of written work that's been submitted to the court in this case other than a copy of the Complaint?
A. No, the only — well, the only thing I read was
the Complaint and appendix to the Complaint. And I believe that's all the legal matter associated with the case that I've read.
Q. Okay.
A. I did look the case up on the web and looked at newspaper articles about the case and things like that.
Q. But the Complaint's the only formal legal document that's been submitted to the court that you've reviewed in this case?
A. The only other thing, I reviewed the expert reports of several Defendants' experts.
Q. Which expert reports did you review?
A. I reviewed Ludmerer, English, Wilson, and I did a cursory review — I’m not sure of the guy’s name — I think it's Thomas. Is that the toxicologist for Defendants?
Q. Yeah. And when were you provided a copy of those expert reports?
A. Around the same time that I was provided the Complaint.
Q. That would have been January or February of this —
A. January or February of 2002.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any documents that were specifically produced by the parties in this case?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Documents produced by the parties in the case?
Q. Yes.
A. Meaning documents produced by the tobacco industry historically --
Q. Well -
A. — historically?
Q. Well, let me clarify my question. You understand in litigation the parties ask for documents from each side, and then they exchange documents. Do you understand that generally?
A. Yes. Of course, I understand that there's a process of discovery in which documents are exchanged.
been turned over as part of the process of discovery in this case?
A. Yes. Mr. Brody shared with me documents that were in the possession of the Department of Justice that were relevant to the case, some of which I used in preparation of my expert statement.
Q. All right. And when did Mr. Brody send you the documents that you used?
A. Shortly after I agreed to become an expert for the Department of Justice.
Q. Have you made any requests for any additional documents from Mr. Brody?
A. No. There was just one discussion, and I received a — I received those documents from him. That was —
Q. Okay.
A. — the only packet of documents I got.
Q. Okay. Have you read any documents that were US government documents that the government produced in this case?
A. The only documents that I know that the government produced in the case that I've read are the Complaint and the appendix to the Complaint.
Q. Okay. No internal US government documents,
though?
A. They’ve not been provided to me, and I haven’t read any.
Q. You read certain documents that were produced by the tobacco companies in this case, right?
A. In the case?
Q. Yes.
A. I think the only documents that I have read that
were produced by the companies in the case are the expert statements by those four individuals I just mentioned.
Q. What about the documents Mr. Brody provided you, did those include any tobacco company documents?
A. Yeah, I’m sorry. They weren't produced — the documents that Mr. Brody provided me were not produced for the case. The documents that Mr.
Brody provided me were historical documents that were from, I understood, the process of discovery or other archival sources that are now widely available through different web sites —
Q. Okay, but —
A. — or from other litigation, and — but I thought you were asking me about documents produced in this particular legal action. I haven’t seen any.
Q. Well, let me clarify my question, then. Have you reviewed any historical US government documents, internal documents, that were created by the US government?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Let me make sure I understand your question correctly.
Q. Well, maybe I can clarify it.
A. For example, I’ve reviewed the first Surgeon General's Report in considerable detail. I visited the United States archives where the archival record of the first Surgeon General's Report is kept. There are — thus, I’ve reviewed published and unpublished materials that the government produced. Those were produced mostly between 1962 and 1963, so —
Q. Well, let me clarify, then.
MR. BRODY: Please, let him finish.
Q. Y ou —
A. Go ahead.
Q. So, you reviewed materials from the national archives?
A. Of course.
Q. And did you provide those materials to Mr. Brody
to give to us?
A. There may be some of those materials that I provided, although I’ve been — you know, this is part of a broader investigation. So, you know,
I'm not sure that all the materials that I have reviewed over a long period of time were in the materials that I specifically cited in the paper that were specifically relevant to the expert testimony that I defined in my report, so --
Q. Okay. Well, you didn't cite any historical
documents created by the US government that were internal documents rather than published reports, is that correct?
A. Yes, I did not in the expert report.
Q. Okay. Now, if any party in this case withheld documents in his possession relating to smoking and health, would that adversely affect your ability to analyze the historical record in this case?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, I guess it sort of depends on — it depends on the documents. But, if they’re historically relevant to tobacco, then, you know, they’re available. Most of the things that I’ve relied on
are actually in the published record.
Q. But if there are any documents that were withheld and never made it into the public domain that related to smoking and health, would that adversely impact your ability to come to conclusions about the historical record?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Possibly.
Q. Does your report, including the bibliography, identify all the materials that you rely upon in connection with your expert testimony in this
case?
A. Well, that's a complicated question to answer, because I'm a historian of medicine. I’ve been teaching history of medicine for more than two decades now. So, I provided the materials with the report that I relied on to produce the report.
But I have a -- to be perfectly honest -- a breadth of knowledge and orientation to the field that’s deeply reliant on years of investigation and reading and teaching, so —
Q. Well, you understand the process of discovery in this case that you’re supposed to turn over to us the materials that you plan to rely on this case,
right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Absolutely, I understand.
Q. And those materials are the ones that are cited in your expert report?
A. That’s correct.
Q. Okay. How many internal tobacco company documents do you reference in your expert report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That's an empirical question. You know, we can count. I have not counted. So, rather than hazard a guess, you know, as somebody who does empirical research, I just say, Let’s count them.
Q. Well, why don’t you tell me how many that you think that you cited in your expert report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just said why should I guess when I can give you a concrete factual answer? And my whole orientation to this is I don't guess when I can give you a factual answer. If you'd like me to stop and count, I'll stop and count.
Q. Well, sitting here today, though, you can't give me an estimate of how many tobacco company documents were cited in your report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think I've answered your question as best I can.
Q. You're not willing to provide any estimate of the number of tobacco company documents?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just — you know, I could provide an estimate.
But I'd prefer, if you really want to know, it's something that we can now know. The document's sitting in front of you. So, I think -- but why don’t you guess at what you did? You know, what I did is in front of you.
Q. I'm not asking you to guess. You wrote your expert report, right?
A. Right.
Q. And I just wanted to have an idea of how many documents that you cited in your report —
MR. BRODY: But-
Q. — without taking the time to review it right here.
MR. BRODY: That wasn’t a question.
MR. SMITH: How-MR. BRODY: That wasn’t—
MR. SMITH: You're violating the order.
That was a question, and you only get to say
"objection".
Q. I'm just asking you if you’re willing to give us an estimate. It's not a difficult question.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think I answered your question as best I can.
Q. Okay. So, you're not -- you haven't provided an estimate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I have not.
Q. Is your expert report a complete and accurate recitation of your views?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Do you have an updated CV since you submitted your expert report?
A. I do have one, but I — yes, of course, I have one.
Q. Is that something you can maybe bring to the deposition tomorrow and provide to us?
A. I might be able to get it for you tonight. I’m not positive that I can.
Q. Well, if you can’t, could you provide it to —
A. I could certainly provide it to you, you know, by next week.
Q. Okay. How did you become involved in this
lawsuit?
A. Well, I’ve been studying the history of American medicine and public health since graduate school at Columbia in the mid 1970s. And there were certain issues I had gotten interested in. My work first started on the history of epidemic disease, and especially sexually transmitted diseases and HIV.
After that, I began to turn my attention as early as probably the early to mid 1980s to issues associated with tobacco use and disease from a historical perspective. And, so, I have probably since the — since maybe 1990, begun a series of scholarly publications in the area of tobacco use on public health, the history of tobacco. And as a result, given the ongoing litigation through the '80s and the '90s, there was a good deal of interest in my work as it might be relevant to the litigation.
And, so, periodically, I’d be approached by lawyers on both sides of tobacco litigation. And for a long time I had decided that I did not want to participate as an expert witness in tobacco litigation. But as I — as more of my
scholarship had emerged, as my opinions had strengthened in their — my ability to substantiate them as my research grew deeper, when I was approached in this case, I decided to agree to participate.
Q. And when were you approached in this case to testify as a -A. Another lawyer from the Department of Justice had called me and briefly visited me probably sometime in 2001, Russ Kinner. And at the time we had discussed the case and, you know, my potential interest as an expert witness. And then I was recontacted early in 2002; and that's when I eventually agreed to serve as an expert.
Q. Okay. Why didn’t you agree to serve as an expert back in 2001?
A. I just felt I hadn’t — you know, at that time I
was watching the cases from a historical point of view, and I was working on my own scholarship. And I just wasn’t prepared to invest the time that it would take to participate in an activity like this. And, so, I was quite interested, and I have followed the cases over the years, but I wasn't interested in being a witness at that time.
Q. And what month was that in 2001 that you were contacted by the DOJ?
A. I would have to check my records. I'm sure that's, you know —
Q. But you have some records on that you can consult?
A. I probably, in an appointment book, do have a time that Mr. Kinner came to see me. You know, he may well have a log, too.
Q. Okay. And how did it come about that Mr. Kinner knew about you? Was that through Doctor Proctor or —
A. Oh, I don’t think so. I imagine that — you know,
I like to think my work in the history of smoking is pretty well known. There aren't that many historians who have focused as much energy as I have in investigating the history of tobacco and cigarette smoking in the United States.
Q. And what did Mr. Kinner tell you about the case in 2001?
A. You know, he told me that the case was being developed; and, you know, that he and his colleagues felt it was an important case; and that they believed that there were historical issues, in particular that were significantly relevant to
their Complaint.
Q. And who contacted you in early 2002?
A. I think Mr. Kinner contacted me first and then — and came to see me; and then Mr. Brody came to see me shortly thereafter.
Q. Okay. Do you remember the month when Mr. Kinner contacted you?
A. He came to see me either — my guess is it was January 2002, but it might have been December 2001.
Q. Okay. And how about Mr. Brody?
A. I'm pretty sure that Mr. Brody came to see me either in January 2002 or February 2002.
Q. Okay. And what did they tell you about the case at that time?
A. Well, at that time they — you know, it was Mr.
Brody who shared the Complaint with me, and then also shared the expert reports of English,
Ludmerer, et. al.
Q. Okay. And what did he tell you about why he gave you those expert reports?
A. He gave them to me —
MR. BRODY: Objection. Go ahead.
A. He gave them to me because he explained that the
Department of Justice could effectively utilize rebuttal witnesses, given that the Defendants were going to offer historical experts. And, so, he wanted to know my impression of the accuracy and fidelity of those reports, and if my own historical scholarship confirmed or contradicted them.
Q. So, Mr. Brody asked you to address the Ludmerer, English, Wilson, and Thomas reports?
A. Yeah. The Thomas report was shared with me. But given its focus on scientific issues in toxicology, I didn't really give it significant attention. I had some thoughts about it probably, but I -
Q. Okay.
A. — I really focused on the reports by, really, my professional colleagues, other professionally-trained historians, and the kinds of work that they were doing in relationship to
the case.
Q. And then Mr. Brody told you he wanted you to address those four experts' opinions in this case?
A. Yes, I think — my sense of it, at least, was that
he wanted to know, you know, if my scholarship and
my historical knowledge was rebuttal in its orientation.
Q. How much time have you spent working on this lawsuit?
A. I spent 160 hours preparing my expert report; and I haven't added up the time since then that I have spent reviewing in preparation for today.
Q. Can you provide an estimate of that amount of time?
A. Yeah, that I could. It’s somewhere -- it's
somewhere probably between 70 and 80 hours.
Q. Okay. So, in total you've probably spent between 230 and 240 hours, is that —
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. What was your time spent in reviewing, you know, the case, the 70 or 80 hours, what did you do?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I've been reading my expert report and the documents that I cited in it. That's been the focus of my review, because I assumed that's what we would be focused on today.
Q. All right. Do you know which tobacco companies are Defendants in this lawsuit?
A. I think I do.
Q. Okay. Who are they?
A. Pliilip Morris is named in the case; you represent Brown & Williamson; Lorillard is a Defendant in the case; Liggett & Myers is a Defendant in the case; British American Tobacco is a Defendant in the case; and American Tobacco is a Defendant in the case.
Q. Yeah.
A. I wasn't keeping track, but let me see if I've
missed any: Philip Morris, Brown & Williamson, Liggett, Lorillard, American, British American. I think that's it.
Q. Those are all the Defendants you can recall?
A. Oh, I think — I don’t remember — there may be an additional Defendant. I don't remember, for example, if the Council for Tobacco Research is named as a Defendant, but I don’t think so. I think I’ve named the Defendants in the case.
Q. Okay. Now, you mentioned you have been provided some documents, tobacco company documents by Mr. Brody. When was that exactly?
A. February 2002.
Q. Okay. He provided those to you at the same time
he provided you with the four defense expert reports?
A. No. The defense experts' reports were provided to me prior to my decision to serve as an expert for the Department of Justice. And then after I agreed that I would do the work, then I received a collection of documents.
Q. Okay. Have you been provided documents by any other lawyers suing the tobacco companies?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Not recently. I mean, lawyers suing the tobacco companies have sometimes sent me proffers or different things that do include some documents; and, as a historian, I'm always eager to get documents. So, people have, over the years, sometimes sent me documents.
Q. And, but, you never agreed to testify in any of the prior tobacco litigation cases?
A. This is the first litigation of any kind that I’ve ever testified in; and this morning’s the first deposition I've ever given.
Q. Okay. Is there any such thing as a certification or licensing program in the field of history?
A. I don't know if we'd call it a certification or
licensing program. Most history's oriented towards — professional history is oriented towards higher degrees in historical studies, and that would be the process of certification. But we, historians, don't think of it as, you know, are you a certified historian or not. People say,
How are you educated? And that's pretty much the way historians think about it.
Q. There’s no national accreditation program?
A. There’s no bar exam. There’s no — there is no national accrediting body.
Q. And there’s no nationwide or statewide test for people who hold themselves out as experts in history?
A. No, there's no test.
Q. Are there any formalized standards or rules that are applicable to historical analysis?
A. Yes, there are processes and methods that are — that we teach and we practice.
Q. And you agree that you should follow and comply with the standards governing historical research in your litigation work as well?
A. Of course.
Q. Now, would you agree that the basic goal or
objective of historical analysis is to ascertain the true facts of what has occurred in the past?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I would say that's one aspect, true, facts. I
mean, obviously, we want to know what happened. But historians are sensitive to not circumscribe that we’re fact-checkers. Obviously, historians utilize the facts that they can obtain, the data that they can collect to develop analyses, interpretations, and what I would call a fundamental deeper understanding of change and continuity in the past. So, obviously, the truth is crucial to me, but if you were say, Are you looking for the true facts? That's only one element of what I'm looking for.
Q. Okay. Well, would you agree that one aspect of historical analysis is making sure you’re accurate about what the historical facts are?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Accuracy is important.
Q. Okay. Would you agree that in performing historical analysis, you should seek to gather all the evidence that's available?
A. Yes.
Q. The more historical data and evidence you have, the better your historical analysis, right?
A. Generally, that’s true. Although, again, that's a complicated question, because you can keep collecting materials — and sometimes my students ask me, When have I done enough to publish this article? When have I done enough to complete my doctoral dissertation? And there are times when you do reach the limit of being able to substantiate claims, and you can collect additional materials, but they wouldn't significantly or in any important way change what your basic historical finding is.
So, I’m very committed to very deep and comprehensive research in my own work and in the work of my students. But I also think that in any research, you reach a limit where you are convinced of the facts, and that’s a good time to sort of say, you know, make your case.
Q. As a general matter, though, the more material that you review, the more substantiation you can give to your historical analysis?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That's generally true.
Q. Now, would you agree that in conducting a historical analysis, you should look for the most reliable and authoritative evidence?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, you're raising a critical issue in
historical methodology, because one of the things historians are doing is deciding what is reliable?
What is important? Why? Who wrote this document? What's their significance? Who was it for? So, when we just say, Well, look for the most reliable materials, that wouldn’t be a guidepost to a historical method.
Q. Well, would you agree that as a general matter, it's possible to ascertain what are the most reliable materials and use those in performing your analysis?
A. I would say reliable for what? You know, that’s always the question historians have. You know, this document, these materials are reliable sources for what question. And, so, yes, reliability is one element.
Q. Well, how about in this litigation? Certainly you’d want to use the most reliable materials in performing your historical analysis in this case,
right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It just, it depends on how we define "reliable".
Of course, I want materials that are most germane and reliable to the specific questions that I'm trying to address.
Q. Would you agree that primary source materials are generally more reliable than secondary source materials?
A. Not necessarily.
Q. Okay.
A. I'm just — it’s a very — you know, it’s a very important question in historical methods. The boundary between what is a primary source and what is a secondary source is an issue that, you know,
I might give a seminar on for a semester with graduate students. And reliability on primary sources versus secondary sources is not the way we think about that distinction.
The importance of primary sources — obviously, research has to fundamentally engage primary sources. But that’s different from saying they’re more reliable than secondary sources.
Q. Well, would you agree that determining what the
most reliable evidence is in a particular case is a matter of historical judgment?
A. Absolutely.
Q. Okay. Now, in conducting a historical analysis, would you agree that you should familiarize yourself with the individuals who took part in the events you're studying?
A. Yes.
Q. After collecting all the information available, then the historian proceeds to analyze the evidence, is that right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. After collecting all the material that's
available, then the historian begins the analysis. It doesn't really work quite that way. You collect, you think and evaluate. You might reframe the essential questions. And the process of analysis is not always fully separate from the process of data collection. It's not a process like some of the other social sciences or some of the sciences where you say, Well, let's collect the data, get all the data, then we're going to do the analysis, because history is interdisciplinary and complex. It’s just — that's not how we work
exactly.
Q. Well, would you agree that historians in performing analysis must understand the limitations of the evidence?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think it's important for historians to
understand both the strengths and the limitations of their evidence as they pursue a question.
Q. And in reporting their conclusions, they should report the strengths and limitations of the evidence that they're relying on?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Usually that's — usually that’s an issue for peer review in a sense that, you know, as we put forward our scholarship, people will say, Well, I think it has these strengths and these limitations, and use these documents effectively and powerfully and appropriately, and he hasn't used these as, you know, effectively. So, I'm not sure it’s the — the historian makes his or her judgments and — based upon the quality and conscientiousness of their research.
Q. Okay. Would you agree that the historian, in performing analysis, must look at both sides of an
issue?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, again, that's not how historians frame
questions, because that would presume that there were two sides of an issue and you've looked at both sides. Many issues I look at might have 30,
40 sides. And if they did, I would say, Let's look at the many sides of this issue, so —
Q. Okay. So, you would agree that a historian should look at all the sides of an issue?
A. Essentially. It’s, again, not how I would characterize it.
Q. Would you agree that the historian should develop conclusions and opinions only as warranted by the evidence?
A. Obviously, I think that the conclusion that historians draw should be drawn from their evidence.
Q. And they shouldn't draw any conclusions that aren’t warranted by the evidence, right?
A. You know, I think there are levels in which one says, Here’s the conclusion I can draw on the basis of this evidence. Sometimes historians are encouraged to sort of say, On the basis of this
evidence, these kinds of things can be speculated. But in those instances, I think one should discern the sort of level of confidence one has in an opinion or a finding from what the evidence might suggest but can’t be absolutely confirmed at that same level of confidence.
Q. Okay. So, would it be fair to say that when a historian runs across some conclusions that aren't warranted by the evidence, he should, you know, plainly indicate that that's speculation or it's something that's only suggested by the evidence?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Comes to conclusions that aren’t warranted by the evidence — you know, again, I think that’s part of the sort of character of analysis and interpretation that generally, you know, the character of our scholarship is we put it out there for that kind of evaluation.
Q. Well, when you —
A. I don't think people should be arguing beyond their evidence, no.
Q. Okay. Well, in your publications you don’t come to conclusions that aren’t warranted by the evidence, do you?
A. I sometimes have speculated in my things, but usually I address the character of the evidence in relationship to my conclusions.
Q. Okay. And, well, as a general matter do you try to make sure that you don't put forth conclusions that are totally without support based on the evidence?
A. Well, of course, I don't put forward conclusions that are totally without support.
Q. And that's a good historical practice?
A. I think that good historical practice requires
that there be strong evidence for our conclusions, interpretations, and opinions.
Q. Okay. Now, in reporting his conclusions, should a historian be complete and accurate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It depends on what you mean by "complete and accurate."
Q. You don't know what "complete and accurate" means, or, I mean, you can use your definition.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, you know, I mean, historians tend to think about things in what we would call a contextural way. Now, complete, you know, my understanding is
that there are probably on the web right now several hundred thousand tobacco documents. Now, if somebody were to say to me, you know, Have you completely reviewed the documents on the web? You know, I don't think that that would be an excellent way of doing research.
Q. Well, the only point I was getting at with my question is you agree that a historian should be accurate in reporting his conclusions?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I believe that accurate is a — you know, there are — it would depend on how you were going to define "accurate".
Q. Well, how about using your definition of accurate. Would you agree that a historian should be accurate in reporting his conclusions?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I believe that a historian should be accurate in reporting their conclusions, meaning that their conclusions should be substantiated by the evidence that they produce.
Q. Okay. Now, the work of a historian sometimes involves judging the conduct of others, is that true or --
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, again, the question is kind of confusing to me, because, you know, judging the conduct of others, you know, I don't judge other people's personal conduct, as a historian, for personal reasons. I do evaluate at a professional level the scholarship and work that other historians do. That's part of what I do.
Q. Well, as a historian, do you think you should avoid bias?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, it would just depend on how you would define "bias." And there’s quite an extensive historical literature on what is bias? How do values become involved in historical scholarship? I do believe that a historian's interest should either be clearly identified, and that, you know, they should avoid -- they should avoid bias where possible.
Q. So, according to your definition of bias, should a historian avoid bias in performing a historical analysis?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. Now, would you agree that one way to avoid bias is to test your conclusions against all of the facts, including the facts that may be contrary to your views?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, all of the facts — I mean, you know, I think you should test your conclusions as aggressively as you can against additional information or arguments.
Q. And historians should test their conclusions against facts that may be contrary to their conclusions?
A. When you come up with a so-called contrary fact, then the question becomes how — does that require you to change your opinion? Does it require you to modify your understanding of what happened and why? And, so, I think that it’s important to look at the body of evidence. Is there evidence which contradicts a particular claim? And if it does, how would a historian in that context make sense of additional knowledge, facts, arguments?
Q. And in performing a historical analysis, though, is it important to consider a contrary fact?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Contrary to what? That would be my question.
Q. Well, using your definition of contrary, contrary to your conclusions, okay?
A. Of course, I'm very interested in people who disagree with my conclusions and what their arguments are.
Q. And as a historian, it's important to consider the views of people that disagree with your conclusions, right?
A. I'm quite — I'm quite interested in considering
people who disagree with my conclusions and what their arguments and evidence are.
Q. Okay. Now, in performing a historical analysis, is it important to put the events in context of the time?
A. Yes.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think it’s important.
Q. Okay. And is it important to understand the standards that may be applicable to an individual's conduct at the time in performing historical analysis?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think it makes sense to review prevailing
standards, approaches, procedures at a particular historical time.
Q. And in performing a historical analysis, is it
important to understand what was known about at the time — about any particular topic?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, it's important to know --
Q. In conducting the historical analysis involving scientific issues, is it important to know the state of the science at the time?
A. Yeah, an important consideration would be to ask, you know, what is the character of scientific understanding at that time?
Q. And is it important in conducting a historical
analysis to find out what people who were actually involved in the historical events say about them?
A. Yes, I'm interested in what people who are involved in those events said.
Q. Now, does historical analysis ever involve
evaluating the conduct of people who took part in historical events?
A. Sometimes it does.
Q. Okay. And in evaluating the conduct of
individuals who took part in historical events, is
it important to understand the standards governing their conduct at the time?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It would be one thing I would want to know.
Q. And would a historian want to bring as much of the relevant facts that bear upon an individual's conduct and take those into consideration in performing his analysis?
A. Again, it would depend upon the particular
historical question, because, you know, we could talk about an individual’s conduct. A lot of my work is on institutions. So, you know, I'm interested in individual motivation and conduct.
But usually my own historical work as it is is related to larger questions. So, my own work hasn't focused on biographical, for example, emphases, even though, obviously, individual actors are important in any historical work.
Q. In evaluating the conduct of institutions, is it important to know the standards governing those institutions’ conduct at the time?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think that it’s important to have as scrupulous and as thorough a notion of the
historical moment in which events are occurring as one can.
Q. And is it important to take into consideration as many of the facts concerning an institution's conduct as you can in performing a historical analysis?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It's obviously important to get, you know, as deep a knowledge as one can around the particular event or problem that you're investigating.
Q. Would a monetary interest in the subject matter be one source of potential bias?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. A monetary interest in the particular subject matter? It could. That’s possible.
Q. Well, in evaluating scientific research, would you agree that it’s important to know the source of funding of that research because it's a potential source of bias?
A. Yes. I think that, you know, it’s helpful to know the source of funding for research in understanding the research.
Q. And universities have adopted rules that govern conflicts of interest, right?
A. They have.
Q. And the federal government has adopted rules that govern the conflict of interest, right?
A. I'm aware of those rules.
Q. Oh, how are you aware of those rules?
A. I served on a conflict of interest committee at
Harvard Medical School for several years. And, in fact, it's impossible to work in any university today without being aware of the federal standards regarding conflict of interest. We all — every employee, I think, of every university now has to make reports of potential conflicts of interest.
Q. Okay. Peer review journals also have roles requiring the disclosure of sources of funding or other conflicts of interest because those represent a potential source of bias, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I understand that journals do. You know, in my own publications, I am asked to return conflict of interest disclosure forms.
Q. Is it important to take into account sources of potential bias in conducting a historical analysis?
A. Yes, sure.
Q. In conducting a historical analysis, is it important to ascertain whether historical documents have been lost or destroyed?
A. It’s certainly of interest when documents have been lost or destroyed. And it does affect our ability to research certain questions. Unfortunately, sometimes we say there aren't documents and, so —
Q. Well, when historical documents are lost or destroyed, is it important to try to ascertain, if possible, what information they may have contained?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I guess the question is if possible; and, you
know, obviously, I've been very committed to the preservation of historical documents. I'm very active in library and archival committees that are committed to the preservation of materials for historians of the future.
Q. In conducting a historical analysis where
documents have been lost or destroyed, should a historian undertake efforts to try to attempt to ascertain what was in those documents that have
been lost?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, it just depends, I guess. You know, one of the things that interested me, for example, in this case, were records of documents that were destroyed by the tobacco companies. And given that there are a lot of documents available, any historian studying those documents would say, well, I've been studying some tobacco industry documents, and now, I have a document that says well, these documents were destroyed, or discussions about, you know, make sure these documents are destroyed, that kind of thing.
That, obviously, is, you know, of considerable interest to me.
Q. And in this case it's important to you to
ascertain whether historical documents have been lost or destroyed?
A. I haven't — I have assumed that in the course of
legal discovery many documents have been recovered and are now part of the public record. That's been a very advantageous aspect of the history of the litigation for me as a historian, because when I began this work, it really appeared that
industry documents would not be available to me in conducting the work, especially industry documents that had, at one time, been marked "confidential," "secret," so on. And, so, the availability of documents from the very process of, you know, do they exist? Can they be seen? In what conditions can they be reviewed? All of these are crucial issues for a historian. And one concern along that spectrum is, Well, what’s missing here?
What's been destroyed? Why was it destroyed? Are there indications in the extant records about why and how documents were retained or destroyed?
So, obviously, in the 20th Century, especially in big institutions, records management policies are important, and they do have a bearing on what we can know, because historians are always, unfortunately, limited by the available documents.
Q. And all those issues relating to how documents were lost or destroyed or whether they exist, those are all an important part of conducting a historical analysis?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Our thoroughness and accessibility for documents
is, you know, always a question. We are dependent on the materials which we have accessible.
Q. And when you perform a historical analysis, you attempt to find out whether documents have been lost or destroyed, is that —
A. It’s potentially one element. It's — you know, I don’t think historians always start by saying,
Well, now that I have this great archive, I wonder what was lost or destroyed? But there are historical instances where one would ask, Of what is extant, is it important? And is there a possibility that there were other important records that were lost? Sometimes we have records of the loss or destruction of documents, sometimes we don't. And we just say, Well, here's what — here's what we left, you know? And historians are always thinking, Well, you know, some important person is about to put their archives at the Library of Congress, and, you know, Are they selecting the letters? And then, you know, saying, Here’s what I want to be at the Library of Congress. And historians are self-conscious about the idea that, Here’s what was deposited. They don’t make the assumption that that's everything.
But they say, Using these resources, what can I understand?
And, then, in other instances, there may be indication that there were other documents; that they don't survive; and, then, that can become one element of a historical analysis.
Q. All these issues relating to historical analysis that we've been discussing, are these all issues that peer reviewers would take into account in deciding whether to, you know, publish research in the area of history?
A. They’re one element. They’re probably not the most important elements. You know, I don’t think when I get a paper from for peer review from a professional journal and I'm looking at the archival record, I'm thinking, Well, did they know that documents were destroyed —
Q. Well -
A. — unless there was some — unless there was some reason to believe that that was a significant element of this. So, I read papers all the time for professional historical journals. And, you know, I think the kinds of evaluative criteria that we're looking for is, Does it seem that
they've been thorough? Did they get to the right archives? Are their interpretations cognizant of both the primary materials that they used and relevant secondary literature?
Getting back to your question about primary and secondary literature, if somebody’s done the archival work but they haven’t explored the relevant secondary literature, that would be a grave scholarly deficit. So, the possession of documents and what’s in an archive and what's available is one element of a larger perspective on quality in historical work.
Q. Okay. Now, I bet you would agree that a historian should be thorough in conducting a historical analysis.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It depends on how you would define thorough, but, you know —
Q. Under your definition of thorough.
A. Under my definition of thorough, they should be thorough. But, you know, my definition of thorough could be different from somebody else’s, but -Q. Yeah.
A. -- sure, they should be thorough.
Q. And you agree that historians should use the right archives in conducting historical analysis?
A. They should use the relevant archives.
Q. Okay. Now, would you agree that the history of the tobacco industry spans a large amount of time?
A. Yes. By "large amount," the tobacco industry, as we know it today, really gets going in the late 19th Century. So, it's over a hundred years.
Q. Okay, and the history of tobacco spans a much longer time, right?
A. Considerably longer than that.
Q. Would you agree that the tobacco industry — the history of the tobacco industry involves hundreds of thousands of individuals?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Probably, yes.
Q. And the history of the tobacco industry involves millions of historical documents?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Certainly hundreds of thousands.
Q. Okay. Now, are there hundreds of thousands of documents that were generated by the tobacco industry themselves?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I presume so, based on what I know about the current availability of documents on web sites that focus on the recovery and dissemination of tobacco documents.
Q. And the federal government has also generated hundreds of thousands of documents on tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There are many thousands of documents on tobacco.
Q. All right.
A. There’s —
Q. And the federal government has generated thousands of documents on tobacco, right?
A. Yes, they have generated many thousands of documents associated with tobacco.
Q. And there have been many thousands of scientific publications on the issue of smoking, right?
A. There are thousands of scientific publications on smoking.
Q. And only a small fraction of those publications were sponsored by the tobacco industry, is that accurate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It would be hard for me to say what the fraction
is, but I would assume that in terms of sponsorship of tobacco research by the industry, it's a small fraction of the research that’s now been done on tobacco and its health implications.
Q. Okay. Would you agree that the history of the tobacco industry is a very broad area of historical research?
A. Yeah. I mean, one of the reasons why I came to it is it's just so fascinating and gets into many critical elements of American science, culture, policy. And I’m interested in the material conditions of health. So, tobacco brings together many of my interests. It’s a broad area.
Q. Okay. Now, I think you stated in your expert report that you were planning on offering opinions about whether the hazards of smoking were common knowledge. Is that accurate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm prepared to discuss sort of the character of both scientific as well as popular knowledge about tobacco.
Q. Okay. And in your view is offering opinions on whether the hazards of smoking were popular among the popular knowledge of the people, is that
within the ambit of historians?
A. I think historians would be interested in, you
know, what was the character of public information and knowledge regarding the harms of smoking at different historical times. I'm interested in that question.
Q. And public knowledge about smoking is an appropriate area of historical inquiry?
A. I've been concerned about that idea, because sort of when people talk about common knowledge, it raises very interesting and important methodological considerations, because, you know, there is no such thing as John or Jane Doe that represents, you know, that this is what common knowledge is. We know that knowledge is, you know, inherently diverse and specific.
So, one of your experts poses his view of sort of, Well, you know, common knowledge of tobacco had it — and that's not exactly how, as a historian, I would approach that question. I'm interested in sort of what kinds of groups knew what? What’s the diffusion of knowledge into society? How are risks to health understood?
So, I would have approached that
question differently from the question, Are historians interested in common knowledge? If you got a group of historians together, I think they would have a very interesting and important discussion about, Well, what constitutes common knowledge, and how would you know it?
And, then, we get into method, evidence, and so on. So, but I'm prepared to talk about the larger question of the dissemination of knowledge of the risks of smoking in American society and culture. That’s an important question.
Q. And in your view, testimony about the
dissemination of public — of knowledge about the hazards of smoking among the public, that is an appropriate area of inquiry for a historian such as yourself?
A. Yes. As I've defined it, I think it’s an appropriate area of inquiry.
Q. Have you done anything specifically to collect any information or data from any individual population of smokers?
A. No, I haven't, although I’ve thought about research questions associated with that, but I haven’t actually done any empirical contemporary
social/psychological investigation at this point.
Q. You haven’t conducted any surveys on any individual population of smokers?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I haven't.
Q. You haven’t done any research involving data from any actual individual smokers?
A. I'm always talking to people who smoke, you know, sometimes about how they came to be smokers; have they thought about quitting? I have a kind of anthropologic interest in contemporary smoking, but it hasn’t been a part of my — it hasn't been a part of my historical — my historical scholarship, although at times, I think, sometimes our understanding of contemporary events informs how we approach historical questions.
Q. You haven't published any peer reviewed research collecting data from any individual smokers?
A. I have not.
Q. All right. Have you calculated the percentage of any individual smoker population that would not have smoked but for the tobacco company’s conduct?
A. Have I — I'm sorry. I missed the beginning of your question.
Q. Have you calculated the percentage of any
individual smoker population that would not have smoked but for the tobacco companies’ conduct?
A. I haven't done that kind of research.
Q. You haven’t collected any data concerning the medical history of any individual smokers?
A. Well, for example, in my research, I was studying the investigations of Doctors Wynder and Graham. And Doctor Graham, who did one of the early path-breaking epidemiological researches, who was a surgeon, was a heavy smoker, and he eventually develops lung cancer. And he identifies the fact that he wishes he had known what he discovered in his research at an earlier time and had modified his smoking behavior. And that's the kind of anecdote that is, you know, valuable to historians about sort of the personal lives of the investigators that I'm studying. So, in that sense, there's an individual who, you know, smoked, and I've written about him, so —
Q. You haven't published any peer-reviewed research where you collected data on the medical history of any individual smokers, have you?
A. No, I haven't been collecting medical histories of
smokers.
Q. And have you collected any data from any
individual smoker population about their exposure to tobacco ads?
A. No, I haven't collected data in that way about, you know, who's exposed to what ads.
Q. And have you collected any data about what
information individual smokers received about the health effects of smoking from their physicians?
A. I know some of the literature on physicians’
encounters with patients around smoking behavior, but I haven't done any empirical research on, you know, what doctors are telling their patients today, for example.
Q. Have you collected any data about what tobacco companies' statements on smoking and health, any population of individual smokers were exposed to?
A. Any individual population? I guess that’s where I’m getting caught up with the questions. I haven’t studied any — I haven't studied — by specific groups -- exposure to tobacco materials on the risks of smoking.
Q. Have you collected any data from individual smokers on their exposure to tobacco companies'
statements on smoking and health?
A. No, I haven't done that.
Q. Have you collected any data from individual
smokers on their exposure to statements put out by the Tobacco Institute?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you collected any data from any individual smokers on their exposure to the Frank Statement?
A. No, that’s not how I would approach -- you know, the questions you’re asking me go right to the heart of how I would approach a historical problem. And, generally, historians don't say, Well, you know, I want to see who was exposed to that ad; I’m going to go ask people. Generally, that wouldn't be an effective, thorough, or, necessarily, reliable approach to understanding who's exposed to advertising.
The Frank Statement, as you know, was an advertisement. If I was interested — and I am — you know, Was the Frank Statement widely disseminated in American popular knowledge and culture? I would ask the question, Where did that advertisement appear? What is the general circulation of the newspapers and other
publications in which the Frank Statement ran as an advertisement? And then, I think, one can ask appropriately what kinds of assumptions can I make about the dissemination of the Frank Statement? And then I would offer an interpretation that would say that the Frank Statement was widely disseminated purposefully. That was its purpose, the widest possible dissemination, and — which is verified in other qualitative sources.
So, I don't think, for example, if somebody wanted to go back and say, Well, I'm going to study the Frank Statement and its dissemination, I’m going to talk to people using oral history interviews.
Q. Well, have you —
A. So, that's how I approach a question like that.
Q. Have you compiled a list of the newspapers in which the Frank Statement appeared?
A. I have relied on documents that describe the
general dissemination of the Frank Statement. And my understanding from, you know, industry documents, is that Hill & Knowlton was very pleased with the breadth of dissemination of the Frank Statement and wrote reports about the
newspapers and how many newspapers, at what cost it had been.
Q. But you haven't gone back to —
MR. BRODY: Please.
Q. You haven’t gone back to —
MR. BRODY: If you could, please, not interrupt.
Q. Are you done with your answer?
A. Yeah, well, now I am done.
Q. Okay.
MR. SMITH: Remember the rules, the orders that are in place. I didn't interrupt him.
He just had —
MR. BRODY: Nothing in any order prevents me from making sure you allow the witness to finish his answer.
MR. SMITH: And he said he did.
THE WITNESS: Well, he actually did interrupt me. But then I, you know, I lost my train of thought.
A. So, you know, please continue, and maybe I'll, you know, I'll get back to it, I’m sure.
Q. Have you examined any newspapers, any newspaper publications of the Frank Statement?
A. Oh, I’ve seen the Frank Statement in a number of newspapers —
Q. Which ones?
A. — because they're often held in the clippings.
You know, I think I saw it in the St. Louis Post Dispatch. I’m trying to remember other ones. But there are many reproductions of the Frank Statement in the most highly distributed newspapers. And my sense was — especially from looking at the Hill & Knowlton materials — is that they were looking for the broadest possible dissemination of the Frank Statement.
Q. All right.
MR. BRODY: Why don't we take a short break. We've been going over an hour.
MR. SMITH: Sure.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 10:10. We're off the record.
(Recess was taken.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 10:18. We are recording and on the record.
Q. Professor Brandt, have you conducted a literature search such as a Medline search about the published scientific literature for articles
written by scientists at Brown & Williamson?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you conducted a search of the public scientific literature for articles written by scientists at any other tobacco companies?
A. I just haven't done it that way. So, there may be individual researchers whose work I have followed and periodically done Medline searches on, but I wasn’t thinking about it in terms of individual researchers at particular companies when I was doing that work.
Q. And you haven’t done any literature search to generally find articles written by scientists at tobacco companies?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Medline searches or — is that what you asked?
Q. Any kind of literature search; have you done a literature search to collect together articles written by scientists at the tobacco companies?
A. Yeah, I’ve collected some of the articles that
tobacco company scientists did write. But, again, I’m not sure how I put that material together.
So, you know, I have materials of company scientists that I have reviewed.
Q. But you haven't done a literature search to find a list of all the articles —
A. No, I haven't.
Q. — that the tobacco company —
A. I haven't done that.
Q. If I — I just need to finish my question before you answer, okay?
A. Okay.
Q. You haven't conducted a literature search to compile a list of published articles by tobacco company scientists, is that true?
A. Yes, that’s true.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted a search of the Surgeon General's Reports to find articles that were published by tobacco company scientists that were cited by the Surgeon General?
A. I'm aware that they did cite some articles by tobacco company scientists, but I haven't — I haven’t looked specifically at that question to know the sort of volume of literature they cited from the companies. But I am aware that the companies provided materials to the Surgeon General's Report, and that the Surgeon General cited company scientists, for sure.
Q. Okay. You haven't tried to compile a list of literature that was published by the tobacco companies that the Surgeon General cites in his reports?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think I answered your question, but I have not.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted a literature search for published scientific articles on smoker compensation?
A. No, I haven't done a literature search on compensation.
Q. Have you done a literature search for published articles on nicotine pharmacology?
A. I have done a good deal of historical research on nicotine pharmacology, in both the published literature, and then some of the tobacco company documents.
Q. Did you ever try to compile a list of articles on
nicotine pharmacology, you know, during any period of time?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Do I have a bibliography on the history of
nicotine pharmacology? Yes. So, I did compile some articles on that.
Q. Okay.
A. Yes.
Q. How about nicotine and addiction? Have you done a literature search to find published articles on nicotine and addiction?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Have you conducted a literature search to find published research on nicotine analogs?
A. No, not nicotine analogs.
Q. Have you conducted a literature search to find published scientific articles on the use of charcoal filters in cigarettes?
A. No, I haven't conducted a literature search on that.
Q. Have you conducted a search of the published literature for scientific articles on the use of palladium or other catalysts in cigarettes?
A. No, I haven't done a literature search on palladium.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted a literature search for published scientific articles on nonburning cigarettes?
A. I have done some research on the potential
introduction of nonbuming cigarettes. You know,
I've read about it. But I don’t know if I would characterize it as a literature search. So, you know, I’ve been studying a lot of different aspects. And sometimes they're not so targeted as, you know, as would be constituted by the method of a literature search. But I certainly am aware of the potential and pilot marketing of nonburning cigarettes.
Q. You just haven’t compiled any kind of literature search for published scientific articles on nonburning cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, for example --1 answered your question. But I will expound, since you asked it again. I did — I do have the long-published book that RJR was providing about their research into nonburning cigarettes. You know, it's a gigantic — it must be over a thousand pages — of a collection of published scientific articles on the scientific and technological aspects of nonbuming cigarettes.
So, I haven't looked at it recently, but at one time I was familiar with the industry’s publication on their research into nonburning
cigarettes.
Q. Okay. Other than the industry's publications, have you researched the topic of nonbuming cigarettes or scientific publications?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. To some degree.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted a literature search for published scientific research on cigarette design?
A. Again, my research has brought me to review literatures on cigarette design, but I generally don’t start by saying, Well, today I’m going to do a literature search on cigarette design. So, a lot of these issues came up in the context of broader questions I was asking.
So, you know, I don’t know that I have ever done a literature search on the scientific and technical literature on cigarette design. But in the course of my historical investigation, cigarette design is a component of my interests and my research.
Q. Okay. But you haven't conducted a systematic literature search to find all the articles on cigarette design?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. How about for environmental tobacco smoke? Have you conducted a systematic literature search for published scientific articles on environmental tobacco smoke?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That’s one of the areas where I probably have
done, you know, fairly systematic investigation on that. And, you know, having published a bit on environmental tobacco smoke, I think that my research into the scientific literature there, you know, certainly was assisted by literature searches.
Q. Okay. And have you conducted a systematic literature search for articles on nitrosamines in tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I would put nitrosamines in the category of an area of interest in which I have, you know, done some reading.
Q. But have you conducted a literature search?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted a literature search for articles on tobacco subsidies given out by the US government?
A. Again, all of your questions, you know, presume a literature search; and I am cognizant of the history of tobacco subsidies and their legislative and political significance. And, you know, a lot of those materials are not searchable through online or computer search engines, because the history of tobacco subsidies goes back before historians really have much of that material available in conventional literature search methods.
Q. Have you conducted any kind of literature search for articles on OS HA regulations regarding tobacco?
A. Again, I'm familiar with some of those
regulations, but I have not conducted a literature search.
Q. And how about EPA regulations of tobacco? Have you conducted a literature search for articles on that?
A. I am quite familiar with the EPA’s reports on the harms and risks associated with passive smoking.
But I haven't thoroughly reviewed all the literature that the EPA produced.
done a literature search for articles on those?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you done any kind of systematic literature search for articles on the proposed FDA regulations on tobacco?
A. I fairly thoroughly have reviewed some — at least a good deal — of the literature on the proposed FDA regulations, yes.
Q. Have you conducted any search of the Minnesota Depository to look for tobacco company documents?
A. I haven't been using the Minnesota Depository much, although I understand from some of the documents that I have obtained that they're stamped, you know, Minnesota Depository. So, I have assumed that some of the materials I have reviewed eventuated in other search engines or other sources from the Minnesota Depository, but I have not been searching the Minnesota Depository.
Q. Okay. Do you understand that that tobacco company documents were produced and made publicly available to the Minnesota Depository in the 1990s?
A. That was my understanding.
Minnesota Depository?
A. I understood that Minnesota had created a depository for tobacco documents.
Q. And you haven't visited the Minnesota Depository, have you?
A. I haven't been to the Minnesota Depository. In large measure because many of those materials are available through other mechanisms now.
Q. Have you conducted any searches at any federal records centers for documents?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. And what federal record centers?
A. Well, at one time I spent a considerable amount of time both at the national archives in DC, and then at the Suitland Records Center.
Q. And what records did you review?
A. At that time I was mostly reviewing archival materials associated with the first Surgeon General's Report. I should say I've also been to the National Library of Medicine, which holds archival materials relevant to the history of tobacco and cigarette smoking.
Q. Okay.
A. That's a federal facility.
Q. Have you ever heard of the Guildford Depository?
A. The Guildford Depository? I don't think —
Q. What’s the date of the earliest tobacco company document you have reviewed?
A. I think I've reviewed tobacco company documents from the 1890s -- certainly before 1900.
Q. Which tobacco company created those?
A. I was most interested in American Tobacco, because American had developed the well-known Tobacco Trust, and they were documents associated with the trust and the later litigation about the trust.
So, in my broader historical work, I had seen documents. Most of those are documents that have been republished and things like that. I didn't see them in an archival form.
Q. Would it be fair to say that the earliest tobacco company documents cited in your expert report are from the 1950s?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yeah. I think that -- you know, I think that that would be a fact. I'm just trying to think. Yeah.
I don't think I cite any tobacco company documents prior to 1950, because, you know, I had a relatively specific set of questions that I
focused in on my expert report.
Q. What is the date of the latest tobacco company document you have reviewed?
A. I just saw a document from 2000. That would be the latest I’ve reviewed.
Q. What document was that, do you recall?
A. I have a document from -- I'm sorry, I don't know Cindy's last name — from her firm that somebody provided me recently. It's from Hunt on & Williams. And it had to do with a filing before the Securities Exchange Commission, I think, associated with a shareholder's proxy relating to Philip Morris’s web site, and what Philip Morris would do — essentially, the language goes, Now that it has admitted that smoking is a cause of cancer and other serious diseases, and this was a lawyer from Hunton & Williams that said Philip Morris has not admitted that.
So, a colleague provided me with that
letter.
Q. Who was that that had provided you with that letter?
A. Julie Richmond.
Q. Who is Julie Richmond?
A. Julie Richmond was the — he was the Surgeon General under Jimmy Carter.
Q. Oh, Julius Richmond?
A. Julius Richmond.
Q. Okay.
A. Julius B. Richmond. He's a colleague of mine in the Department of Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School.
Q. And did he say where he got that document from?
A. He didn't say.
Q. Have you asked the lawyers for the government for any documents furnished by the tobacco industry in defending prior cases?
A. I did not.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Have you reviewed the tobacco litigation testimony by any of the people who wrote the tobacco company documents you’re relying on for your opinions in this case?
A. Did I review the testimony of — I’m sorry. I need you to re-ask the question.
Q. Did you review any of the tobacco litigation testimony of the people who wrote the tobacco company documents that you're using in this case?
A. Did I review any of their testimony? No, I haven't reviewed their testimony.
Q. And have you reviewed any testimony from any prior tobacco litigation?
A. I have looked at testimony periodically. At one time, Ness Motley asked me to review some historian's testimony for them. So I reviewed Lacey Ford's testimony in what was, I think, a Florida trial.
Q. Any other testimony you can recall?
A. I don't recall reviewing any other. I reviewed maybe an expert statement. I don’t remember reviewing other testimony.
Q. And was all of the tobacco litigation testimony you’ve seen provided by lawyers suing the tobacco companies?
A. Julius Richmond showed me his testimony.
Q. Oh, do you know which case?
A. In the — probably in the Broin and Engle cases.
Q. Have you reviewed the tobacco litigation testimony of any individuals who worked for any tobacco companies as employees?
A. No, I’ve read about it in the general press, so I am aware that some tobacco company executives
testified, for example, in Minnesota. But I have no, you know, precise knowledge of their testimony in the cases.
Q. You haven't reviewed the actual transcripts of any tobacco company employees’ testimony?
A. No, I haven't done that.
Q. Have you reviewed the tobacco litigation testimony of any individuals who worked for the US government on smoking and health issues other than Doctor Richmond?
A. No, I think only Doctor Richmond's, so —
Q. Okay. Other than Doctor Richmond, have you reviewed the testimony of any of the other former Surgeon Generals in tobacco litigation?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I haven't reviewed them.
Q. Have you ever spoken with anyone who works at a tobacco company?
A. Yes. Well, I’ve spoken to somebody at the Tobacco Institute.
Q. Oh, who was that?
A. You know, I was trying to recall the man's name. When I began my research on the history of cigarette smoking and tobacco, I obviously thought
it would be important to be able to consult materials at the Tobacco Institute, and, potentially, at the companies. And, so, I went to the Tobacco Institute and was later — it was later explained to me that, unfortunately, their materials would not be made available to me, so —
Q. Okay. Have you ever tried to contact anybody at the material tobacco companies?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. And do you recall who you talked to at the Tobacco Institute?
A. I don't. It was some time ago, because it was just when I was just getting started, and I was kind of getting the lay of the land in terms of what kinds of materials would be available. And, so, the irony for me was that I had begun the project assuming — and I think this goes back to some of your questions about the availability of materials and, you know, record management, and accessibility to historians — and I started the project with the notion that it was unlikely that a considerable volume of industry material was likely to be available to me for a number of reasons associated with the issue of tobacco in
the 80s and '90s as I was getting started on my project. And then the litigation began to be a vehicle for research that I just couldn't possibly have anticipated when I began the project. So, in that sense, my route into tobacco industry materials has largely been the function of discovery in the litigation.
Q. And have you ever tried to contact any nontobacco companies to get, you know, corporate records or other documents from them?
A. Nontobacco companies? I forget. I may have once. I was doing a project on airline policy and smoking on airlines. And I was curious about sort of customer complaints about smoking on airlines. And I forget, but I at least thought I might send a letter to some of the airlines and ask them if they could open up archives about the debate in the airlines, especially going back to the '70s and 80s about smoking on planes.
Q. And what was their response?
A. I just don’t — again, I don’t remember. I don't think I got access to the kinds of materials I was looking for.
Q. Generally, do corporations give historians access
to their corporate files or —
A. It depends. You know, there are many corporations that have actively sought professional historians to write their histories. And, so, there are some very distinguished business historians who actually have been invited, you know, with very great latitude about accessibility of materials, into important corporations that want their histories, you know, traced in a rigorous, systematic, and professional way.
So, it just varies. And it's a contextural issue. It depends on what that industry produces, and, you know, why they would want a, you know, a kind of critical history written. There are also, then, in-house histories that get written that are somewhat different in character.
Q. Would the —
A. There are in-house histories of many of the tobacco companies.
Q. Would it be fair to say that some corporations let historians come in to do historical analysis on the records and some don’t?
A. Absolutely. I mean, there are examples in the —
you know, there are examples in the tobacco industry at different times when the industry wrote histories of the various industries that — you know, there are quite useful books by people like Nan Tilley on RJR. You know, Robert Heyman, who was the President of American Tobacco, wrote a history of tobacco in American culture. You know, books that I'm quite familiar with. And, you know, active, you know, accounts of the rise of the industry. And, so, some of the people have had access to industry individuals and records. Richard Kluger, in writing ’Ashes to Ashes," clearly had some access to fairly high level executives, especially at Philip Morris, but apparently at some of the other companies as well.
Q. Okay. Do you recognize the reports put out by the Surgeon General as authoritative sources of information on smoking and health?
A. There have been a lot of them. But, generally, I do think of them as authoritative sources.
Q. And the Surgeon General's Reports are
collaborative efforts by various members of the public health community, is that fair?
A. Public health and scientific community, medical
community.
Q. In studying the history of smoking and health and the government's role of smoking and health, would one source of historical documents be internal documents from the US government?
A. Potentially, one source of documents.
Q. In studying the history of smoking and health,
would one source of information be documents from the US Public Health Service?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And would it be useful to review the records of the Surgeon General regarding the Surgeon General's Report in conducting a historical analysis on smoking?
A. Yeah, I think I mentioned a minute ago that I have
—	that that was one of the first things I did was get to the national archives to see the archival records of the first Surgeon General's Report.
Q. And would it also be useful to review the records of NIH on smoking and health?
A. Depending on the particular question, it could be.
Q. And would documents from the National Cancer Institute be a source of information on smoking
and health?
A. Again, depending on the particular question that you had, they could be relevant.
Q. And would documents from the FTC be a source of information on smoking and health?
A. If you were interested in the FTC's role, they could be.
Q. Well -
A. You know, I mean, the question is all these things are potentially relevant. It's like getting back to this question that I had raised or you had raised and I had tried to respond to earlier, the particular relevance of any documentary basis has to do with the particular questions that you’re pursuing.
Q. In evaluating the government's role in smoking and health issues, would it be useful to look at records from the FTC?
A. Yes.
Q. In reviewing the government's role on smoking and health issues, would it be useful to review records from EPA?
A. Again, depending on the issue. EPA's not
interested in smoking at certain times or doesn't,
you know, get active in this area until a certain time. So, at the time that it begins to pursue issues, for example, about passive smoking, its records could be relevant.
Q. In assessing the government’s role in smoking and health, would it be useful to review FDA records on the proposed FDA regulations of tobacco products?
A. Could be, yes. I mean, again, if you’re interested in those kinds of initiatives by particular regulatory agencies and that's the question, then they would be relevant.
Q. And in evaluating the government’s role on tobacco, would it be useful to review the Department of Agriculture records on tobacco?
A. Around certain questions, yes.
Q. Are there any regulations or procedures that are in place under which the US government has an obligation to maintain historical records about its activities?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I assume, yes. But I'm not familiar with the precise procedures of record maintenance in the federal bureaucracy. There are procedures.
Q. As a historian, is it important to you that the US government maintain its historical records so that they could be reviewed by historians who want to do research?
A. I think, you know, for anyone who works in big institutions, there are procedures about the maintenance of records. So, it’s important to me that the records, you know, that are likely to be most relevant to historians are maintained.
Q. In preparing for your testimony in this case, have you reviewed any of the internal files or documents from the FTC on smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Not in preparing for my work in this case, no.
Q. Have you ever reviewed any of the —
A. I've seen some materials from the FTC. It was obviously — I've reviewed the Congressional testimony, the Blatnik Committee hearings, and FTC proposals. I'd have to review if they were archivally related materials. They turn up in different archives you see. So, for example, in the Surgeon General’s archives you can come across a file on FTC regulations. So, I would have to review where different things that I’ve learned
about the FTC and what kinds of documents, you know, I’ve reviewed. But I didn't review them in relationship to this expert testimony.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal FTC documents, documents that were generated by the FTC internally?
A. I have seen internally-generated FTC documents in different contexts. For example, at one time I looked into the debate about Joe Camel’s appeal to minors. And what I don’t know is whether they were internal or they were produced for -- you know, they were published, federally-published documents. But I think that some of them were internal documents that the FTC later released about its discussions about Joe Camel.
Q. In preparing for your testimony in this case, have you reviewed any of the internal files of the US Department of Agriculture?
A. Have not.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, have you reviewed any of the internal files of the Agricultural Research Service?
A. No.
any of the internal files of OS HA?
A. No, I did not
Q. In preparing for your testimony, have you reviewed any internal files from the US Public Health
Service?
A. I'm trying to think if there's anything —
internal files from the Public Health Service? As I say, I'm familiar with internal archival materials from the Pub he Health Service, but I did not review them in preparation of this expert testimony.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, did you review any internal files from the EPA on tobacco?
A. Not in preparation of my testimony.
Q. And in preparing for your testimony, did you review any of the internal files of the FDA relating to their proposed tobacco regulations?
A. No, not in preparation of this testimony.
Q. Have you seen any of the internal files of the FDA relating to their proposed regulations?
A. At one time I may have seen some of that
documentation. Again, some of it’s available on the web now, things like that. So, I — you know,
I’m largely familiar with the FDA initiative and
its legal context. But in preparing this testimony, I have not reviewed materials from the FDA.
Q. And in preparing for your testimony, have you reviewed any internal files from the National Clearing House on Smoking and Health?
A. Archival materials?
Q. Yeah.
A. No.
Q. In forming your opinions in this case, did you consider internal documents from the files of any of the US government agencies relating to tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I thought I went over this. You know, the
archival materials that I'm most familiar with are those associated with the first Surgeon General's Report. But I didn’t review them in preparing my expert statement. I’m broadly familiar with the archival record inside the Public Health Service.
Q. Okay. Other than —
A. Inside the first Surgeon General's Committee.
Q. Okay.
A. There are archival materials from that committee.
Q. Other than the materials on the first Surgeon
General's Committee, have you reviewed any other internal US government files from the Public Health Service on tobacco?
A. Not in the preparation of this testimony.
Q. Okay. Have you ever seen any such documents?
A. Possibly.
Q. But sitting here today, you can’t identify?
A. Well, I mean, you know, I mean, there are a lot of documents available, both electronically, and, then, you know, there are a lot of materials in my broader research, you know, in terms of the history of Public Health Service I've used in, you know, in different projects. So, but I — you know, I think the point here is I haven't done new archival research associated with the preparation of my expert testimony.
Q. And in preparing for your testimony, have the lawyers from the US government given you any internal documents on smoking and health from the Surgeon General's office?
A. No, they did not.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, did the lawyers for the government give you any internal documents from the US Department of Agriculture?
A. No, they did not.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, did the lawyers for the US government give you any internal documents from the Agriculture Research Service?
A. No, they didn't.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from the US Public Health Service?
A. No.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from OSHA?
A. No, they didn't.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from EPA?
A. No.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from FDA?
A. No, they didn't.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from the National Clearing House on Smoking and Health?
A. No.
Q. Did the US government give you any internal documents from any US government agency?
A. No, they did not.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal government documents relating to the creation of the 1972 Surgeon General’s Report?
A. No, I haven't reviewed them.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal documents from the US government relating to the 1988 US Surgeon General's Report?
A. The '88 report? There were a couple of reports that I served as an outside peer reviewer for.
Q. That — if I can help you out —
A. Yes.
Q. 1989 you served as a peer reviewer, right?
A. Right, I think '89. So, that was my only
confusion. But I have not reviewed the archival materials associated with the '88 report.
Q. Okay.
A. In fact, I never saw any archival materials from those reports. But, periodically, somebody from the government would send me a chapter to write a critique of that kind of thing.
Q. Do you still have any of the documents you were sent relating to your work as a reviewer on the Surgeon General's Reports?
A. I might. I would have to check. I certainly have
the critique I wrote of whatever it was, but —
Q. Oh, okay. Well, if you wouldn’t mind checking, and, then, if you could provide those to Mr.
Brody — would you be willing to do that?
A. Yeah, I'll provide him whatever I have.
Q. Okay. Now, did you send any documents to the US government when you were working on the Surgeon General's Reports?
A. No, I sent them no documents.
Q. Okay.
MR. BRODY: Do you want to change the
tape?
MR. SMITH: We still have time, right?
VIDEO OPERATOR: We’ve got about five minutes.
Q. Did the US government ever tell you to retain any of your documents that you created in conjunction with your work on the Surgeon General’s Reports?
A. I don't remember if they told me to retain anything, you know. Usually, I think that the rule is to send it back. You know, send back the chapter, something like that.
Q. Okay. And did you send back any materials to the US government?
A. I'm sure I did what they told me to do. I always do what they tell me to do.
Q. And just so we're clear, you worked on the 1989 report, right?
A. Right.
Q. And you worked on the 2000 report, is that right?
A. I — you know, I don’t always have the dates exactly straight, but I think that I must be listed as a peer reviewer on two or three of the reports.
Q. Okay. When was the last time that you worked as a peer reviewer on the Surgeon General's Reports?
A. I think the 2000 would be the last time, because then my memory kicks in, and I haven't done anything for the Surgeon General's office since then.
Q. Okay. And that critique that you mentioned, which report did that relate to?
A. I think it was a report in the '90s, but --
Q. Okay. Do you have any materials from your work on the 2000 report?
A. I don't think so, because I sent them back what, you know, what they asked for. And I don’t remember writing a critique of anything for the
2000 report, although I do remember getting it in and a galley copy for, you know, if I had questions or comments.
Q. Did you create any documents in conjunction with your work on the 2000 report?
A. Not to my memory. But I, you know, I could probably try to check.
Q. And who did you deal with when you were working on the 2000 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't even know. I don't know.
Q. You don't know who you were dealing with?
A. You know, I mean —
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, I got a letter from somebody, and I answered it. And I don't know who I — you know, it wasn't important.
Q. Well, did you have any telephone conversations?
A. No, I had no telephone contact.
Q. You know —
A. It was not extensive review. They have different levels of peer reviewers in the process, I think, and people who are really going to address a whole chapter, and people who are sent a copy for
general review, that kind of thing.
Q. And how about the other Surgeon General’s Reports, who are some of the people you worked with on those?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There was a guy at CDC. I think his name is
Rothenburg, Robert Rothenburg. I'd have to check, but I think that was his name. But that was the individual who, you know, who contacted me, and who I sent my report to.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any internal US
government documents relating to communications between the government and the tobacco industry?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal US government documents containing opinions of government officials regarding the conduct of the tobacco industry?
A. No, I haven't.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 10:59. We are off the record. This concludes Cassette No.
1.
(Discussion off the record.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: We are now recording
and on the record. The time is 11:01. This is the beginning of Cassette No. 2 in the deposition of Allan Brandt.
Q. In forming your opinions in this case, you didn't consider internal US government documents reflecting communications between the government and the tobacco industry?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I did not.
Q. And in forming your opinions in this case, you didn’t consider internal US government documents containing the government's opinions regarding the conduct of the tobacco companies?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted any sort of review of internal US government documents on nicotine addiction?
A. No, not internal government documents, no.
Q. Have you conducted any kind of review of internal government documents on cigarette design?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Have you conducted any review of internal
government documents on environmental tobacco smoke?
A. No.
Q. Have you conducted any review of internal
government documents on tobacco taxes imposed by the US government?
A. No, no internal government documents.
Q. Have you conducted a systematic review on any internal government documents on tobacco subsidies given by the US government?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you conducted any review of internal US government documents on promotion of tobacco products by the US government?
A. No.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, have you discussed any issues relating to your testimony with any individuals working with the US government other than the lawyers for the government?
A. No, only Mr. Brody.
Q. Okay. You haven’t discussed your testimony with anyone in the Surgeon General's office?
A. No, I haven't.
in the FTC?
A. No.
Q. You haven’t discussed your testimony with anyone in the Department of Health and Human Services?
A. No, I have not.
Q. You haven’t discussed your testimony with anyone at the Department of Agriculture?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. You haven't discussed your testimony with anyone at the FDA?
A. No.
Q. You haven't discussed your testimony with anyone at EPA?
A. No.
Q. And you haven’t discussed your testimony with anyone at OSHA?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you conducted a review of the FTC regulations governing tobacco advertising in the 20th Century?
A. I'm broadly familiar with FTC regulations of tobacco advertising.
Q. Are you familiar with USD A regulations on tobacco? A. No.
guidelines regarding tobacco?
A. I'm not familiar with them.
Q. Are you familiar with the EPA regulations that were enacted regarding smoking?
A. Somewhat familiar, I’d say.
Q. And you’re aware that the EPA regulations on secondhand smoke were struck down by a court?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just don’t — I don’t exactly recall the legal history of the EPA regulations.
Q. Do you know whether the EPA regulations on secondhand smoke are still in effect?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I do not.
Q. Are you familiar with OSHA regulations regarding smoking?
A. Only in the broadest sense.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the OSHA regulations on smoking?
A. Well, I have evaluated the history of regulatory initiatives around questions of passive smoke.
So, I was aware that both OSHA, EPA, probably NIOSH, also, all had been players in the federal approach to regulations in the workplace, for
example. But I'm not familiar with the specific level of, you know, who regulated what.
Q. And have you looked at the actual regulations that were issued by OSHA on smoking?
A. At one time, I may have seen them.
Q. All right.
A. But I did not review them in preparation of this testimony.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, have you examined the history of smoking and health in Great Britain at all?
A. Not in preparing this testimony. But, you know,
I’m interested in the — I guess, in my opinion, I did cite the 1962 Royal College of Physicians’ study. So, in that sense, there is a connection to Great Britain.
Q. Okay. Other than the Royal College of Physicians’ report, is there any aspect of smoking and health in Great Britain that you are looking at for purposes of your testimony in this case?
A. Well, I was interested — there were some, you know, so-called offshore research done at the Harrogate Labs that are in England; and that came up in some of the company documents I reviewed.
Q. And have you conducted any of the research published by Harrogate Labs?
A. I haven't reviewed their research.
Q. In preparing for your testimony in this case, have you conducted any kind of reviews of polls regarding public awareness of the health hazards of smoking?
A. Not directly in preparation of this testimony,
although I'm aware of some of the polls. And some of the polls are cited in some of the company documents I reviewed.
Q. Okay. Have you looked at any actual polls from the 1950s on public awareness of health hazards?
A. At one time I looked at those polls. I looked at Gallup and other polls on those questions.
Q. Okay.
A. I have not recently reviewed them in preparation of my testimony.
Q. When were the latest polls you've seen on public awareness of the health hazards of smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I may have looked at polls in the '90s. But I haven’t looked at any polling data recently.
of the health hazards of smoking put out by the Roper organization?
A. I probably have. I've seen Roper polls.
Q. Okay. And can you identify which ones you've seen there?
A. I couldn't now, because, as I say, I didn’t review that material recently in preparation of my testimony.
Q. Have you seen any internal tobacco company documents that contain polls regarding the public's perception of the tobacco industry as a source of smoking and health information?
A. I have seen some tobacco company documents that looked at that question and/or related questions, especially the relative confidence in filtration among the American public.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any internal tobacco
company polls conducted by the Roper organization?
A. I was familiar that the companies employed Roper to do some of their polling work, but I haven’t reviewed polls.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted any kind of systematic review of public statements by officials in the US government regarding smoking and health since 1900
to the present?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I have reviewed public statements by public health authorities throughout the 20th Century. And, you know, given the sort of general nature of your question, you know, certainly the Surgeon General's Reports constitute public statements by public health officials about smoking and health.
But going back before the first Surgeon General's Report of '64, you know, I was certainly familiar with the initiatives of Surgeon Generals in their public statements before that, going back even before the sort of modem era of public health initiatives regarding smoking. There were Surgeon Generals commented on smoking going back into the 1920s and '30s.
Q. Other than the Surgeon Generals’ statements on
smoking and health, have you reviewed any other US government officials' statements on smoking and health?
A. Well, for example, I’m familiar that, you know, Joseph Califano, who was Secretary of HHS, made statements about smoking and health. He's not a Surgeon General. So, you know, there have been
other secretaries of HHS/before then HEW. So, there are many public statements by public officials, including, you know, Commissioners of the Federal Trade Commission. I'm familiar with some of their public statements about smoking and advertising and health. So, yes, I'm familiar with many public officials’ comments on smoking and health.
Q. In preparing for your testimony, have you
conducted any kind of review of state and local regulations on smoking?
A. I've been quite interested in that, but in preparation of my testimony, I did not reinvestigate it. But I’m certainly aware of the broad national movement towards local regulation, beginning, really, in the 1970s and '80s.
Q. And there are a large number of local and state entities that have issued smoking-related regulations, is that accurate?
A. Yes, many have. Many states have their own, you know, legislation associated with smoking in the workplace and so on.
Q. Have you made any attempt to review the material state laws and regulations on smoking themselves?
A. Not in any kind of comprehensive way.
Q. Okay. Have you conducted any kind of review of public statements by public health organizations, such as the American Cancer Society, warning the public about, you know, smoking hazards?
A. I haven't studied that systematically. Obviously, I've been familiar with the role that the voluntary health agencies played in the history of understanding the harms associated with smoking. So, but I have not studied the American Cancer Society or the American Heart Association's interventions in a concerted way in my own investigations.
Q. Okay. And in preparing for your testimony in this case, do you plan to testify about American Cancer Society or the American Lung Association or the American Heart Association’s efforts —
A. The only place where —
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. The only place where it's immediately relevant to my opinions and the expert statement that I submitted was the role that some, if not all, of those agencies played in — especially in the 1950s and early '60s in helping to identify the
harms associated with smoking. And, in part, helping to produce the political process that eventuates in the first Surgeon General's Report.
So, I may, in my testimony, you know, relevant to my opinions, you know, talk about the role that they played. I think that's — if I remember correctly, those organizations are identified in my statement.
Q. Okay. Other than the public health organizations, what other entities helped participate in the political process that led to the 1964 report?
A. You know, I think there were a series of things. There were people in Congress who were pressing for a report, people like Marie Neuburger and others. There were people in the government at NCI, and certainly at the Public Health Service, who saw the value in a definitive statement from the government about the science of smoking and health. And then, of course, these voluntary agencies also weighed in to help, you know, spur the Kennedy administration to appoint a commission, which was done under Luther Terry’s auspices.
from any of these public health organizations?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I have not.
Q. You haven't reviewed any American Cancer Society internal documents?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I haven't.
Q. And you haven't reviewed any American Medical Association internal documents?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. Which tobacco companies’ documents have you reviewed?
A. I've seen documents from, I think, all of the
companies named as Defendants in the case. I'm just trying to think if there's any company, for some reason, that I haven't seen some of their materials. But I think, you know, the companies named in the case, I've seen some of their documents.
Q. And have you undertaken any effort to review documents from tobacco companies that the US government hasn’t named as Defendants?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Sitting here today, based on your review of the
tobacco company documents, can you identify any of the scientists working for British American Tobacco Company?
A. Yeah, I think there's Felton, Bentley; they worked for British American Tobacco.
Q. Are you sure that both of them did?
A. I assume that they did, but —
Q. Okay.
A. It seems like maybe you think they didn't, so —
Q. Can you identify any of the scientists working at Lorillard?
A. At Lorillard? Yeah, Alexander Spears worked at Lorillard.
Q. Any of the actual scientists?
A. He was a scientist. You know, he was a chemist —
Q. Okay.
A. — who went on to become an executive. But, actually, that was not an unusual career path.
So, what I found when I looked at company scientists is that they often performed administrative and executive roles as well.
Q. Okay.
A. Spears was an important scientist at Lorillard.
sold by Lorillard?
A. Yeah, Lorillard made Old Golds and Kents.
Q. Okay.
A. I could probably identify some others.
Q. Can you identify any of the cigarettes made by British American Tobacco Company?
A. British American Tobacco, you know, had this —
I'm not sure. I think that British American Tobacco made Viceroys.
Q. All right. Are there any other cigarettes from them that you can identify?
A. I'd have to give it some thought.
Q. How about Brown & Williamson? Can you identify any of their cigarette brands?
A. I'm pretty sure I could identify some Brown & Williamson brands. I'm just blanking now. I'll think about it and I'll get — Brown & Williamson
—	I just — I'm, you know, I'm blanking.
Q. Can you identify any cigarette brands sold by Liggett?
A. Liggett? Liggett made L&M. They also introduced Lark.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any of the Annual Reports from the Council for Tobacco Research?
A. Yeah, I've reviewed a number of their reports.
Q. Have you done a systematic review of all the CTR Annual Reports?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It depends on how you would define "systematic," but —
Q. Well, have you reviewed all the CTR Annual Reports?
A. I can't say I’ve reviewed them all, but I have reviewed many CTR Annual Reports.
Q. Well, is there any particular period of time for which you've reviewed the CTR Annual Reports?
A. Any particular time?
Q. Yeah.
A. I've reviewed a good number of them for at least the mid to late '50s through the 1990s. But I did not say I need to review every single one of them in order to conduct my research.
Q. Okay. So, sitting here today, you're not willing to say that you've reviewed every single CTR annual report?
A. Well, I mean, you know, I’m trying to be accurate in my responses to you.
scientific publications by CTR grant recipients?
A. Yes. I've reviewed some of their publications.
Q. About how many publications by CTR grant recipients have you reviewed?
A. I don't know, probably as many as — probably as many as 30 or 40. So, you know, I'm quite familiar with a number of people who got CTR grants and some of the work that they did.
Q. And you haven’t conducted any review yourself to ascertain the quality and accuracy of all the scientific publications that were funded by CTR?
A. No, I really wasn’t interested in that exactly as the question that most concerned me about CTR. You know, I actually assumed that a lot of the science that CTR sponsored, you know, was, you know, of a relatively high quality. You know, as CTR frequently pointed out, appeared in peer review journals. So, my question, as a historian, wasn’t, you know, is that quality science? I had different questions about it.
Q. And, so, you're not planning to testify in this case that CTR-funded research wasn’t quality science?
A. There were examples of extremely poor quality
science among CTR writers and researchers. But, I don’t think that that was necessarily characteristic of CTR's research program. You know, for example, I reviewed some of the research that was done by Carl Seltzer, who was a physical anthropologist with a kind of quasi Harvard appointment. And he got considerable funds from CTR. And I don't think there's that much question — based upon others who were really peer reviewers of that work, as opposed to a purely historical assessment — that the work was, you know, of very flimsy scientific quality. That would be one example. But there are many examples of CTR research that was done by, you know, considerably more elite scientists at a higher level.
So, there's a range to CTR research, everything from, you know, I think — I don’t know if I would use the term, but others did historically, you know, tobacco junk science, to research that was of a very high quality done by prominent researchers. So, if one were really looking at the CTR research program and evaluating it, which would be an important project, you know,
that, I think they'd find that kind of range.
Q. You're aware that there were a number of the CTR grantees that received the Nobel Prize, right?
A. Yes, I'm aware.
Q. And there were a number of the CTR grantees that published in respected peer review journals?
A. Absolutely. In fact, I see that as a crucial
element to my historical understanding of CTR; that for the Council for Tobacco Research to achieve the kind of authority and legitimacy that was crucial to its public relations goals, it needed scientists at the highest level to publish, you know, excellent work.
So, rather than, you know, seeing that as an endorsement of CTR's program, I see it neither as an endorsement, nor a criticism. It's part of my historical analysis of the role that CTR played.
Now, if CTR wanted to succeed in its public relations mission, which is explicitly laid out in many documents, it didn't need second-rate scientists, to be perfectly honest, like Seltzer, although he played a role for them. It needed Nobel-level scientists in order to say, Look what
the tobacco industry is doing to contribute to our understanding of human health.
So, I wasn’t surprised at all to find that there were eminent researchers working for CTR.
Q. And have you found that the tobacco companies sought out Nobel-level scientists that produced high quality research?
A. For sure. They sought out the Nobel-level scientists, and they sought out the Seltzers and the Aviados and the Hickeys, people who would do work that was more germane to their immediate mission of defending tobacco as noninjurious, of calling into question the scientific findings of the first Surgeon General’s Report, and earlier science.
So, they sought out a lot of different types is my point.
Q. All right.
A. And, so, if we were going to characterize CTR research, we’d have to understand the role that different scientists played within their larger program.
Q. Are you familiar with the Scientific Advisory
Board of CTR?
A. Of course.
Q. And do you know whether any officials of the US government ever sat on the Scientific Advisory Board of CTR?
A. I actually think probably some did. I think — and what I don't — what I’m not certain of is did they at the same time that they had their government appointments, but we could check that. But, you know, for example, Paul Kotin, I think, had had a federal role, and he's at one time a member of the SAB.
Q. You’re aware that the Scientific Advisory Board of CTR determined which grants would be funded by CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Am I aware that the Scientific Advisory Board determined which grants would be funded?
Q. Yeah.
A. Well, my understanding is slightly different than that; it’s that the Scientific Advisory Board officially had the capacity to award grants, but that others also reviewed grants in their process who were not members of the Scientific Advisory
Board. So, I think that, you know, the sort of — the procedures of CTR were such that the Scientific Advisory Board was promised autonomy over grants, but, as you know, there were also other monies spent by CTR that were not reviewed by the Scientific Advisory Board for so-called special projects, so-called legal projects.
So, CTR, as an entity, you know, certainly had a peer review process in its Scientific Advisory Board, but it also allocated funds, grants to others that were not reviewed by the Scientific Advisory Board.
Q. Have you undertaken any inquiry into the
background or qualifications or credentials of the members of the SAB?
A. I've been interested in that question, because I was interested sort of in how they structured their peer review process, especially in relationship to their particular programmatic approach to investigating questions of health, vis-a-vis the cigarette. So, you know, my sense from some of the industry documents is that, you know, they were looking for certain kinds of scientists who, you know, would be willing to
participate in their work, some of whom were quite distinguished. I mean, you know, I'm very impressed that some extremely distinguished scientists worked with the SAB. And then I think that there was a — again, there was a kind of gradient in terms of the prestige or elite quality of the scientists associated with their program.
Q. Were there any scientists that worked on the SAB that weren't qualified for that position?
A. I couldn’t really say, because I did not evaluate the credentials of every scientist on the SAB.
I’m not prepared to answer that.
Q. It’s true that CTR funded thousands of published scientific studies, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know how many that CTR funded?
A. I don't know offhand, but, you know, certainly thousands of published studies.
Q. And CTR gave out millions of dollars in grants to outside scientists for various research projects, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, they did.
Q. Do you know how much money CTR gave out?
A. I know for particular years, like, I think near
the end they were giving out as much as 20 million a year near the end. At first they got started quite slowly, and a predominance of the budget was going for PR and administration. So, you know, they got geared up. And eventually they were giving, you know, I think as much as 20 million — maybe more — in a year to scientific research.
Q. Isn't it true that the idea of having a grant
program, such as that run by CTR, was something that was recommended to the tobacco companies by outside scientists in the 1950s?
A. I think that, you know, it was perfectly
conceivable. I don’t know if outside scientists recommended it to them. But it was perfectly conceivable. It's a realistic strategy for, you know, for potentially enhancing research on smoking and health.
Unfortunately, if you evaluate the history of CTR, its impact on smoking and health questions, by the industry’s own admission, was negligible. So, certainly, people were recommending independent research. You know, the industry, you know, really giving money that, you
know, without strings and without industry control, the sort of promises of the Frank Statement, you know, realized. That was — you know, that's one thing.
Now, was that CTR? I think that’s a question for, you know, further investigation and discussion.
Q. Have you conducted any review to find out what the recommendations were by outside scientists in the 1950s regarding establishing a grant program like CTR?
A. I don't know what scientists were saying.
Obviously, the federal government had an interest in doing research in this area. And the, you know, the tobacco industry inevitably had a phenomenal interest in seeing health issues that's associated with cigarette smoking critically and scientifically evaluated. So, I would just anticipate that scientists would say, you know,
That's a great idea. Let’s get science to work on these most important issues that impact the American public’s health.
So, you know, did people urge the tobacco companies to do this? I would imagine,
for sure.
Q. Have you reviewed any communications between CTR and the US government?
A. You know, I'm aware of the activities of the
Tobacco Working Group in the federal government, although I haven't studied it closely. But I don’t know that they had any direct communication with CTR. I just don't know.
Q. You haven't reviewed any documents reflecting
communications between CTR and the US government?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Okay. Isn't it true that a number of the studies that were funded through CTR also received cofunding from US government entities, such as the National Cancer Institute?
A. I think that is true. And, again, that totally
confirms my perception of CTR that, you know, that the companies actively would be eager to have conjoint research or researchers who had federal grants as well, because CTR's — the whole question for CTR was always, you know, Is this a legitimate and authentic research enterprise that has important researchers working for it? And its whole legitimating capacity as a public relations
vehicle dependent on excellent science.
Q. And do you have any criticism of the US government for cofunding research projects with CTR?
A. You know, in retrospect, now that we understand CTR's program better, one could come to the conclusion that some of those judgments might have been in error. At the time it might have been more difficult to really understand CTR's program.
So, a lot of what we know about CTR has only emerged in very recent historical research and with access to CTR archives, which certainly no one in the government would have had at the time that any collaboration was planned.
Q. Okay.
A. So, for example, somebody in the government would not have known about, you know, the council of attorneys that, you know, oversaw CTR, the work CTR was doing to prepare witnesses for litigation, activities like that that might have made them cautious about any potential collaboration with CTR. But those are things that I assume were not clearly known at the time.
Q. Have you done any investigation about what the government knew about CTR?
A. I have not.
Q. Isn’t it true that there were scientists who
worked at US government laboratories who accepted funding from CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I assume, given how your question is phrased, that the answer is yes. And, so, you know, if you tell me that that's true, then, you know, I — it doesn’t contradict anything that I believe about CTR.
Q. And you haven’t done any investigation to
determine whether CTR gave funding to researchers at US government labs?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I have not done any research.
Q. Have you conducted a search to find out if any individuals who worked for the US government in any capacity received funding for research from CTR?
A. It certainly is possible.
Q. Okay. Do you know whether CTR still exists?
A. I understand that CTR was disbanded as a result of the agreement in the so-called master settlement; and that's my understanding of CTR today.
Q. Isn’t it true that a number of the scientists who received funding from CTR worked at prestigious academic institutions?
A. As I've explained, the answer is yes. And that was crucial to the strategy of CTR’s pub he relations. You know, I mean, these were no secrets. When they got a Harvard researcher, they said, Well, we have a Harvard researcher, Carl Seltzer, or a Harvard researcher, or a Harvard project. And, you know, as somebody who works in that institution, I realize it has a kind of credential that can be authoritative. The irony is that Seltzer never had a Harvard academic appointment. But CTR understood his utility.
Now, there are more prominent Harvard professors, you know, who also work for CTR. And I see them, in a sense, as related in the strategy of CTR. Seltzer would produce the kind of science CTR wanted for its defense of the cigarette.
Manfred Kamov sky wouldn't do anything related to tobacco. He had no interest in tobacco at all.
But, on the other hand, he was willing to take CTR money, because it made it possible for him to do his research. So, at my institution, Harvard, CTR
offered funds to both Carl Seltzer, who was not a professor, had no professorial ladder appointment, and Manfred Kamovsky, a distinguished professor; and both served CTR's essential goals and needs very effectively.
Q. And did you ever object to Harvard researchers receiving CTR grants when you were there?
A. I once had a talk with Manfred Kamovsky before he died, because I was interested in this from a historical perspective. And I wouldn't say that I objected, although I was -- by the time I talked to Professor Kamovsky when I was a young professor at Harvard, I was concerned at that time as a result of both some research I had done, that in a sense it was easy, perhaps, not to realize that one's research had been used for the social function of legitimation. And a lot of tobacco CTR researchers said, Well, they’re giving me money to support important research. And I don't care what the tobacco industry does, as long as this is something good. And, certainly, I was familiar with that argument. But I also had become aware in my own research and analysis that CTR would then use the name of Manfred Kamovsky
and Harvard as a means of implying that they were doing substantive, important, elite, prestigious science.
Q. And when was your conversation with Kamovsky?
A. It must have been — let me think if I can put a time on it — sometime in the — probably in the late 1980s.
Q. Did Kamovsky agree with your arguments and stop taking CTR grant money?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know what he did. I don’t know.
Q. To your knowledge, did he stop taking CTR grant money after you talked to him?
A. I don't know what — I wasn't trying to convince him not to. I just was talking to him about, you know, what the implications of, you know, of working with CTR were. I, you know — so, I don’t know what he did. I didn't talk to him about it.
And, you know, I didn’t follow up with him about it.
Q. Isn't it true that a number of the studies funded by CTR have been cited in the Surgeon General's Reports on smoking and health?
A. I'm sure that’s true.
MR. BRODY: Doug, why don't we take a short break.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 11:40. We are off the record.
(Recess was taken.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 11:49. We are recording and on the record.
Q. Doctor Brandt, have you taken the time to review the Surgeon General’s Reports to find citations to publications that were funded by CTR?
A. No, I haven't done that in any kind of systematic way. I assume that the Surgeon General, you know, would, where appropriate, you know, cite anything produced anywhere that would be relevant to the question, so —
Q. Okay.
A. I'm sure there are CTR-produced materials in the Surgeon General's Reports.
Q. Are you aware of any research sponsored by CTR that was falsified?
A. No, I wouldn’t say falsified. I think that one of the things that interested me is that sometimes it appeared there was a process of negotiation between the leadership at CTR and its researchers.
So, if, for example, you took the Homburger case where he wanted to, you know, use a term describing cancer, and, then, negotiate with the CTR directors about what term he could use, then the question of the verity of that science or its falsification comes up. But whether that would be falsified research, I don’t know that I would characterize it that way. But you do have implications in the documentary records of instances where CTR authorities intervened or negotiated with researchers that would be uncharacteristic of independent research processes.
Q. You’re not aware of any data that's reported in any CTR-funded research study that was falsified?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Okay. Are you aware of any instance in which CTR-funded research was prevented from being published?
A. Well, I am, again, I'm broadly familiar with the Homburger case where there were questions about its form of publication. But I'm not aware of instances where, you know, research that was being done under CTR auspices was forbidden from
publication.
Q. Are you aware of any instance where a CTR grantee or a contract researcher was prevented from disclosing that their research had been funded by CTR?
A. I think there were instances in the records from
CTR — if I remember correctly — where CTR would advise that, you know, Please, don't put our name on this. But, you know, we could check the documents on that. But I think that there are instances where CTR did not want identification with its granting program.
Q. Well, have you done anything to go and find any research studies that were published that didn't contain an attribution to CTR as a grant provider but which were, in fact, funded by CTR?
A. I think there are examples like that. Like I read a piece recently by Aviado, who was getting special projects money, but, you know, Doctor Aviado did not identify that he was being funded by CTR in this publication. So, you know, I think that would be characteristic of that kind of problem where it's not clear the role that CTR played in the work.
I also recently read a piece by Seltzer.
And if I remember correctly -- again, I'd like to be able to check it — but if I remember correctly, Seltzer, there was no notation on this article that Seltzer was receiving CTR support.
So, those kinds of examples —
Q. Well -
A. — do raise a question about the ability for an
outside reviewer to assess the potential financial interest of the investigator.
Q. Well, isn't it true that CTR grantees would sometimes publish research that wasn’t funded using CTR money?
A. Well, of course.
Q. And in instances where CTR researchers published research that was not funded using CTR money but the grant came from another source, should they, in your view, have to put an attribution to CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, all I'm saying is, you know, I don’t know if this specific project — but the work was
—	especially the work of Aviado and Seltzer — was especially related to the particular issue that CTR was funding with them relating to smoking
and health, and it was not noted on those articles. So, of course, Manfred Kamovsky probably did a lot of work that wasn't funded by CTR, and I doubt if his work said, you know, the work that wasn't funded by CTR was noted. But, it certainly is a, you know, interesting question.
If we looked at the thousands of research articles published under grants from CTR, do they all have the attribution of CTR? I don't know the answer to that question, but I'd be interested in knowing. And, then, did CTR researchers, you know, regularly identify themselves as such for the research that was done under CTR auspices; and what was CTR getting for its money in cases like Aviado and Seltzer, irrespective of whether a particular grant had funded the general work that they were doing?
Those are all legitimate questions.
Q. And you haven’t done anything to systematically go through and answer those questions?
A. Not yet. Those are questions I would be interested in investigating.
Q. Have you been informed that at least one scientist that the government has named as an expert witness
in this case has published research that was funded by CTR?
A. I wasn't aware of that.
Q. The government never told you that?
A. No.
Q. When you were forming your opinions in this case, you didn't consider the fact that the government had hired individuals whose publications were funded by CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think I’ve answered that question. If I didn’t know, then, obviously — I answered it now three times.
Q. Okay.
A. No, I did not know.
Q. In your view is it appropriate for the government to employ scientists to testify as an expert in this case whose published studies have been funded by CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It could be. It depends on that person's expertise, what they’re going to testify to, if their opinions are — you know, reflect their expertise and research. You know, I have to
reiterate, I think there were some excellent researchers who took CTR money, and I don’t think that that in any way mitigates the public relations, you know, approach that CTR took. And I think there’s a wide gradient of scientific quality and individuals associated with the CTR. And for me, analytically, in terms of my opinion in the case, it confirms the very strategic role that CTR played within the entire picture of industry organization during the critical period that I've been investigating.
So, if the government has a witness, you know, that at one time had a grant from CTR, you know, I'm not sure I have any opinion about that or it has any significance for me.
Q. Well, is it inappropriate in your view for scientists to accept grants from CTR?
A. You know, it depends, historically. It's a very interesting historical question. And I think there were times that it was not inappropriate; and then there are times when it became increasingly inappropriate. And now that I know as much as I know about CTR, you know, if CTR offered a researcher grant now, I would tell that
researcher, but, you know, CTR was a very planned public relations strategy meant to enhance the distortions that were being perpetrated by the industry, I don't think you should take money from them. But there was a time when people didn't know that. And they made the best judgment they could. And, you know, one of the things that I’ve noticed in my investigations of the history of CTR is that they often identified young researchers who were having difficulty getting funding. There was a kind of process of recruitment in which you could enlist people who would have very favorable scientific careers in the work of CTR, so —
Q. Would you criticize a researcher whose publication was funded by CTR after they had been involved in litigation against the tobacco companies?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It’s a complex question. I just have to go back over it. Why would I criticize an individual who had taken money from CTR after —
Q. After they had testified against the tobacco companies.
MR. BRODY: Same objection.
A. Well, because I think I answered that question.
My assumption is that whoever is testifying now, perhaps, against the tobacco companies, doesn’t have the deep historical understanding of the role that CTR played at certain times. So, you haven't told me anything. I don't know who this person is. I don't know when they took money from CTR. I don't know what the research is. Now, historians are very sensitive to these things.
You know, what was the context? What was the program? How does he end up now becoming an expert witness for the government, and on what areas of expertise? So, I wouldn't criticize somebody for testifying, you know, for the government, having taken a CTR grant.
You know, for example, when I talked to Manfred Kamovsky in the late '80s, the beginning of a clear understanding was at least beginning to be available about the role the industry had played in distorting the science associated with tobacco; and, so, I was beginning to have some concerns about it. The Harvard School of Public Health I think recently passed a regulation saying that no one on its faculty is allowed to take tobacco money. No, I don’t need to make a
judgment about the sort of, you know, rectitude of a policy like that. I'm interested in it as a historian. What does it mean? Why did it come about? Who was behind it? What are its implications?
So, you know, am I critical of somebody testifying, you know, who — critical that this person took money from CTR? I'd have to know more about the particular circumstances. You know, that’s my answer.
Q. Okay. You mentioned CTR special projects. Did you know that the CTR special projects — do you know when they began?
A. I have a sense of when they get quite active. But I think there was indications of special projects, certainly, by 1970 would be my guess. I'm trying to think of the earliest document I have. But, certainly, even before special projects began, the role that general counsels played in the administration of CTR was impressive.
Q. Okay. Isn't it true that special projects had to be approved by the Scientific Director of CTR?
A. I don't know, and, you know, I just don’t know. Maybe the Scientific Director did approve the
special projects. But I haven't seen documentation that the Scientific Director had clout, vis-a-vis special projects. My impression of CTR from the documents would be that the Scientific Director worked for the legal counsel, as opposed to the legal counsel consulting the Scientific Director. I think there’s a lot of evidence that, you know, that the lawyers, you know, were overseeing the direction that CTR was taking, as opposed to the Scientific Director.
Q. Okay. Now, you agree that litigation sometimes requires that research be done, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I guess, you know, it often may require research.
Q. Well, for example, you’ve conducted research in this case, right?
A. I have.
Q. And in conducting research in this case, you worked with the lawyers for the US government, right?
A. Yes. Oh, I see what you're asking. I think I see what you’re asking. If, by what you’re asking, you know, was it appropriate for CTR to sponsor research associated with litigation, you know, I
would say that the answer is no. And the reason I would say no is that if you want to create a fully independent scientific record, you don’t have lawyers involved in litigation directing the scientific projects of that organization. One would develop strategies for developing firewalls between the independent science of a Council for Tobacco Research, for example, and the research that would be done in the context of adversarial litigation.
So, the idea that one of CTR's functions evolved into a process of conducting research associated with litigation is one of the ways that CTR really gets into trouble. It has many functions. It's performing many roles for the companies. There's an ongoing debate within the companies about what role should CTR be playing, and I think, you know, strategically, was enormously difficult to have it both saying, We do the highest quality scientific independent research, and we’re also preparing witnesses for litigation who may be scientists doing research for us.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. My question is in this case you worked with lawyers on the litigation, right?
A. Of course, I did.
Q. Okay. And you met with a lawyer several times, right?
A. I met with Mr. Brody once in January or February, as I said, '02; and then, again, on, I think, the only other time I saw Mr. Brody was in preparation for my deposition, so —
Q. And you met with Mr. Kinner also, right?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And you also — did you have any telephone conversations with any of the lawyers for the government?
A. I had a couple of phone conversations with Mr. Brody and one of his colleagues.
Q. And the lawyers for the government provided you with documents that you're using in connection with your opinions?
A. Absolutely, but the analogy between my research, as an expert government witness, and developing expert scientific witnesses for tobacco litigation, in my judgment, is an enormously faulty one. And I had an extensive scholarly
record in the area of the history of tobacco prior to being engaged by the government as an expert witness. I was sought out because of the extensive research and work that I had done, independent of any organization, and recently had done some additional work that consolidates work I had done previously in this context.
But the CTR was developed, historically, with the commitment of, We’ll do anything to protect the public’s health should there be any problem with our product. Going back to the Frank Statement, as you know the CTR’s origins are at the Frank Statement. And the idea that lawyers would be using that institution to develop experts, I think, calls into question the role that the CTR plays.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Isn't it true that representatives of the tobacco companies had discussions with the United States government's Department of Justice before they formed CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just don’t know.
Q. The US government hasn't provided you any
documents reflecting their conversations with the tobacco industry about the formation of CTR?
A. No, they didn't.
Q. You didn't consider the US government's input in the decision by the tobacco companies to form CTR when you formed your opinions?
A. I assumed when CTR was formed — and this is true when you are doing historical work — you follow very closely, and, so, you know, What was the industry saying about CTR when it was formed? They were saying, you know, what's really required is new research, independent research, no-strings-tied research into the fundamental questions of smoking and human health.
So, if you go back to the origins of CTR
—	and here's where you really have to pull the time thread — you know, we can’t talk about CTR as if it's an entity outside of time. It changed over time. It had implications from the beginning, some of which were clearly understood to outsiders, some of which, not. And, so, my perception is, you know, Could CTR have been successful in terms of helping us to understand better the health impact of smoking on human
beings? It could have been successful. And what did CTR end up doing, based upon the historical record? It did something quite considerably different. And it did not do what it told the public it was going to do.
I’m unaware of materials that say to the public, One of CTR's purposes is to develop expert scientific witnesses for litigation. I do not know of anything in the public record that made that clear to scientists in general in the scientific community and to the public.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal US government documents on CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I've answered that question. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you asked the government to provide you access to the people who had discussions with the tobacco industry when CTR was formed?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I didn't do it.
Q. Have you published anything in the peer review literature specifically on CTR?
A. Not specifically.
Q. Are you familiar with Kenneth Ludmerer?
A. Yes, lam.
Q. Do you regard Kenneth Ludmerer as an expert in history?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Are you familiar with Theodore Wilson?
A. I only have become familiar with Theodore Wilson through having had his expert statement shared with me.
Q. Are you familiar with Richard Thomas?
A. Again, I only became aware of Richard Thomas’s work through his expert statement. I had not previously been.
Q. Are you familiar with Peter English?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you regard Peter English as an expert in history?
A. Yes, he's an expert.
Q. Kenneth Ludmerer, is he still President of the American Society for the History of Medicine?
A. Yes, he is.
Q. And you're also — you're a member of that?
A. I'm a member of that organization, yes.
Q. And do you work with Kenneth Ludmerer at all?
A. I haven't ever really worked with him. But he's a colleague. I know him personally a bit. I'm certainly familiar with his work. And, you know, in that collegiate way that I will see him at a meeting or at a talk. So, yes, I know Ken Ludmerer.
Q. And how much time have you spent reviewing Kenneth Ludmerer's expert report?
A. I didn't keep track specifically of the time I
reviewed his expert report. But I certainly spent
—	you know, I certainly spent a number of hours carefully reviewing his expert statement.
Q. Well, was it more than five hours?
A. Yeah. It was more than five, and, probably, you know, less than 12.
Q. And how much time did you spend reviewing Richard Thomas’s expert report?
A. Much less, probably three or four hours.
Q. And how much time did you spend reviewing Peter English’s expert report?
A. Eight to ten hours, something like that.
Q. And how much time did you spend reviewing Theodore Wilson’s expert report?
A. Again, probably his is somewhat longer than the
two expert historians. I spent a little bit longer with that, probably 10 to 12 hours.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed all the documents that are cited in Kenneth Ludmerer's expert report?
A. I was familiar with many of the documents
associated with his report when I read his report.
Q. But you took no effort to collect all the
documents together cited in Ludmerer's report and review them all?
A. Well, I think, you know, many of them were
documents that I had reviewed myself or, you know, had at one time, you know, read or had in my file, so I didn’t.
Q. Can you say, sitting in here today, that you’ve reviewed all the documents in Ludmerer’s expert report?
A. I would say that I was familiar with most of the documents in his report.
Q. Okay. How about Theodore Wilson, have you reviewed all the documents cited in his expert report?
A. I was familiar with many of the documents in his report. I did not review them all.
Q. Okay. And have you reviewed all the documents in
Richard Thomas’s expert report?
A. No, I did not
Q. And have you reviewed all the documents in Peter English's expert report?
A. I was familiar with most-to-all of the documents in the English report from my own, you know, long-standing historical studies in that area.
Q. Have you specifically requested and reviewed any of the documents cited in any of those four experts’ reports from the government?
A. No, I didn't because I was already familiar with them, so I wasn't going to call the government to do my research. I’ve been researching this question for quite some time. And most of those documents were accessible to me.
Q. And I think you — I remember — if I remember correctly, you said you didn't specifically request any documents from the US government in preparing for your testimony?
A. I did not request any documents from the government.
Q. You haven't requested that the US government provide you with internal tobacco company documents that smoking does not cause cancer?
A. Government documents that concluded smoking does not cause cancer?
Q. No, you haven’t asked the government to provide you with tobacco company documents that conclude that smoking does not cause cancer?
A. Well, as I explained, the government provided me with one group of industry documents, and whether any of the government-provided documents came to the conclusion that smoking does not cause cancer, there were materials in there where, you know, C.
C. Little, for example, the first Scientific Director of the Tobacco Industry Research Council Committee says, you know, We know of nothing that would indicate that smoking causes cancer. So, is that —
Q. Well, was that an internal tobacco company document?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Both internal and public documents.
Q. So, the government did provide you with some
internal tobacco company documents that concluded that smoking does not cause cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think that’s right. And, you know, I think that
they did.
Q. Has the government provided you with any internal tobacco company documents that conclude that smoking is not addictive?
A. I just don't know. I haven't broken down the documents in quite this way. So, you know, a lot of internal company documents indicate at a relatively early time that the industry was familiar with the concept and mechanisms of addiction, but there may be some documents from the Tobacco Institute or one of the companies that said that, you know, We don’t beheve that to be the case. I just don’t know.
Q. And have you specifically requested that the government —
A. I made no —
Q. — provide you?
A. — no further request of the government for any documents. So, you know, we can stipulate I didn’t request any documents from the government after this initial body of documents that the government sent me. So, if the answer — if the question begins, Did I request documents from the government, other than that one set of documents
that they sent me at the beginning, I've requested no further documentation from the government during the course of preparing my expert statement.
Q. Well, maybe we can run through these questions very quickly then, okay?
A. Okay.
Q. Did you request that the government provide you with any documents that — internal tobacco company documents saying that nicotine is not addictive?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you request that the government provide you with any internal tobacco company documents that say that smokers do not compensate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I did not.
Q. Did you request that the US government provide you with any internal US government documents that conclude that smoking does not cause cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I did not.
Q. Did you ask the government to provide you with any
internal US government documents that state that nicotine is not addictive?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I did not.
Q. Did you ask the government to provide you with any internal US government documents that say that smokers do not compensate?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I did not.
Q. Have you conducted any kind of systematic review of US government publications on nicotine and addiction?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I have reviewed, for example, the Surgeon General's Report on nicotine addiction. I have reviewed other governmental, you know, publications associated with addiction.
Q. Have you conducted a review of US government publications on cigarette design?
A. I thought you asked me that before, but there may have been a problem with your — I think I answered no, I have not.
Q. Okay.
A. Maybe there’s a page that's been stuck back in
there.
Q. Have you reviewed Ronald Fisher's publications on smoking and health?
A. I have.
Q. And have you reviewed Joseph Berkson’s publications on smoking and health?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Have you reviewed documents relating to the Second World Conference on Smoking and Health?
A. No, I don’t think I've looked at any documents from the Second World Conference.
Q. Have you reviewed any documents from the Third World Conference on Smoking and Health?
A. No, I didn't review documents from the world conferences. It just wasn’t part of my research for this testimony.
Q. Have you reviewed any documents from the
Conference on the Primary Prevention of Cancer in 1979?
A. No.
Q. Have you reviewed any documents from the Banberry Conference on Safer Cigarettes?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you reviewed the American Cancer Society’s
Cancer Prevention Study CPS-1?
A. I've seen some materials from the American Cancer Society. But I'm not familiar with that particular document, I don't think.
Q. You're not familiar with the CPS-1 study by the American Cancer Society?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know what that is.
Q. Are you familiar with the CPS-2 study by the American Cancer Society?
A. No.
Q. For your testimony in this case, have you conducted any sort of review on statements on smoking and health in newspapers and periodicals during the 20th Century?
A. I have looked at newspaper accounts of the science of tobacco over the course of the 20th Century.
And, so, I have broad familiarity with how the media and journalists address questions of describing the science of tobacco and its harms. And, of course, in my review of CTR, I also became familiar with the kinds of interventions that CTR/earlier TIRC, made to influence the character of media and other journalistic assessments of
tobacco's harms.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Are you familiar with the Center for Indoor Air Research?
A. No, I’m not really familiar with it.
Q. Okay. In preparing for your testimony, you haven't —
A. I didn't use their materials.
Q. Okay. And you don't plan to testify about the Center for Indoor Air Research?
A. I don't intend to.
Q. Okay. You're not aware of the Center for Indoor Air Research ever funding any research that was falsified?
A. I'm not aware of that.
Q. Okay.
A. But I'd be interested.
Q. Are you familiar with the Independent Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health?
A. No, I’m not.
Q. You haven't reviewed any of the reports put out by the ISC?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with the Hutchinson Smoking
Prevention Project?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Battelle Memorial Institute?
A. Yes, I'm familiar that they did some contract work for various tobacco companies.
Q. Have you conducted any sort of review or study of the contract research that was done at the Battelle Memorial Institute?
A. I was familiar with the work they did on what I think was called the Griffith filter. So, I saw some of their documents associated with that. Probably what I saw were industry documents describing the work being done at Battelle.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with the Barclay cigarette?
A. Only in the most general way. I remember it.
Q. You don't intend to —
A. I haven't researched the Barclay cigarette.
Q. You don't intend to testify about the Barclay cigarette?
A. I don't expect to, but I'm — you know, it's
conceivable that my testimony could cover issues of the move to low tar/low nicotine, you know, so-called safer products, etcetera.
Q. Are you familiar with the AMA-ERF program?
A. Yes.
Q. And didn’t tobacco companies sponsor biological research on smoking through the AMA-ERF program?
A. I think that was the goal, although, in retrospect, the assessment of the scientific considerations of the AMA-ERF program would be that they produced, you know, a negligible body of scientific research associated with the biological activity of tobacco.
Q. Do you know how much publications the AMA-ERF program produced?
A. I don't know offhand.
Q. Have you conducted any review of any of the publications funded by the AMA-ERF?
A. I have looked at some of those things, but I couldn't tell you now, specifically, you know which particular publications emanated from that effort, which, I think both the AMA and the industry ultimately was quite disappointed in.
Q. Are you familiar with an Institute of Medicine report issued in 2001 entitled "Clearing the Smoke: Assessing the Science Base for Tobacco Harm Reduction"?
A. I saw it, but I have not read it.
Q. Okay. You don't plan to testify about the IOM report?
A. I don't think that my testimony, the scope of it, would contain, you know, such recent reports on harm reduction and prevention and its science.
Q. Are you familiar with Star Scientific?
A. Yes, lam.
Q. Do you know anything about Star Tobacco?
A. I know a little bit about it. The CEO came to see me in my office a year or two ago —
Q. Okay.
A. — and explained to me the product, gave me a carton of Advance cigarettes, so --
Q. Did you go out and smoke those right away?
A. I have not smoked them, but some of my students have shown considerable interest in them.
Q. Okay. Do you know whether Star is being sued by the US government?
A. I do not know whether — I did not see their company named in the suit. But I guess I understand that Brown & Williamson has developed some kind of relationship with Star. So, I was aware of that.
Q. Okay. Have you done any research or investigation
into the relationship between Brown & Williamson 12:24:30 and Star?
A. I haven't. I know that Star owns a priority technical capacity apparently to remove nitrosamines, which, you know, are considered to be, you know, cancer causing. And, so, I did — all I was very familiar with was the packaging of the original Advance cigarette, but I'm not — I haven’t really followed the business relationship between Brown & Williamson and Star.
Q. Are you familiar with the design of any of the Star Tobacco cigarettes?
A. Only what you get on the package insert and the web site. So, what they’re telling me there that I did read at one time.
Q. Has the government ever told you that it has withheld certain documents relating to its internal deliberations regarding smoking and health that have been requested in this litigation?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. They did not tell me that. I haven’t discussed it.
Q. Have you undertaken any review of tobacco industry funded research at Washington University?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you undertaken any review of tobacco industry funded research at UCLA?
A. Well, Washington University, that's where Ludmerer is, so that’s tobacco funded research.
Q. I'm talking about actual scientific studies, have you looked at any —
A. No, I haven't looked at UCLA.
Q. Well, let me rephrase the question, cause I think I got interrupted, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. You haven't looked at any tobacco industry funded scientific research at Washington University, right?
A. Again, I was looking at tobacco funded research, but I wasn’t always, you know, always aware of where the researchers were. But to my knowledge,
I haven't been focused in any way on a particular university like Washington, and, so, I don’t know.
Q. All right. Have you looked at any program by the tobacco industry to fund research at UCLA?
A. I haven't.
Q. Have you looked at any tobacco funded research at Oak Ridge National Laboratories?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you examined tobacco funded scientific research at the Medical College of Virginia?
A. You see, I was aware that all of these places potentially had contracts with CTR or had researchers who were involved in CTR.
Q. Well -
A. Yes.
Q. If I can clarify, outside of CTR —
A. Outside of CTR?
Q. Yeah — have you studied any industry grants to the Medical College of Virginia outside of any CTR funding?
A. Yeah, my understanding was during this period where CTR was doing -- was sort of identified as doing the critical work on smoking and health, that various companies sometimes would develop contract relationships with Medical College of Virginia, and so on. So, I know that in my review, one of the companies — I'd have to check my records — but one of the companies was — said, Well, we have that research going on. You
know — is it Larson at Medical College of Virginia? So, there were instances. Oak Ridge Labs comes up. There were instances where I was aware, you know, at a relatively early point in time — I don't know about recently — that the industry had relationships with universities outside of CTR where research was being conducted.
Q. Have you looked at any of the tobacco industry funded research at the Medical College of Virginia before CTR was formed?
A. Well, as I remember, this guy Larson and — is it Haag?
Q. Yes.
A. I think they were at Medical College of Virginia. So, you know, they produced a major piece of work on tobacco; and I was familiar with that. I knew it had been industry funded. So, I guess in that sense, the answer to your question is yes.
Q. So, you're familiar with the Larson and Haag treatise on tobacco?
A. I am.
Q. Have you examined or researched any of the scientific studies conducted by Larson or Haag or any of the other researchers at the Medical
College of Virginia and published in the scientific literature that were funded by the tobacco industry?
A. I just couldn't say. I — you know, I want to be accurate and I just — you know, I couldn’t say for certain whether I have or I haven’t. I'm certainly familiar with their work.
Q. Have you looked at any internal documents from Medical College of Virginia —
A. I have not.
Q. — relating to the —
A. Sorry.
Q. If I can just -- let me start over, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you looked at any internal documents from the Medical College of Virginia relating to tobacco industry funding and research there?
A. No, I haven't seen any internal documents from the Medical College of Virginia.
Q. All right. And have you conducted any kind of literature review to search for published scientific studies by researchers at the Medical College of Virginia that were funded by the tobacco industry?
A. Well, I said I was familiar with the Larson/Haag treatise, and that was funded by the tobacco industry, at least to my understanding.
Q. And the Larson and Haag treatise was something that the Surgeon General relied on in the 1964 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, it relied on — it cited.
Q. Okay.
A. You know, I think there's a difference.
Q. Other than the Larson treatise, have you done any
—	conducted any research of what published scientific studies came out by researchers funded by the tobacco industry at the Medical College of Virginia?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what kinds of research programs were funded at the Medical College of Virginia?
A. No, I don’t.
Q. Have you conducted any review or research on the
—	research funded by the tobacco companies on smoking and health directly, rather than through CTR?
A. Could you ask that again?
Q. Have you conducted any research on the programs that were funded by the tobacco industry on smoking and health, other than through CTR?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. Which programs have you looked at?
A. I was quite interested in the RJR program. I have been interested in the Liggett & Myers programs.
Q. Maybe I can clarify my question. I'm wondering have you looked at any of the programs where the tobacco industry has funded outside scientists?
A. Oh, outside scientists, not the internal research?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Yeah.
A. No, I haven't. I haven’t evaluated those programs.
Q. Okay.
MR. BRODY: Why don't we break for lunch?
MR. SMITH: Yeah. This will be a good
time.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 12:32. We are off the record.
(Whereupon the deposition recessed at

VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 1:40. We are recording and on the record.
Q. Have you reviewed any tobacco company research on nicotine analogs?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the tobacco company research on charcoal filters?
A. I was familiar with the Arthur D. Little program that resulted in the Lark cigarette. So, that was a charcoal filter.
Q. Isn't it true that the American Tobacco Company came out with the Tareyton filter, which was a charcoal filter, in the 1950s?
A. There may well have been a charcoal filter which came out before Lark. And I knew that Tareyton was a filter cigarette. You know, was strongly advertised for its filter effects.
Q. Okay. But you haven't done any -A. I haven't done any research on the development of the Tareyton filter.
Q. Have you looked at any of the research the
American Tobacco Company sponsored on charcoal filters?
A. That American Tobacco sponsored?
Q. Yes.
A. I don't think so.
Q. Have you conducted any research on the tobacco company research on reducing nitrosamines in tobacco?
A. Well, I was familiar that that became one goal in potential filtration. And when I took a look at Star and that -- and I went back a little bit further to find out, you know, when nitrosamines had been identified and what some of the concerns about them had been. I'm broadly familiar with the idea of nitrosamine filtration that ultimately results in cigarettes like Advance.
Q. Other than Star Tobacco, have you done any
research on any other tobacco company's research into low nitrosamine tobacco?
A. I don't think so specifically. I'm familiar,
generally, with some of the tobacco company’s efforts in filter development —
Q. But you -A. — but I haven’t specifically focused on nitrosamines.
Q. And you haven’t reviewed any internal tobacco
company documents on reducing nitrosamines in tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No.
Q. Have you conducted any research on the tobacco company efforts to produce cigarettes containing palladium catalysts?
A. I'm familiar with the rough outlines of the development of XA and the debates about its effectiveness and ultimate marketing. So, that part of palladium cigarettes I am familiar with.
Q. And isn’t it true that there were health concerns about putting palladium into cigarettes?
A. I understood that that was an issue that was raised by palladium cigarettes.
Q. And that issue was raised by scientists in the scientific community?
A. I'm mostly familiar with it from internal
documents. But I think there were concerns about additives in general and their health consequences, and certainly palladium would have raised concerns.
Q. Have you looked at any of the Surgeon General's Reports to find out what the Surgeon General says
about palladium?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I haven't.
Q. Have you looked — I know that you mentioned that you had reviewed an RJR published compendium of research on nonbuming cigarettes.
A. At one time I did look at that book.
Q. Okay. Have you look at any internal tobacco
company documents on research into nonbuming cigarettes?
A. I have not.
Q. Sitting here today, can you identify any scientific fact about smoking that was in the tobacco company files you’ve reviewed but was not already available in the published scientific literature?
A. I think, you know, broadly evaluating the
character of tobacco company research, there are several successive indications of knowledge that the companies had at a fairly sophisticated level that at least it’s uncertain what the character of the general scientific knowledge about those elements were. And I think it starts out with certain carcinogens that at least the companies
were aware of the potential for them to be in tobacco, especially burning tobacco, going back, you know, probably to the 1940s, but certainly by the early '30s, you know, what was the level of identification of possible carcinogens in cigarettes. Probably the companies were ahead of public science.
And, then, on issues like addiction, there is some indication in the literature that the characteristics of dependency, tolerance, and withdrawal were identified by the companies prior to the emergence of that kind of knowledge in the broader public scientific community. So, those would be two that I would point to, but there could be others.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Have you done any kind of review of published scientific literature identifying carcinogens in tobacco smoke?
A. Yes, I've — I have looked at some of the literature, you know, the science of carcinogenesis and the identification of possible carcinogens.
Q. And have you tried to review the scientific
literature on all the carcinogens that have been identified in tobacco smoke?
A. I haven't comprehensively reviewed the scientific literature. You know, my research has focused on sort of the level of company knowledge, the level of public knowledge, and the relationship between company internal knowledge about issues like carcinogens, as well as what the companies are saying publicly.
So, that’s really — that's a real focus of my research. So, sort of a comprehensive review — a comprehensive systematic review of the scientific literature of carcinogens in cigarettes is related to my study, but it's not central to the questions I’ve been focusing on.
Q. Which carcinogens have you reviewed published literature on?
A. 3-4 benzopyrenes, the general category of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; and, as a historian of medicine, a lot of the concerns about some of these substances reach back, you know, deeper into history, and from chimney sweeps to industrial workers. So, in that sense the continuity of concerns about these kinds of
chemical structures as part of my broader historical knowledge of risks to health in a more general way.
Q. Based on your review, would you agree that the tobacco companies have done a lot of innovative research on cigarettes and smoking and health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, I don't know — I just don't know how we would come to an agreement about what innovative really means. I think the companies did some research, and they didn't do other research. Obviously, they took steps to try to identify carcinogens. But that was actually contested in the companies. Should they be doing it? What would be the company's research versus what they would allocate to CTR for research?
So, in terms of innovative research, I don’t know that I would characterize it that way. They had a product, and they needed to know what was in the smoke that people, you know, were taking into their bodies. You know, I’m not prepared to be able to categorize at the, you know, metascientific level what was really new about that research or where they, you know,
utilized new technical insights or methodologies. You know, I'm just not prepared to evaluate innovation.
Q. Well, what about your review of the RJR Reynolds nonburning cigarettes, would that be an innovation in cigarette design?
A. Yes. I think that, you know, I would characterize that as an innovation in design. You know, its effectiveness, you know, I don’t think has been determined in terms of it being more healthy than a conventional cigarette. So, I think the — you know, the historical jury on the innovation of, for example, an Eclipse cigarette, is out, because it hasn’t been, you know -- generally, when we say something’s innovative, well, it’s new. There’s no question nonburning cigarette is in that sense an innovative product. But, you know, the quality of it as an innovation or, you know, whether I’m impressed with it as an innovation would be determined by, you know, is it significantly healthier than a convention product? And that, I don’t think, anybody has been able to reveal.
Q. In your view it hasn't been shown that nonbuming cigarettes are less hazardous than regular
cigarettes, is that accurate?
A. I would say I haven't seen anything yet that would convince me that that's the case, you know, so —
Q. But you're willing to say that —
A. Maybe there's data out there that will show that. Unfortunately, the companies have sometimes been reticent to say, Well, this is safer, and this is how we know it. And we know why the companies were reticent to say, This is safer, because they were worried, and, you know, this I could document over and over again is that, you know, we can’t claim this is safer, because it would imply that our product is harmful.
So, evaluating that question of the relative efficacy of filtration — is it safer — that's been a kind of historical problem in this area.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Are you aware of any statement by the US
government that nonbuming cigarettes are safer?
A. I'm not aware.
Q. Okay. Now, the tobacco companies have undertaken a number of projects to try to develop less hazardous cigarettes, is that accurate?
A. The government has?
Q. No, the tobacco companies.
A. The tobacco companies.
Q. Have they undertaken a number of projects internally to try to develop less hazardous cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, it's a little unclear to me for this reason:
It’s just complicated, because on the one hand, if you ask the companies, you know, Are you trying to develop a less hazardous cigarette, the companies' public reply was typically, No, we don’t know anything that makes a cigarette unsafe. I think that’s almost a direct quote from an industry spokesperson. And that was a consistent public posture on the part of the industry for a considerable length of time till, you know, relatively recently. My understanding is even when Eclipse was marketed, you know, RJR was loath to say that, you know, it's a safer product. So, have they made efforts to construct a safer product, I think, you know, at times the industry was looking for, you know, effective filters, was looking, you know, to try to develop a safer
product. I think the XA project was about trying to come up with a safer product. So, there’s certain indications in the record that they did that. But they never, you know, they never explained that that’s really what they were doing.
Q. And maybe I can clarify my question then, okay?
A. Sure.
Q. In your view —
A. Yes.
Q. — did the tobacco companies conduct a number of projects that were aimed at developing less hazardous cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, there were projects that did attempt to develop less hazardous cigarettes in my view.
Q. Now, are you familiar with agmatology?
A. Agmatology?
Q. Yeah.
A. No, I’m not.
Q. Are you familiar with an organization called the TRC?
A. I don't know. There was an organization in
England that was a Tobacco Research Council, you know, somewhat similar but somewhat different from
the American program. And I think that went by the initials TRC, is that —
Q. Yeah. Have you undertaken any effort to conduct research about the Tobacco Research Council in Great Britain?
A. I have a familiarity with their program, which
some people suggested was more independent than CTR from industry funding and support; that they gave the money to the TRC with fewer strings. But I haven't thoroughly investigated TRC.
Q. And have you reviewed any of the TRC's Annual Reports?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Have you conducted any search for literature that was published with TRC funding?
A. No, I didn't do that.
Q. Are you familiar with Neil Benowitz?
A. Yeah. I'm familiar with his work. I don't know him, but I’m familiar with some of his work.
Q. Do you recognize Benowitz as an expert on smoking and health?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any of the deposition testimony of Benowitz?
A. No, I have not.
Q. All right. You're familiar with Richard Dahl?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recognize Richard Dahl as an expert on smoking and health?
A. I do.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the testimony Richard Dahl's given in tobacco litigation?
A. I haven't reviewed his testimony.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the expert reports
submitted by Richards Dahl in tobacco litigation?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Are you familiar with John Heller?
A. There was a John Heller who was head of the NCI at one time.
Q. Are you familiar with Richard Bing?
A. Yes, I'm familiar with who he was.
Q. And who was he?
A. He was a researcher. He was originally on one of the papers of the Government Tobacco Working Assessment that Bemie had set up, Bing; and then he becomes a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the CTR.
Q. Are you familiar with Richard Pollay, P-o-l-l-a-y?
A. I'm familiar. Again, I don’t know him, but I know of his work.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with Carlo Croce,
C-r-o-c-e?
A. C-r-o-c-e? No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Louis Robbins?
A. Yes. I think Robbins was an epidemiologist, but I'm not positive. I've seen something that he wrote.
Q. And do you know if Louis Robbins ever worked for the US government?
A. I don't know.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Louis Robbins’ publications on smoking?
A. I have this idea that he was a coauthor, perhaps, of the Strong Paper, but I would have to check it.
Q. Okay. What’s the Strong Paper?
A. The Strong Paper’s cited in my expert report. I think it was the paper published just before Bemie’s ultimate statement that was a consensus statement of the voluntary health organizations and the federal agencies with the greatest interest in the problem of smoking and health.
And it was one of the big impact 1950s evaluation
of the scientific evidence.
Q. And other than the Strong Paper, perhaps, are you aware of any other Louis Robbins publications on smoking?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. And are you familiar with Joseph Feldman?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Robert Huebner, H-u-e-b-n-e-r?
A. I think he was a — he was involved with CTR, I think. I think I’ve seen his name as an SAB member.
Q. Are you familiar with his educational background or expertise?
A. I'm not.
Q. Are you familiar with Jocelyn Elders?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you recognize Jocelyn Elders as an expert on smoking and health?
A. You know, I don’t think I would say that she's an expert on smoking and health. I think she has a general, you know, general public health orientation. Obviously, she was Surgeon General. But, you know, she is not somebody who has done
research oriented work, even at the public health level so far as I know on smoking and health, but -
Q. Okay.
A. -- you know, to the degree that the Surgeon
General is an expert on public health and smoking is a public health issue, then she is, so —
Q. Well, is or is not Jocelyn Elders an expert on smoking and health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I guess what I was getting at is it depends on what we mean by "expert” in health. But, you know, I would say she has some expertise in that area.
Q. Are you familiar with Scott Appleton?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you familiar with Charles Webster?
A. Yes, I'm familiar with Charles Webster.
Q. And who is Charles Webster?
A. Charles Webster is a distinguished historian of medicine in the UK who I think has spent most of his career at Oxford.
A. I know I — I think I have come across some things that Dunn was at one of the companies, I think.
But I'd have to check to see where he was.
Q. Sitting here today, do you know which company Dunn worked for?
A. I don't want to guess. I think I know, but I better — probably shouldn't guess.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with Leonard Abood, A-b-o-o-d?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Earl Clements?
A. Yes, I'm familiar with Clements. He was a — I guess the term was President of the Tobacco Institute, or at least the head of the Tobacco Institute. Former, you know, federal legislator.
Q. Are you familiar with Daniel Donahue?
A. No, I don’t know who Daniel Donahue —
Q. Are you familiar with Bob Bexin, B-e-x-i-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Jack Henningfield?
A. Yes, he's an expert on addiction and pharmacology.
Q. Have you had any conversations with Henningfield about smoking?
A. I'm familiar with his published work, but I — I may have met him once. I don’t remember.
Q. I assure you, you would remember. Are you familiar with Sharon Boyse, B-o-y-s-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Ronald Bernstein?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Christopher Coggins, C-o-g-g-i-n-s?
A. I'm not.
Q. Are you familiar with Cuyler Hammond?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. What do you know about Hammond?
A. He was a leading American statistician who was the head of the statistics unit of the American Cancer Society; and he and colleagues published one of the most impressive epidemiological evaluations of smoking and disease in the 1950s — a series of publications actually. They were known for their large sample, which was uncharacteristic of some of the research at the time.
Q. Would you view Hammond as an expert on smoking and health?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you familiar with Patrick Donoho, D-o-n-o-h-o?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Kathy Ellis?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar — I think you mentioned Paul Kotin before, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And Paul Kotin at one time worked for the US government, is that true?
A. I think that is true. I had some memory that he did work for the government. I knew that he was also involved at CTR.
Q. Are you familiar with Roger Blackie?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Gary Flamm, F-l-a-m-m?
A. No, I’m not.
Q. Are you familiar with Charles Blixt, B-l-i-x-t?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with James Chaplin?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with James Glenn?
A. He was head of CTR, I think, really, during its final phase. And he had been Dean of Mt. Sinai Medical School and was a urologist.
Q. Are you familiar with Sharon Blackie,
B-l-a-c-ki-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Alvin Feinstein?
A. Yes. I know his work.
Q. And who is he?
A. He was an internist and epidemiologist at Yale Medical School. For a long time wrote a kind of important book called "Clinical Judgment" that focused on issues of differential diagnosis and the application of numerical or quantitative knowledge to clinical situations. He was a grantee of CTR.
Q. Are you familiar with Philip Cook?
A. I think that he's a statistician epidemiologist.
Q. Are you familiar with Frank Colby?
A. Yeah, I think that Colby worked for CTR and kept the library and the records, or there was a Colby who did that; and I’m not sure of his first name, so — is that the Colby you have in mind?
Q.	Well, I'm just wondering if — I mean, do you know one way or the other whether Frank Colby is the Colby at CTR?
A.	I'm not sure. Sorry. I don't want to say.
Q.	Are you familiar with Theresa Birch?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Anthony Burke, B-u-r-k-e?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Robert Gertenbach?
A.	Yeah, Gurtenbach, I think, was a lawyer who worked for CTR.
Q.	Are you familiar with Richard Cox?
A.	Richard Cox?
Q.	Yes.
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with William Adams?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Nick Cannar, C-a-n-n-a-r?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Harold Burnley?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Martin Gilbey, G-i-l-b-e-y?
A.	I don't think so.
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Weitzman?
A. No, I’m not.
Q. You don't recognize Weitzman as an expert on tobacco?
A. I know his name and somebody mentioned to me, but I don't know him; and I don't know what his work is on.
Q. Are you familiar with Richard Carchman?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with John Craig Head?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Samuel Chilcote, C-h-i-l-c-o-t-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Alexander Shmuk?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Barry Arnason?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Frank Gullotta,
G-u-l-l-o-t-t-a?
A. No, I don’t think so.
A. Austern?
Q. Yeah, A-u-s-t-e-r-n.
A. I think he may have been a grantee of CTR, but I'm not positive. I'd have to check.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Dixon?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Brendan Dawson?
A. I think that’s a spokesperson for Tobacco Institute.
Q. Are you familiar with Nancy Balter?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Claude Teague?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you know who Claude Teague worked for?
A. Yes, he worked for RJR.
Q. Are you familiar with Mr. Teague’s educational background?
A. I'm pretty sure he was — you know, he had a
degree in one of the sciences. But he worked on a variety of different types of scientific projects while at RJR, everything from the psychology of marketing to younger people, to evaluating the scientific evidence on carcinogenesis, and issues
associated with nicotine as addictive. So, he was around the map on a little of different areas of science.
Q. But do you know what kind of degree he obtained? A. I did know. I don't recall.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any of Claude Teague's testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. No, I haven't reviewed his testimony.
Q. Are you familiar with Louis Bantle, B-a-n-t-l-e? A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Jessie Steinfeld?
A. Yes, he was a Surgeon General.
Q. Are you familiar with William Bates?
A. William Bates?
Q. Yes.
A. I'm not sure. I think he was an industry researcher, but I —
Q. Are you familiar with Jeffrey Harris?
A. Yes, I know Jeffrey Harris. He’s an economist.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Harris’s expert reports in tobacco cases?
A. I knew he testified in Cippolone, but I have never reviewed any of his testimony.
Q. How about any of his expert reports that he
submitted, have you reviewed any of those?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you ever met Harris or discussed tobacco related issues with him?
A. I have met Harris, since he was both — my memory is that he was an internist at the MGH, the Mass. General Hospital, and taught economics at MIT, which I assume he still does. And periodically I would see him in Cambridge at meetings on tobacco and public health. And, so, 15 years ago I had discussions with him. I haven't seen him in over a decade.
Q. Has the US government ever told you that Harris's opinions in tobacco litigation have been rejected by a number of courts?
A. No, no one told me that.
Q. Are you familiar with Mark Berlind?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Victor Han, H-a-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Scott Zeger, Z-e-g-e-r?
A. No.
Q. You don't recognize Zeger as an expert on tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Are you familiar with James Heckman?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Dean Krugman?
A. I know that name, and I don’t know him. But I know — I think I know he works on children’s issues and tobacco media advertising, but I don't have any strong familiarity with his work.
Q. Are you familiar with Timothy Wyant?
A. No.
Q. You don't recognize Wyant as an expert on tobacco?
A. I haven't really, you know, looked at who else is an expert. I mean, I assume you mean expert witness or --
Q. Just a — in the course of your work you review articles by people on tobacco, right?
A. Right. So, tell me his name again? I'm sorry.
Q. Timothy Wyant, do you recognize him as an expert on tobacco?
A. I just don’t — I don’t know who that is off — you know, don’t recall.
Q. All right. Leonard Miller, are you familiar with him?
Q. You don’t recognize Miller as an expert on tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't recall who he is.
Q. Are you familiar with Nicholas Wald?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with S. P. Kothari,
K-o-t-h-a-r-i?
A. No.
Q. You don't recognize Kothari as an expert?
A. No, I don’t, no.
Q. Are you familiar with Paul Han?
A. Yes, Paul Han was President of American Tobacco at the time of the Frank Statement and the creation of the TIRC.
Q. And are you familiar with Timothy Hartnett?
A. Yes. Timothy Hartnett was President of Brown & Williamson and then went on to become the first President or Director of TIRC.
Q. Are you familiar with Ira Ockene, O-c-k-e-n-e?
A. No.
Q. You don't recognize Ockene as an expert on tobacco?
A. I feel like every question I get, you'll repeat a question if I say no, then you ask me a second time. Is that the procedure?
MR. BRODY: Do you want —
Q. The procedure is I can ask questions —
A. Okay.
Q. — then he gets to say "objection" and then you — MR. BRODY: Actually, perhaps, for clarity sake, you should re-ask that one and pronounce the name correctly. It might help with recognition in getting an accurate record.
MR. SMITH: I spelled the name.
A. Okay. Let’s go on. I do not recognize the name. Q. Okay. Are you familiar with Carl Baker?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Robert Cundiff?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Lauren Ackerman?
A. Lauren Ackerman?
Q. Yes.
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Harmon McAllister, M-c-A-l-l-i-s-t-e-r?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Joseph Debethizy, D-e-b-e-t-h-i-z-y?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Henry Saffer, S-a-f-f-e-r?
A. No.
Q. You don’t recognize Saffer as an expert on tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I don’t.
Q. Are you familiar with W. T. Hoyt?
A. Yes. Hoyt was originally with Hill & Knowlton, and then went to become the first Executive Director — I would have to get you the precise term -- of the Tobacco Industry Research Council, and served with Clarence Cook Little in an administrative capacity there for a considerable length of time.
VIDEO OPERATOR: Excuse me, we want to change tapes. The time is 2:14. This concludes Cassette No. 2. We’re off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 2:16. We are recording and on the record. This is the
beginning of Cassette No. 3 in the deposition of Allan Brandt.
Q. And are you familiar with Robert DiMarco, D-i-M-a-r-c-o?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Guerin, G-u-e-r-i-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Peter Hammill, H-a-m-m-i-1-1?
A. Yeah, yes.
Q. And who was Hammill?
A. Hammill was the first Scientific Director for the first Surgeon General's Committee, and was ultimately replaced by Guthie.
Q. Are you familiar with Ulrich Hurter, H-u-r-t-e-r?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Joseph Autrey, A-u-t-r-y?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with J. Howard Beales, B-e-a-l-e-s?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Peter Bourne, B-o-u-r-n-e? A. Yeah, Bourne worked for the Carter administration on drug issues, and I don’t know if he would have
been called the Drug Czar, but something like that.
Q. Well, do you recognize Mr. Bourne as an expert on tobacco issues?
A. Not necessarily. I don’t think that was the characteristic of his, you know, professional authority for having been selected for that office.
Q. Are you familiar with Hans Falk, F-a-l-k?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Otis Bowen, B-o-w-e-n?
A. Yes, Bowen was a head of HSS.
Q. Are you familiar with Edward Horrigan, H-o-r-r-i-g-a-n?
A. I am familiar. There was a Horrigan who worked for one of the companies and I — maybe it was RJR. I’m not sure.
Q. And do you know whether it was Edward Horrigan or not?
A. I would just have to check.
Q. Are you familiar with David Burns?
A. I am familiar with David Bums.
Q. And have you reviewed any of Burns's expert reports in tobacco litigation?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Burns's deposition or trial testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. I haven't.
Q. Have you had any conversations with David Bums about tobacco?
A. At one time Burns was an advisor to a tobacco study group at Harvard. And he would come visit twice a year, something like that. And at those times, I met him and talked about tobacco. This was, again, 15 years ago.
Q. And what kinds of issues did you discuss about tobacco with Burns?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Burns was advising this Harvard group about research into strategies for tobacco reduction, the reduction of tobacco use; and the Harvard group was developing different types of research initiatives and questions associated with it. And Bums would visit to discuss that. So, that's —
I, you know, told him about my historical work.
You know, we would have conversations about ways of assessing, you know, whether policies were effective or not in reducing tobacco use, and he
was an advisor.
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Susan Ivey, I-v-e-y?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Richard Semenik, S-e-m-e-n-i-k?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Brennan?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Victor DeNoble?
A. Yes, DeNoble was a researcher, I think, for Philip Morris, but I'd have to check.
Q. Have you conducted any analysis of what Victor DeNoble did when he was at the tobacco companies? A. No, I haven't.
Q. Are you familiar with Jonathan Gruber,
G-r-u-b-e-r?
A. Yes, I'm familiar with him. He’s an economist at MIT.
Q. Do you know if he’s done any work on tobacco?
A. I know he has worked on tobacco. And I heard him give a talk about a year ago.
Q. And what was that talk on?
A. I wish I remembered better, but it was on, you know, strategies for tobacco -- reduction of tobacco use.
Q. And what kind of strategies did Gruber talk about for reduction of tobacco use?
A. I think he was interested in generally sort of,
you know, incentives for, you know, incentives for encouraging people to, you know, to not become smokers. There's an economist at Harvard who is doing behavioral economics, and he invited him to come and talk about tobacco.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Russell, R-u-s-s-e-1-1?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Nick Brookes, B-r-o-o-k-e-s?
A. Yeah. Nick Brookes, I think, was President of — let me see if I can get this right — recent President of one of the companies. I’d have to check and see which one.
Q. Sitting here today, you don't know which company Brookes worked at?
A. Let me just think for a second. I think it was Brown & Williamson.
Q. And have you had any conversations with Shopland about tobacco?
A. Again, a long time ago I did. He was, you know, at the Office of Smoking and Health in the federal government, early on helped set up that office.
He also periodically would come up to Harvard to consult with this tobacco study group that had been set up.
Q. Who else was on the tobacco study group that had been set up at Harvard?
A. It was directed by John Pinney, who had been active in the Surgeon General’s Reports in the Office on Smoking and Health and the federal addiction policy. And an economist at Harvard, senior economist at Harvard — whose name I'm not recalling this second — and they would invite this group up. So, I'm trying to think. It had people like Bums, Shopland, researchers from the west coast — Ellen Gritz was one of the consultants to that committee.
Q. And what approximate time was it that this committee was in operation?
Smoking Policy Behavior and Health; and I think it ran from around 1985 to '88, something like that, that three-year period.
Q. And are there any records at Harvard relating to that committee?
A. There probably are.
Q. Who would have those records?
A. I just don't know. The group lost its funding and kind of, you know — I don't know where those records would reside, but I would imagine that somebody has some, you know, record of those meetings.
Q. Who was funding the Harvard group on tobacco?
A. They may have had a small level of federal
funding. I think there were some foundations that were interested in the work. But I couldn't say.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with Gary Huber?
A. Yes. Gary Huber, a researcher I think in Kentucky and subject to a lot of controversy about the validity of his research, first a tobacco company researcher, and then, you know, I think he has — you know, I think he's been involved in litigation, but I don’t really know.
A. Gary Burger?
Q. Yeah, B-u-r-g-e-r.
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Thomas Humber, H-u-m-b-e-r?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Allan Armitage, A-r-m-i-t-a-g-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Jeffrey Bible?
A. Yes, he was a President of Philip Morris.
Q. And do you know whether he’s still President or not?
A. He’s not President now.
Q. Do you know who the President of Philip Morris is now?
A. I'm not sure I know who the new President is.
Q. Do you know who the President of any of the tobacco companies is?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't — you know, I don't know offhand, because it's really outside my area of expertise, the current Presidents of the companies.
Q. Are you familiar with John Calfee, C-a-l-f-e-e?
but I couldn’t tell you who he is.
Q. And are you familiar with Peter Howley, H-o-w-l-e-y?
A. Yeah. I think Peter Howley is or was a professor at Harvard. And I know he's associated with — at one time was associated with CTR.
Q. Are you familiar with Kip Viscusi?
A. Yes, I'm familiar with his work.
Q. And he teaches at Harvard, right?
A. He teaches at Harvard Law School.
Q. And Viscusi's worked as an expert in a number of tobacco cases, right?
A. I understand he has participated in some litigation.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the Viscusi's publications on smoking?
A. I'm familiar with one or two of his books.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Viscusi's testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you discussed any smoking and health issues with Viscusi?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you ever told Viscusi that he shouldn't work
on behalf of the tobacco companies?
A. No, I wouldn't do that, you know. Why would I do that?
Q. Are you familiar with Daniel Horn?
A. I've never told anybody that they shouldn’t work for the tobacco companies. I'm familiar with Daniel Horn.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with Alexander Holtzman, H-o-l-t-z-m-a-n ?
A. Again, I just can't place Holtzman, although, you know, I probably should be able to.
Q. And are you familiar with Francis Roe, R-o-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with David Clanton,
C-l-a-n-t-o-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Anthony Biglan, B-i-g-l-a-n?
A. I just saw something about Anthony Biglan, but I don’t know that I could tell you exactly who he was. No, I can't tell you.
Q. Are you familiar with David Townsend, T-o-w-n-s-e-n-d?
A. No.
A. Yes, I've seen some of Peter Lee's work. You know, he was a critic of the epidemiology and wrote some critical pieces about the tobacco epidemiology.
Q. And do you have any opinion about the quality of Lee’s research on smoking?
A. You know, I think he raised traditional critiques of, you know, the epidemiology. I was familiar with, you know, there were other people who took Lee on, and there was kinds of debates in some of the epidemiological literature about sort of his critique, and it seemed to me pretty conventional.
Q. And do you know whether Peter Lee's research was ever — was funded by the tobacco industry?
A. I have this idea that Lee at one time had a
connection with the tobacco industry, but I would have to check.
Q. Are you familiar with David Horazdovsky, H-o-r-a-z-d-o-v-s-k-y?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Paul Bloom, B-l-o-o-m?
A. No.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't.
A. Yes.
Q. Have you ever communicated with Samet about tobacco?
A. I once meant Samet at the Harvard School of Public Health and, you know. I’m familiar, you know, with his professional work in epidemiology.
Q. And have you reviewed any of Samet’s testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the expert reports Samet's submitted in tobacco litigation?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Herbert Bentley, B-e-n-t-l-e-y?
A. Yeah, I think that Bentley was one of the visitors from BAT in the 1950s.
Q. Are you familiar with Raymond Thornton?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Larry Holcomb, H-o-l-c-o-m-b?
A. No.
A. No.
A. If that’s the Felton of Felton & Bentley, yes.
Q. Are you familiar with Wilhelm Hueper, H-u-e-p-e-r?
A. Yes, Hueper was a researcher with the federal government in the 1950s — worked on issues of environmental health.
Q. Do you know if Hueper did any work on tobacco?
A. Yeah, I think that, you know, Hueper was in some ways a skeptic of the lung cancer/cigarette hypothesis, although I think he believed that cigarette smoking was harmful. But my own sense of Hueper -- and I don't know as much about him as some other people probably do — is that his focus was on environmental hazards. And, so, he mostly did research on the changes in the — the impact of the environment on health.
Q. Have you reviewed any Hueper's publications on tobacco?
A. I have not.
Q. Are you familiar with Franklin Fisher?
A. I once met Franklin Fisher. He's an economist at MIT. I think I did see that he was listed as an expert in the case.
Q. Do you know if Fisher has done any work on tobacco?
A. I don't know his tobacco work.
Q. Are you familiar with Paul Bunn, B-u-n-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Eric Windholtz, W-i-n-d-h-o-l-t-z?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Oliver Schein, S-c-h-e-i-n?
A. No.
Q. You don't recognize Schein as an expert on tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just don’t recognize the name.
Q. Are you familiar with Joseph Cullman, C-u-l-l-m-a-n?
A. Joseph Cullman?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. Is that Junior or III?
Q. I'm not sure. Tell me about both.
A. You should check.
Q. Tell me about both. What do you know about both the Joseph Cullmans?
President of Philip Morris. Joseph Cullman, Junior, I'm pretty sure he was President of Benson & Hedges at the time of the Plaza Hotel meeting, attended that meeting. That was the beginning of TIRC, so -
Q. Are you familiar with Myron Johnston?
A. I get this confused, too, cause there were a
couple of different Johnstons that were Presidents of tobacco companies; and there was a Johnston — I think he was President of American Tobacco.
Q. Myron Johnston, you don’t know whether he was President of a tobacco company or not or —
A. No, I’m saying I think he was President of American Tobacco, I think.
Q. Are you familiar with Frank Chaloupka,
C-h-a-1- o-u-p-k-a?
A. I’ve seen some of his work on tobacco control, so I’m familiar with him as a tobacco researcher.
Q. Are you familiar with Allan Rodgman, R-o-d-g-m-a-n?
A. I'm familiar that he was a, you know,
scientist/chemist at RJR from the '50s. I think, you know, well into the '60s for sure.
L-i-s-a-n-t-i?
A. I just don't know who that is.
Q. Are you familiar with Paul Slovik, S-l-o-v-i-k?
A. I know Slovik's work on risk assessment; and, so,
I have some familiarity with his scholarship.
Q. Julius Richmond you know, though, right?
A. Julius Richmond, you know, works in the same program I work in.
Q. Have you ever had any discussions with Richmond about his tobacco testimony?
A. I have had a few conversations with him about it, yes.
Q. And what’s he said about that?
A. You know, I think he has — you know, he’s found it a gratifying part of his professional career; that, you know, and the litigation's been one component of his, you know, ongoing work in public health.
Q. And would you recognize Richmond as an expert in smoking and health?
A. Yes, because Richmond — and in this way I would slightly distinguish him, for example, from Jocelyn Elders — was the Surgeon General at the time of the '79 report, which was one of the most
elaborate and comprehensive assessments of smoking and its harms, you know, in the history of the Surgeon General’s Reports. So — and then Richmond continued to make smoking a focus of his public health activities.
Q. And you mentioned that Richmond had given you some testimony from Broin and Engle. Did you review that testimony of Richmond's?
A. I don't know that I ever read the whole testimony, but periodically he would pull it out and show me little bits of his Broin and Engle testimony. So, he had the transcripts, and, you know, he showed them to me.
Q. Are you familiar with Clarence Cook Little?
A. Yes, I am familiar with Little.
Q. And do you know Little's educational background?
A. Yeah, Little was a biologist, undergraduate of Harvard, class of 1910, I think, and went on to become President of the University of Maine,
University of Michigan, and found a lab in Maine.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Little’s publications?
A. I certainly have reviewed many of his publications once he went to work for TIRC. I haven't reviewed his scientific publications before that. But for
most of the time he was, really, both a, you know, an academic administrator and a science administrator. So, you know, I'm not familiar with the body of scientific work that he did.
Q. Have you reviewed Julius Richmond's testimony in tobacco litigation about Clarence Cook Little?
A. I have not.
Q. Are you familiar with Curtis Judge?
A. Yeah. I'm trying to remember which company Judge worked for, but, you know, he worked for one of the companies.
Q. Are you familiar with Andrew Schindler?
A. I think Schindler, also, was an executive with one of the companies.
Q. Do you know which one?
A. I'd have to check.
Q. You’re familiar with Leroy Bernie, though, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you familiar with Sheldon Sommers, S-o-m-m-e-r-s?
A. Yeah. I'm familiar with Sommers, because he had a very active role in the Scientific Advisory Board at the TIRC/CTR — pathologist.
A. Yes, I think he must have been a respected scientist.
Q. Are you familiar with Ernest Pepples, P-e-p-p-l-e-s?
A. Yes, Pepples was an — I think a lawyer and executive at Brown & Williamson.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Pepples’s testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. I haven't reviewed his testimony. I've seen some of his memos and correspondence.
Q. Are you familiar with Philip Witorsch, W-i-t-o-r-s-c-h?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Leonard Zahn, Z-a-h-n?
A. Yeah, Zahn was a publicist who originally worked for Hill & Knowlton, and then went to CTR, then I think started his own independent public relations firm. He also had credentials as a journalist.
Q. Are you familiar with Gary Robertson?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Michelle Bloch, B-l-o-c-h?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Cummings?
CTR research.
A.	Thomas?
Q.	Owen, O-w-e-n.
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with C. E. Tinsley,
T-i-n-s-l-e-y?
A.	I don't think so.
Q.	Are you familiar with John Robinson?
A.	I can't recall.
Q.	Are you familiar with John Rupp, R-u-p-p?
A.	I don't think so.
Q.	Are you familiar with Lincoln Lewis?
A.	No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Robert Lewis?
A.	We're at the Ls now. No.
Q.	Are you familiar with Charles Tucker?
A.	I don't recall.
Q.	Are you familiar with David Remes, R-e-m-e-s?
A.	I don't think so.
Q.	Are you familiar with Robert Dolan, D-o-l-a-n?
A.	I don't think I know who that is.
Q.	You don't recognize Dolan as an expert on tobacco? MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't.
A. Yes, I've seen some of his research on tobacco.
Q. Are you familiar with Langbom Rust?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Gerry Whidby, W-h-i-d-b-y?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Charles Whitley, W-h-i-t-l-e-y?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Horace Komegay,
K-o-r-n- e-g-a-y ?
A. Yes, Komegay was the head of the Tobacco Institute during one phase. And if my memory serves me correctly, he had been a Congressman from North Carolina.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Eriksen, E-r-i-k-s-e-n?
A. Yeah, I’ve met him, also. He was at the CDC directing their smoking and health programs.
Q. And what do you know about Eriksen?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, that he directed that part of the federal program for tobacco control and harm
reduction. And I think he recently spent time at WHL.
Q. Are you familiar with Maurice Senkus, S-e-n-k-u-s? A. Yes, I've come across Senkus. He was a researcher at RJR.
Q. Are you familiar with T. C. Tso, T-s-o?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Edward Sanders?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Howard Liebengood, L-i-e-b-e-n-g-o-o-d?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Robert Mckinnell,
M-c- K-i-n-n-e-1-1 ?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Daniel Oliver?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Kendrick Wells?
A. Kendrick Wells?
Q. Yeah.
A. There is an addiction researcher on the west coast named Ken Wells, but I don't know if that's the same person.
though?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with David Schechter, S-c-h-e-c-h-t-e-r?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Victor Lindsley, L-i-n-d-s-l-e-y?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Suzanne, S-u-z-a-n-n-e, Oparil, O-p-a-r-i-1?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Stephen Parrish, P-a-r-r-i-s-h?
A. Yes, Parrish, you know, was, I think, the
President of Philip Morris — I think one of the companies.
Q. Are you familiar with Martin Or low sky, O-r-l-o-w-s-k-y?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Dan Snyder, S-n-y-d-e-r? A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Sharon Smith?
A. No.
A. No.
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Addison Yeaman, Y-e-a-m-a-n?
A. Yeah, I'm familiar with Yeaman. He was a lawyer for Brown & Williamson — very active, both with the company, and then, I think, went to pretty much full time to CTR.
Q. Are you familiar with Sorrel Schwartz, S-c-h-w-a-r-t-z?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Gio Gori, G-i-o G-o-r-i?
A. I'm familiar with Gori. He was at the NIH working on tobacco-related issues in what was called the TWG or Tobacco Working Group, and that group periodically held discussions with researchers from the tobacco industry; and the office was closed down in the late '70s, around the late '70s.
Q. Are you familiar with Frederick Schultz, S-c-h-u-l-t-z?
A. No.
S-p-a-r-b-e-r?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Mary Ward, W-a-r-d?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with James Mold, M-o-l-d?
A. Yes, Mold was very active with the XA project and kind of the lead scientist, I think, working on palladium.
Q. Are you familiar with Tom Osdene, O-s-d-e-n-e?
A. Yeah, Osdene was also a company researcher, I think, at Philip Morris.
Q. Are you familiar with William Steele, S-t-e-e-l-e?
A. I'm not sure. I'm just — I don’t recall who Steele is.
Q. Are you familiar with Kent Pinkerton, P-i-n-k-e-r-t- o-n?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with David Weeks, W-e-e-k-s?
A. I don't recall.
Q. Are you familiar with Frederick Panzer, P-a-n-z-e-r?
A. Yeah, Panzer was at the Tobacco Institute, a tobacco lobbyist.
A. I don't think so.
Q. John Pinney, you mentioned you were familiar with him?
A. I knew John.
Q. Did you guys have discussions about tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, we did.
Q. What kinds of discussions did you have with Pinney about tobacco?
A. Well, John was — John had been active in the federal government before coming to Harvard to direct this research study group; and, so, during the period that he was at Harvard, I would see him, you know, somewhat frequently to talk about research initiatives that his institute might take, and, you know — it was mostly about sort of the work of this Harvard working group on tobacco and health. He had an administrative position principally about sort of inviting different researchers to come talk or what would be initiatives for new funding.
Q. And did Pinney work for Julius Richmond when they were in the government?
A. Yeah. I think they worked together in terms of the 79 report. I know they had worked together.
Q. And how did it come that Pinney, you know, got a job at Harvard?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just don't know. The economist was Tom
Shelling, that was — Pinney and Shelling ran this group.
Q. Are you familiar with Carol sterling?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Ian Uydess, U-y-d-e-s-s?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Christopher Proctor, P-r-o-c-t-o-r?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Gerald Long, L-o-n-g?
A. The name is familiar, but I couldn't immediately place him.
Q. Are you familiar with James Morgan?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Are you familiar with Susan Stuntz, S-t-u-n-t-z?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Michael Ogden, O-g-d-e-n? A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Judith Swain, S-w-a-i-n?
A. No, I don't think I know of her.
Q. Are you familiar with Walker Merryman,
M- e-r-r-y-m- a-n?
A. Yes, Walker Merryman, again, was ahead of the Tobacco Institute.
Q. Have you viewed any of Merryman's testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. I have not.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Are you familiar with William Farone, F-a-r-o-n-e? A. Again, I'm familiar with the name, and I just couldn't place who that is.
Q. And are you familiar with Graham Reed, R-e-e-d? A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Graham Read, R-e-a-d?
A. No.
MR. BRODY: Second time.
Q. Are you familiar with Stanley Temko, T-e-m-k-o? A. Again, I've seen the name, but I couldn’t identify him now.
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Loretta McKenzie, M-c-K-e-n-z-i-e?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Neil Weinstein, W-e-i-n-s-t-e-i-n?
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q. You don't recognize Weinstein as an expert on tobacco?
A. I'm wondering if he's an author of several, you know, articles that I read that were sort of review essays on tobacco, but I couldn't say for sure. I’d have to check.
Q. Are you familiar with Lance Reynolds?
A. I think Lance Reynolds is one of the sort of, you know, Reynolds heirs. But I don't — you know, one of them wrote a book about, you know, growing up in the tobacco world. But I'm not sure it was Lance Reynolds. I’d have to check.
Q. Was that Patrick Reynolds?
A. That's Patrick.
Q. Are you familiar with Lance Reynolds?
A. No, I don’t know who Lance Reynolds is.
to spell it — I mean pronounce it — it's K-l-o-e-p-f-e-r?
A. Yes.
Q. How would you pronounce that?
A. Kloepfer, I don't know.
Q. And who is he?
A. He also worked, I think, for the Tobacco Institute.
Q. Are you familiar with Mick McGraw, M-c-G-r-a-w? A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with Paul Mele, M-e-l-e?
A. I think he was at one time on -- I'm just not sure. You know, it’s familiar, but I couldn't clearly identify —
Q. And are you familiar with Ellen Merlo, M-e-r-l-o? A. No.
Q. You’re familiar with Robert Proctor, though, right?
A. I am familiar with Robert Proctor.
Q. And you're aware that the government has identified Doctor Proctor as an expert in this case?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recognize Doctor Proctor as an expert in
the history of smoking and health?
A. Yes.
Q. Is Doctor Proctor respected in his field?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you familiar with Proctor's views on the history of smoking and health?
A. Yes. Generally, I am.
Q. And would your opinions regarding the history of smoking and health be substantially similar to those of Doctor Proctor?
A. Substantially similar.
Q. Okay. Can you identify any areas of disagreement between yourself and Proctor?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There are probably some small interpretive differences. A lot of Robert's work has focused on the significance of the investigation of cancer risks in Germany. And my own work focused principally in the US, and, in part, in terms of the British epidemiology. And, so, in terms of tracing the sort of — the relative importance of the early studies, there are some minor historical tensions in our evaluation, you might say. In, like, you know, I would think he would think like,
say, the Muller study was highly significant. I think it's a very important study, but my own emphasis really places, you know, somewhat greater significance in terms of our systematic understanding of the harms of smoking on Dahl,
Hill, Wynder, Graham. So that's the kind of thing that, you know, Professor Proctor and I might debate.
Q. And can you think of any other areas where you and Doctor Proctor have a debate about smoking and health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I can’t.
Q. Have you viewed Doctor Proctor's expert report in this case?
A. He did send it to me, and I did review it.
Q. When did he send that to you?
A. He sent it to me sometime around early June, I’d
say.
Q. And have any other experts in this case sent you any expert reports that you read?
A. No. That’s the only one that I've gotten.
Q. Have you taken the time to review the deposition testimony given by Doctor Proctor in this case?
A. I have not seen it.
Q. Have you discussed Doctor Proctor’s testimony in this case with anyone?
A. Doctor Proctor's testimony in the case or — I'm sorry. What was the question?
Q. You know that Doctor Proctor's been deposed in this case?
A. Yes, I knew he had been deposed.
Q. Have you discussed Doctor Proctor's views or opinions or his testimony with anyone?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I've discussed them with Doctor Proctor.
Q. And is that the only person?
A. Yeah. I think that’s the only person I’ve discussed Doctor Proctor's deposition with.
Q. And what discussion did you have with Doctor Proctor?
A. I spoke to him after he was deposed, and, you know, had a kind of brief, general conversation like, you know, How did it go? Fine. You know, and we didn't get into very many details about it. He just said, you know, it's about what he had expected. He had been deposed before.
Q. What details did you discuss about Doctor
Proctor's deposition?
A. You know, it was more about sort of the character of being deposed. You know, he said, You'll be asked a lot of questions that I might not know the answer to, things like that. And, you know, kind of the pleasantness of the experience, how nice the people were, you know, relations with the lawyers.
Q. And what did he say about that?
A. He thought you were just very nice. He didn't identify you by name, you know, but —
Q. And have you reviewed any of Doctor Proctor's testimony in prior tobacco litigation?
A. I was aware that he had testified, and, but, I have not reviewed any of his testimony in the other litigation.
Q. And have you reviewed any of Doctor Proctor's expert reports in prior litigation?
A. I think he sent me his earlier report, but I haven’t read it.
Q. Okay. Within your academic field, who else would you consider to be an expert in the history of smoking and health?
Kluger book in terms of the history of smoking and health. There hasn’t really been that much historical work. Really, to be perfectly honest with you, beyond my own and Robert Proctor's on the history of tobacco risk and health, outside of the litigation, and now, you know, the litigation’s generated some expert work, but I'm trying to think of other prominent historians of medicine. I've been influenced, for example, quite a bit in my own thinking about the history of medicine by Charles Rosenberg, who’s a historian of medicine who spent most of his career at Penn — recently came to Harvard — and is a colleague of mine now in the Department of History of Science. And in terms of how to think about historical problems, very influential. In the history of public health, there are people who are generally influential, but they haven't focused down on smoking and health from a historical perspective. So, unfortunately there's not more people who, you know, work concertedly in the field.
Q. So, other than yourself and Doctor Proctor, you're not aware of any other experts on the history of
smoking and health?
A. Let me just give it a little bit more thought, but you know, going back to your question about secondary sources, if you were looking for secondary sources, you know, there's a historian at Ohio State who published an article on an early Surgeon General’s Report, and then the first Surgeon General's Report, John Burnham. He's fairly highly regarded. But there haven't been a lot of people who have really directed a lot of attention to these areas. And, you know, there have been many books on the history of tobacco, especially recently. Most of them are written by journalists, some of whom have done an excellent job in recovering a lot of material and in analyzing it. But they generally don't have the character of placing the issues in a kind of deep, historical and social context in terms of the sort of range of methods and arguments that would be more characteristic of somebody who's a professional historian.
Q. All of your formal education was in the area of history, is that right?
history.
Q. What about your undergraduate education, what area did you work on there?
A. I worked in history, also, but I had courses in,
you know, math and science; and, you know, I had a liberal arts education.
MR. BRODY: Maybe we should take a short
break.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 3 o'clock. We're off the record.
(Recess was taken.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 3:16. We are recording and on the record.
Q. Doctor Brandt, isn’t it true that the 1964 Surgeon General's Report lists or contains lists of carcinogens that had been identified in cigarette smoke?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, it does identify carcinogens in cigarette smoke.
Q. Have you compared the list of carcinogens in the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report with those identified in internal tobacco company documents?
Q. And have you compared the list of carcinogens in any of the Surgeon General’s Reports after 1964 with those identified in any internal tobacco company documents?
A. I haven't actually made that exact comparison.
No, I haven’t done it.
Q. Now, before the break we were discussing your educational background, and all your graduate education was in the area of history?
A. That's correct.
Q. The articles you have published in peer review journals, have they all been in the area of history?
A. No, I’ve published articles both in the historical literature, but also in the — in journals that are targeted towards medicine and public health.
Q. Okay. Since you got your doctoral degree, have you done any teaching in fields other than history?
A. Well, history might be broadly construed, but I’ve taught — I teach history of science and medicine. I’ve taught in the Harvard School of Public Health. For example, periodically, I teach a good number of public health students, in addition to
medical students. But most of my work is focused on — in teaching has been in the history of medicine and public health and medical ethics.
Q. Do any of your courses address tobacco?
A. Periodically, my courses have addressed the history of tobacco.
Q. Okay. When was the last time you addressed the history of tobacco in one of your courses?
A. Oh, just last fall or last spring, because I often
bring examples from my own research in the history of tobacco to illustrate questions in public health.
Q. Now, you don’t have any degree in the physical or biological sciences, is that true?
A. That's true.
Q. And do you hold yourself out as an expert in biology?
A. No.
Q. And do you hold yourself out as an expert in toxicology?
A. I'm interested in aspects of the history of
toxicology, but I do not hold myself out to be an expert in toxicology.
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you an expert in the neuro sciences?
A. No, I’m not an expert in the neuro sciences.
Q. Are you an expert in pharmacology?
A. Again, my historical interests traverse aspects of the history of pharmacology, but I'm not an expert in the science of pharmacology.
Q. Are you an expert in the science of nicotine addiction?
A. Again, I've been interested in the history of the science of nicotine addiction, but I’m not a nicotine addiction scientist.
Q. You haven't published any articles on the science of nicotine addiction that —
A. I have an article on the history of the science of nicotine addiction.
Q. But you haven’t performed any experiments on the science of -A. No, I haven't performed experiments.
Q. Just so I can clarify the record, you haven’t performed any experiments on the science of nicotine addiction, is that correct?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. And are you an expert on tobacco chemistry?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you an expert on growing tobacco?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on tobacco toxicology?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you an expert in epidemiology?
A. I have a degree of expertise in epidemiology as a historical phenomenon.
Q. Okay.
A. And that's been a focus of interest of mine, the history of epidemiology. I’ve taught courses on the history of epidemiology.
Q. You don't have any degrees in epidemiology, do you?
A. No, I don't.
Q. You haven't performed an epidemiological study, have you?
A. No, I have not.
Q. And you haven’t published any epidemiological science in peer review publications?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on statistics?
interest of mine, but I'm not an expert in statistics.
Q. Are you an expert on ethics?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you recognize Thomas Murray as an expert on ethics?
A. I do.
Q. Have you reviewed any of Doctor Murray's testimony in tobacco litigation?
A. I haven't reviewed his testimony. He did send me — he did send me a very early, very brief expert report that he once prepared.
Q. And do you know what case that was for?
A. I think it was associated with one of the state cases brought by the attorneys general. But I don't know precisely which state it was associated with. I think they were shared materials. But he had prepared an expert statement on the ethics of tobacco that he sent me.
Q. Do you plan on testifying about the ethics of tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I haven't made plans about my testimony, exactly.
So, I guess what I would say is this: Is that
I've been interested in some of the moral questions that arise in the course of the history of decisions made about tobacco, and I'm quite interested in moral questions in science and medicine in general, especially as they arise historically, but, also, in contemporary aspects.
And as I evaluate the history of tobacco and where my research has focused, there are some very powerful moral questions that, you know, that I might speak to. I just don’t know.
Q. Have you put any statements about ethics or your testimony on ethics in your expert report?
A. No, my expert report does not focus on the ethical issues associated with decision-making in the tobacco industry, for example.
Q. Is there any standard course of training in ethics?
A. No, there's not. And, in fact, that’s why, even with my historical training, which — there just is no standard training in ethics. And, so, people develop expertise in that area from a fairly wide range of fields. Murray, for example, came from psychology; and he’s well known as one of the leading ethicists in the country.
Q. Is there any national accreditation process in ethics?
A. Well, that’s an interesting question. There's a national accreditation process evolving, but especially for clinical bedside ethics. So, for example, in hospitals where there are ethics committees, there are moves towards beginning to accredit individuals who have certain expertise in counseling patients about ethical issues. But it's — I don’t think there's a definitive accreditation process at this time, but it’s being, you know, developed.
Q. But you haven’t been accredited in ethics?
A. No, and, in fact, most of the scholars doing work in ethics actually are not clinically involved in the way that I just described. And, so, there's no professional accreditation.
Q. And is there any licensing procedure for people who hold themselves out as experts in ethics?
A. No, there's no licensing.
Q. Are there any nationwide or statewide tests for people who hold themselves out as experts in ethics?
Q. Now, would it be fair to say that analysis of ethics or a good ethical judgment isn’t the monopoly of experts in ethics?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Would it be fair to say that? Could you repeat that? I’m sorry.
Q. Would it be fair to say that good ethical judgment is not the monopoly of experts on ethics?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think that good ethical judgment is not a monopoly of people who identify themselves as ethicists. The difference, really, is not that ethicists have good ethical judgment and others don’t; that ethicists bring an analytic capacity to ethical issues that generally even people who may have good ethical judgment may not have fully articulated or be aware of. And, so, it's like a lot of areas of scholarship.
Q. So, would an ethicist have an ability beyond the average person to tell whether something was morally good or morally bad?
A. They would certainly have the expertise to define the potentialities of morally good and morally bad positions and explicate them in a more
sophisticated way. That’s I think how ethicists really assist in our investigation of morality problems.
Q. Would the ethical judgment of an ethicist necessarily be better than that of an average person?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Not necessarily. Could be, could not. There are good ethicists and sophisticatedly trained people who have real expertise and, you know, it's the same as in my own field of history; there’s excellent work, and there's work that’s really, you know, not so strong.
Q. Do the principles that we discussed governing historical analysis also govern ethical analysis? MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know exactly which principles you have in mind, but --
Q. Well, why don’t I be more specific then, okay?
A. Sure.
Q. In conducting an ethical analysis, do you want to make sure that you have as much information as possible?
A. The information could be, for example, different
than it would be for a historical analysis. So, you know, you have to have as much of the relevant information available as possible.
Q. And in conducting an ethical analysis, would you want to make sure you consider all sides of an issue?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You would want to have a sense of the range of perspectives in evaluating that issue, all sides, you know, again, is a — raises definitional issues.
Q. In conducting an ethical analysis, would you want to make sure you avoid bias?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Generally, you would want to avoid, you know, bias.
Q. And in conducting an ethical analysis, would you want to make sure that you are relying on the most reliable information?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, I don't — you know, I hate to be semantic, but, you know, you want the best information that’s obtainable within a context.
Q. Do you think it's unethical for the tobacco
companies to be in the cigarette business?
A. Not to be in the business, no. I don't think
that, you know, it's inherently unethical to be in the tobacco business. I do think that the sale of products, that, you know, have serious health consequences raises very serious ethical issues for the people who produce harmful products.
Q. Okay. Well, maybe I can be more specific. Was it unethical for the tobacco companies to keep selling cigarettes after the Surgeon General said they cause cancer in 1964?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. The question is just so broad, to keep selling tobacco. In other words, the ethical question —
I would frame it much more narrowly. You know, did the companies fulfill a set of ethical responsibilities in the face of the first Surgeon General's Report, and what would those ethical responsibilities have been? And if I were conducting a full ethical analysis of that, it would be, you know, had they satisfied an effective duty to alert their consumers, people who use their product, as well as the general public who might some day use their product of
everything that was known about the product? Did they take steps to reduce the harms of that product in a clear and public way? So, you know, was it unethical for them to continue to do business? No. Did they take steps that were potentially highly unethical? Yes.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Do you think it would be ethical to do human testing of cigarette design modifications?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There are — I'd have to think about it. I have done quite a lot of work on the history of human experimentation. And there are potential models for doing research with risky interventions. And, so, I haven't thought about it all that much.
But, you know, potentially one could get two groups of smokers who know that they're engaged in a harmful and risky behavior, and that group might want to be randomized to a potentially safer product. But I think, at least, theoretically, I would say at this point — and I would want to analyze this in more detail — it is conceivable that one can do ethical research on two groups of smokers using different products. But it’s
difficult. And there are always hurdles to doing effective research on harm.
Q. And what are some of the hurdles about doing human experimentation on cigarette modifications?
A. Well, one of the big hurdles is randomization,
because if you're randomizing people to something that you know is harmful, generally our ethics — even going back to the early periods of our understanding of randomization technique -- would be that it was unethical.
On the other hand, when, you know, you have people who are prepared to consent to research that they know have some risk for the potential benefit of new scientific knowledge that may eventually benefit them, we do studies. So, you know, again, I haven't given this a great deal of thought, although I'd like to give it more.
But, you know, we sometimes ask people to volunteer for potentially risky cancer treatments.
And, so, I can at least think that if there had been real transparency and people were saying, we know this is dangerous, but we're searching for less dangerous products, there are potential strategies for investigating that. But you have
to start with the idea of a full, thorough informed consent about the potential risks of the research.
Q. Are you an expert on public relations?
A. I guess what I would say is I am an expert on aspects of the history of public relations. I've done quite a lot of research on the introduction of formal professional public relations into the tobacco industry; and as a result of that research, some wider reading on the history of public relations, I have learned a good deal about the rise of professional public relations in 20th Century American society.
Q. Have you ever worked at a public relations firm?
A. I have not.
Q. Has anybody ever hired you to do public relations work?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on lobbying?
A. I have studied aspects of the history of lobbying and special interest influence in legislation.
So, I have some degree of expertise in lobbying.
Q. Has anybody ever hired you as a lobbyist?
A. No, I’ve never served as a lobbyist.
Q. Have you ever worked at a firm that does lobbying? A. No, I have not.
Q. Are you an expert on economics?
A. No, I'm not an expert in economics.
Q. Are you an expert on marketing?
A. Again, I have a strong historical interest in
changing aspects of marketing in the course of the 20th Century.
Q. And you have no formal degrees in marketing?
A. No, I do not.
Q. You’ve never worked for a marketing company?
A. I didn't.
Q. Have you ever published any peer reviewed research in a marketing journal?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Are you an expert on government regulation?
A. Again, historically, I've studied some aspects of government regulation, but I'm not an expert in government regulation.
Q. Are you an expert on the Federal Trade Commission regulations governing tobacco?
A. Again, I have some knowledge of those, but I'm not an expert on them.
regulations regarding tobacco?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on the science of addiction?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I thought you asked me that already, but I'm happy to answer it again. No, I'm not an expert on the science of addiction.
Q. And are you an expert on cigarette design?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, I’m not an expert on cigarette design.
Q. Are you an expert on cigarette additives?
A. No, I’m not an expert on additives.
Q. Are you an expert on smoker compensation?
A. No, I’m not a expert on compensation.
Q. Are you an expert on the effect of pH on cigarettes?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on nicotine analogs?
A. No.
Q. Are you an expert on charcoal filters?
A. No.
Q. I think you’ve already testified that you're not an expert on the use of palladium in cigarettes, is that correct?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. As I said, I was familiar with the historical
developments of the XA cigarette, but I'm not an expert on palladium.
Q. Okay. Are you an expert on nonburning cigarettes?
A. As I think I said earlier, I am familiar with
nonburning cigarettes and their place within the historical development of attempts to produce a potentially safer product. But I’m not an expert on nonbuming cigarettes.
Q. You haven't ever designed any nonbuming cigarettes?
A. No, I didn't do that.
Q. And you haven’t obtained any patents on nonburning cigarettes?
A. I have no patents.
Q. Are you an expert on low tar cigarettes?
A. Again, it figures in my historical assessment of the history of tobacco, but I’m not an expert on low tar cigarettes.
Q. Are you an expert on the government regulations regarding cigarette labeling?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I’ve written about the history of cigarette
labeling.
Q. Are you familiar with all the regulations that have been issued on cigarette labeling?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm familiar with the legislation that led to the original warning in '66, the subsequent change in the warning, and then the rotating warnings, and each piece of subsequent legislation; and, so, I'm familiar with the history of the Labeling Act and its amendments.
Q. And every pack of cigarettes that’s been sold
since 1966 has contained a warning label warning smokers about the hazards?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I wouldn't characterize it as you just have in your question, because the earliest label, you know, was extremely limited in its so-called warning. And the subsequent warnings have been more clear about the harms of smoking.
Q. And the government was the one who created the Labeling Act, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. My understanding is that Congress creates acts, but that those acts are subject to a complex
process of negotiation, advise and consent, special interest lobbying, and so on.
Q. And are you critical of the government for any of the labels put on cigarettes?
A. Am I critical of the government?
Q. Yeah.
A. Well, again, the question doesn't go to the heart
of my own analytic framework, which is why was the label that was on the package on the package? And it's not an issue of blame or criticism. It’s, you know, the original warning was a limited warning; and the project for the historian is to explain why did that particular warning appear on packages starting in '66?
Q. Congress has the constitutional power to put whatever label they want on cigarettes, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, Congress has the authority to specify the warning.
Q. And that every label on the cigarette packs has been approved by Congress?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
A. I'm an expert in some ways on the element of its historical significance in the history of tobacco.
Q. Are you an expert on the science regarding environmental tobacco smoke?
A. I have studied the evolution of scientific
arguments about the harms of environmental smoke. Q. Have you taken any measurements of environmental tobacco smoke?
A. No, I don’t take measurements.
Q. Have you performed any epidemiological studies regarding environmental tobacco smoke?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever been involved in any regulatory
proceedings regarding environmental tobacco smoke? A. I have not.
Q. Are you an expert on scientific polling?
A. No.
Q. Now, you're not a medical doctor, right?
A. I am not.
Q. And do you hold yourself out as a medical expert?
A. Of course not.
Q. You haven't treated any patients?
A. I would be violating laws, and I don't do it.
Q. And you haven’t diagnosed any patients?
A. Maybe every once in a while I’ll diagnose one of my kids, but that's as far as I would go.
Q. Have you ever worked in a scientific laboratory?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. You haven’t ever performed any scientific experiments in a laboratory?
A. No.
Q. And you're not a lawyer?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. And you wouldn’t hold yourself out as a legal expert, would you?
A. No, I don’t do that.
Q. You haven't reviewed any legal codes governing the ethical obligations of lawyers?
A. No, I haven't examined those codes.
Q. And would you hold yourself out as an expert on the ethical obligations governing lawyers under those codes?
A. No, I wouldn’t hold myself as out as an expert on that.
Q. Have you ever performed any experiments involving mouse skin painting?
A. No. No, I haven’t done any mouse skin painting.
Q. Have you ever done any experiments involving
ciliastasis?
A. No.
Q. You haven’t published any research findings regarding mouse skin painting?
A. I have not published on that.
Q. And you haven’t published any ciliastasis, c-i-l-i-a-s-t-a-s-i-s research?
A. No.
Q. You haven't published any epidemiological studies?
A. No.
Q. Do you know who the current Surgeon General is?
A. No, I don’t. I don't remember his name.
Q. Have you reviewed the settlement agreement between the tobacco companies and the states?
A. I did read the settlement agreement when it was agreed upon.
Q. And how did that come about?
A. Oh, I just, you know, as a result of my
long-standing interest in the history of tobacco,
I was interested in the history of the settlement agreement and what it represented for the — for what it represented as a public health outcome.
Q. Would you hold yourself out as an expert on the
settlement agreement between the tobacco companies
and the states?
A. I have some knowledge of the settlement agreement, but I would not consider myself an expert on the agreement.
Q. Are you planning to offer any opinions about the Master Settlement Agreement in this case?
A. I don't expect to.
Q. Now, you are aware that the Master Settlement Agreement contains certain restrictions on marketing of cigarettes, true?
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is it reasonable to have restrictions on marketing of cigarettes such as are contained in the MSA?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It's not really related to my expert statement, but I think, you know, restrictions on marketing are at least one potential public health strategy that’s significant.
Q. And the MSA contains restrictions on tobacco company lobbying efforts, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm not — I don't recall that part of the MSA, although I know that it did lead to the disbanding
of the Tobacco Institute.
Q. And in your view, was it reasonable to add lobbying restrictions to apply to the tobacco companies such as are in the MSA?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just haven't evaluated it, but, generally, it seems reasonable.
Q. And was it reasonable to disband the Tobacco Institute?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It just — it's a judgment that’s outside my full area of expertise. So, I mean, you’re asking for a judgment, you know, like my opinion. But it’s different from the opinions that I've offered in my expert statement.
Q. All right. Did you ever object to the disbanding of the Tobacco Institute?
A. No, I didn't object to that.
Q. And the MSA contains restrictions on suppressing research, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Restrictions on suppressing research? I’m just not adequately familiar with the provisions of the Master Settlement Agreement to offer judgments
about it.
Q. Okay. Doesn't the MSA contain restrictions on
making material misrepresentations about smoke and health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think it does.
Q. And are such restrictions reasonable in your view?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. They’re reasonable.
Q. And the Master Settlement Agreement contains provisions that require the tobacco companies to fund a foundation that conducts public education efforts on the health hazards of smoking, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is that a reasonable provision?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, I've sort of said that, you know, that I don’t know what reasonable means. And, so, in this context, and, you know, as a -- if I'm being asked as a citizen — am I being asked as an expert? You know. So, you know, is it reasonable? Yes, I think it's reasonable.
Q. The Master Settlement Agreement contains
provisions that prohibit targeting under-aged smokers, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, are such restrictions on targeting under-aged smokers reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think those restrictions are reasonable.
Q. And the Master Settlement Agreement contains a ban on youth sampling?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is the ban on youth sampling in the MSA reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think that's reasonable.
Q. And the MSA contains a ban on youth gifts, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think it does.
Q. And in your view is the ban on youth gifts in the MSA reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think it’s reasonable.
Q. And the MSA contains prohibitions on significant brand name merchandise?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. True?
A. True.
Q. And in your view, are the prohibitions on cigarette brand name merchandise in the MSA reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I've already raised my question about the term "reasonable," and on what grounds I'm being asked these particular questions. But, yes, I think it's reasonable.
Q. And the MSA contains provisions requiring the publication of internal tobacco company research and other documents from their files, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think so.
Q. And in your view, are the provisions of the MSA requiring the publication of internal tobacco company documents reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
sponsorships, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think it does.
Q. And in your view, are the restrictions on brand name sponsorships in the MSA reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think they are reasonable.
Q. And the MSA contains a ban on the use of cartoon characters in advertising?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, it does.
Q. And in your view, is the ban on the use of cartoon characters in tobacco advertising reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just — I keep going back to this, and, you know, there are a lot of questions like this, but I just don’t know. Reasonable to whom is the first question?
Q. To you.
A. Tome?
Q. To you? Is that a reasonable restriction to you.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. And, you know, yes, I think that's — that restriction makes sense.
Q. And the Master Settlement Agreement eliminates outdoor advertising?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. True?
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is the prohibition of outdoor tobacco advertising in the MSA reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And the MSA bans promotions of tobacco products in TV shows, movies, and video games, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, are those restrictions reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, they are.
Q. And the -MR. BRODY: For purposes of saving them (indicating), can I just stipulate that for the remainder of this string I object to every question about what the MSA has in it, and then every question about whether that particular thing is reasonable?
MR. SMITH: I only have a couple more questions.
THE WITNESS: I’ll pause for you to do
that.
Q. And the MSA dissolves the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And do you think that the provisions of the MSA dissolving TI and CTR are reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I do.
Q. And the MSA has a prohibition making the minimum pack size for cigarettes 20 cigarettes, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is that restriction on pack size reasonable?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think it is.
Q. In fact, haven't you advocated a restriction on pack size in your public writings?
A. I may have, yes.
using the name of a nontobacco product for a tobacco product, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view, is that a reasonable restriction?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And, in fact, you've advocated that type of restriction in your public writings, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you compared the provisions of the Master Settlement Agreement with the proposed FDA regulations on tobacco?
A. Not systematically.
Q. Would it be fair to say that there are a number of the MSA provisions that were also in the proposed FDA regulations?
A. Some.
Q. Now, you've written the developments in
agricultural techniques, production, technology, industrial organization, and the portable match all contributed to the growth of the tobacco industry, is that correct?
Q. And you’ve also written that as long as there have been cigarettes, there’s been a concern about their impact on health, true?
A. True.
Q. And with increased cigarette consumption, there came an increased concern about the impact of smoking on health, is that true?
A. Yes, I think that’s true.
Q. And you've written with the advent of the
cigarette came a powerful anticigarette movement which focused on both moral and health risks of tobacco?
A. That's correct.
Q. And one example of an early anticigarette advocate was Henry Ford?
A. Yes, he was an antitobacco advocate.
Q. Now, there are a number of epidemiological studies on smoking conducted in the 1950s and '60s, is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And the epidemiological studies on smoking were conducted by outside scientists and published in the scientific literature?
Q. And the epidemiological studies conducted in the 1950s were also publicized widely in the public press, is that true?
A. Fairly widely.
Q. And the studies on smoking and health in the 1950s were published in the scientific literature and known to the scientific community, true?
A. Yes.
Q. And information on the adverse effects of smoking that was available in the 1950s was reviewed and summarized in US government publications, true?
A. Yes.
Q. And the information on the adverse effects of smoking that was available in the 1950s was reviewed by a variety of medical organizations and public health associations?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And the information regarding the adverse effects of smoking that was published in the 1950s was also reviewed by physicians?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Some physicians reviewed them, yes.
Q. Weren’t there a number of medical organizations such as the American Cancer Society and American Lung Association that concluded that smoking caused cancer in the 1950s?
A. They did.
Q. And the medical community, in coming to that conclusion, wasn’t relying on the tobacco companies' views, were they?
A. No, they weren't.
Q. And doctors themselves began quitting smoking in significant numbers, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It depends on what "significant numbers" would mean. But physicians began to evaluate their own smoking behavior, for sure.
Q. Haven't you written that there were significant numbers of doctors that quit smoking after the publicized studies in the 1950s?
A. Yes. You know, I think that's a fair characterization.
Q. And the Reader's Digest carried a number of articles that discussed the scientific evidence on smoking and disease, is that —
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. And the New York Times, Time, and Newsweek all contained articles on the scientific evidence showing that smoking caused disease?
A. Sometimes they did. Sometimes they presented, you know, that they felt the compulsion to present the tobacco industry’s position simultaneously. So, you see, one would need to do a kind of substantive investigation of what those articles really said. It wasn't a sort of simple thing, it's been demonstrated smoking causes cancer. It said, Scientific reports have shown; and then it says, The tobacco company’s response to these data are. So, that was characteristic of the '50s.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Quitting smoking by individuals was also described in the lay press at the time, is that true?
A. Yes, strategies for quitting were in the public media.
Q. Did the tobacco industry ever publish any contrary epidemiological data in the 1950s?
A. Contrary to?
Q. Showing that smoking — strike that. Did the
tobacco companies ever publish any epidemiological
data that contradicted the published epidemiological studies by outside scientists in the 1950s?
A. There was an article published about tobacco workers that was based on epidemiological data which showed that they lived longer, and — irrespective of tobacco use. And then the Tobacco Institute widely publicized that through a flier that they sent to doctors and dentists called "Tobacco and Health," so that was an epidemiological study.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Did any medical association endorse the views of the tobacco industry on causation in the 1950s?
A. Not that I know of.
Q. Now, there are still scientists who are
independent of the tobacco industry who expressed the view in the 1950s that causation had not been established, is that true?
A. Yes.
Q. In 1954, Wilhelm Huebner of the National Cancer Institute wrote an article stating that the causation theory in cigarettes had not been scientifically proven, is that correct?
Q. Leroy Bemie, the Surgeon General, was asked for a definitive statement that cigarettes caused disease in 1957, and he stated that there were views on both sides of the issue, right?
A. Well, I think he stated fairly categorically that, you know, in his view, smoking was a principal cause of lung cancer. So, we could look at the specific language.
Q. Didn’t Bemie also recognize that there were
scientists independent of the tobacco industry who believed that smoking did not cause cancer?
A. He may have recognized that, but that was — but his own position was absolutely clear that, you know, he believed, as the Surgeon General, that smoking did cause lung cancer.
Q. Actually, didn't Bemie decline to give — state an opinion one way or the other whether smoking caused cancer?
A. No, I don’t — that’s not how I read the record.
If you look at his, you know, '57 and 59 statements.
Q. I'm just focusing on'57. In'57, didn't he decline to state one way or the other whether
smoking caused cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think -- I'd have to look specifically at the '57 statement with you.
Q. In 1959, he did state that smoking caused cancer, right?
A. That’s my understanding.
Q. Isn't it true that Louis Robbins, The Chief of the Cancer Control Program for the Public Health Service in 1962, wrote an article stating that causation had not been proven?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know the Robbins piece.
Q. The government lawyers haven’t provided you with the 1962 Robbins article?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, they did not.
Q. And the government lawyers, did they provide you with any internal US government documents by Robbins saying that causation had not yet been established that were written in the 1960s?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, they did not.
Q. Now, there's no evidence that the tobacco industry
controlled the views of Huebner or Robbins, is there?
A. Well, no. But, for example, when the tobacco industry found out that Huebner would be talking, they set up a special press conference and made it possible to promote his viewpoint aggressively with the public. So, I don’t have any evidence that they influenced his science, but they certainly seized his viewpoint.
Q. Now, you have written that around 1960 there were epidemiological studies that were completed that showed that cigarette smoking was associated with lung cancer, right?
A. '60s? I mean, I think probably even earlier, but -
Q. Well, didn't you write that in 1960 was when the studies that showed that lung cancer was associated with smoking were completed?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, that would not exactly characterize my position.
Q. Weren’t there a lot of criticisms of the
methodology of the earlier epidemiological studies that were conducted at the beginning of the 1950s?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, that would not be my position either.
Q. Well, we’ll look at some of your publications later on, okay?
A. That’s great.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Now, the Surgeon General s Advisory Committee was formed in 1962 to begin work on what ultimately became the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And you already mentioned Mr. Hammill was involved in that effort, right?
A. Yes. I think it was Doctor Hammill.
Q. Can you identify any of the other people that were involved in the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee?
A. Yeah. There were ten members of the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee, and, obviously,
Luther Terry was the Surgeon General. He appointed them — Marie Seevers, Jacob Furth Burdette, LaMastra, Schumann, Bayne-Jones, William Cochran — let me see if — I haven't counted up.
Let me just think and see if I’m missing anybody here. Feiser, Furth, Hickman. I don't think I
had mentioned Hickman.
Q. And wasn’t the purpose of the Surgeon General’s Advisory Committee to evaluate the evidence and end any controversy about whether smoking caused cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't think they were necessarily to evaluate controversy so much as come to a definitive conclusion about the science that had preceded it.
Q. When the Surgeon General's Report was issued in 1964, didn't it state that the issue of causation was controversial, even among the members of the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think that the issue of causation had been controversial, and I think that the controversy had been stirred by the extremely critical public relations that had been developed around the science by the industry. And the charge was to come up with a definitive assessment of the scientific evidence.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Haven’t you written that the epidemiological studies in the 1950s touched off a debate within
the scientific community about the nature of causality, proof, and risk?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I wrote that. But I didn't completely agree with how you characterized what you just read in your previous question.
Q. Now, you’ve written the members of the Surgeon General's Committee realized the complexity of determining whether smoking caused cancer, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And you have stated yourself that the process of proving that cigarettes cause disease was complex?
A. Yes, of course, it was.
Q. And proving that smoking caused cancer required the development of new statistical and quantitative methods, is that true?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. And proving that smoking caused cancer required rethinking the nature of the causal relationships and epidemiology?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, to some degree.
Surgeon General adopted a test of causation that had not been previously used, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, that's not exactly true, because even in earlier papers, Dahl & Hill, for example, had suggested the criteria that they were using to make the determination of causality. So, the first Surgeon General's Report utilized a long history of different criteria within science and medicine, but explicitly defined the criteria that they had used as a committee. But they didn’t come up with those newly. They were part of a long-standing tradition in medicine, that is, how do we know that something is a cause? And I would trace that debate, you know, back, you know, at least two centuries.
Q. You’ve written that the 1964 report was important in it raising the stature of epidemiology as a discipline, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I have written that.
Q. And isn’t it true that before the 1964 report was issued there was debate within the scientific community about whether epidemiological evidence
could be used to establish causation?
A. No, that's not how I would characterize that. I mean, there are always debates in science about what kind of evidence do you have for what kinds of claims. But, you know, no one would have said that, you know, John Snow had not made a good, you know, epidemiological inference when he identified the Broad Street pump as a — and water as a potential vehicle for cholera in London in 1854.
So, the idea that epidemiology was, you know, new, untested, and hadn’t addressed questions of causahty before, would be a mischaracterization of the historical record.
Q. Haven’t you read that there was a debate in the
scientific community before 1964 among laboratory scientists and epidemiologists about what proof was sufficient to establish causation?
A. Yes. There's always debates in science about, you know, what determines causahty. You know, as I’ve done more work in this area, I don't think it was strictly a debate between lab science and epidemiology. Many of the epidemiologists were very reliant on lab sciences as one element of their explanatory framework. So, you know, I just
wouldn’t characterize whether, well, they were the lab scientists and they were the epidemiologists and they were having a debate about causality.
That would not be an accurate historical assessment of the time.
Q. Okay. Well, then, would you agree that with the issuance of the 1964 report there was a consensus that smoking caused cancer?
A. I think there were, broadly, a good deal of consensus prior to that. I think what the '64 report really accomplished was to expose to a considerable degree the idea that there was an ongoing controversy about this. Because here you had a group of eminent and independent scientists coming together to review data which had been produced at least over the last decade and more. And I don't think that the consensus arises in '64.
Q. And would you agree with Doctor Proctor’s testimony that 1964 marked the point at which there was a governmental consensus that smoking caused cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I might place it just slightly earlier.
Q. And when would you place the point of the
governmental consensus that smoking caused cancer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Consensus is, you know, consensus doesn't happen on a day. But I think that a considerable degree of scientific consensus had built by the time of the Strong report that I cite in my expert testimony that — even more by the Bemie evaluation. And then, certainly, by the time, you know, you get to other national level evaluations, like the Royal College. So, I see it as a process. Consensus isn't something that happens.
It’s a process that can be identified. And a good deal of consensus had developed in the mid to late ’50s.
Q. Has the government shown you any internal US government documents saying that smoking did not cause cancer after the Bernie statement in 1959?
A. No, they haven't shown me any.
Q. Okay. Do you think that scientists like Huebner who said that smoking did not cause cancer before 1964 were acting in bad faith?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, I think the idea of, well, you know,
that’s acting in bad faith, you need evidence for that — something like that. No, I have no reason to believe that Huebner acted in bad faith?
Q. As the Scientific Director of CTR, isn't it true that the tobacco industry looked at Clarence Cook Little to express his views on the causation issue?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think that they utilized Little.
Q. And you've seen a number of statements put out by the tobacco industry where they've referenced Little's views on causation, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, you've written that the 1964 report received front page media coverage throughout the country, true?
A. True.
Q. And you've written that the 1964 report marked a watershed in the history of public health, true?
A. Yes, I think that’s true.
Q. And you've also written that by issuing the 1964, for the first time the US government accepted responsibility for elucidating health risks based on epidemiological studies?
Q. And I believe you’ve written that in 1964 the
Surgeon General’s Report changed in a fundamental way, the way the scientific community views issues of causation?
A. Yes, I think certainly by 1964 and the authority and legitimating power of the first Surgeon General's Report, you know, did have an impact on how we would evaluate, you know, risks in the future.
Q. Isn't it true that when the 1964 report was
issued, polls showed that most Americans already associated cigarettes with cancer?
A. Yes, I think polls show that Americans associated cigarettes with cancer, but what that means, and the polling techniques and everything, would be subject for further investigation.
Q. Isn't it true that by the early 1950s, Gallup
polls show that 90 percent of smokers had heard that cigarettes might cause cancer?
A. Yes, I think that they probably heard that.
Q. Okay. And would you agree that the 1964 Surgeon General's Report had a significant impact on the consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. It did — my understanding is that it did briefly; that there was a decline in consumption immediately in 1964, but within a relatively short period — by '65, '66 — consumption was back to where it had been before.
Q. Isn’t it true, though, after 1966, consumption continued to decrease until the present day?
A. We’d have to look more closely at the graphs.
There are some bumps in it. So, it’s not a consistent decline, but there’s no question smoking has declined substantially from '64 or '65, 66, to the present.
Q. Now, following the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, isn't it true that proposals were made to Congress to regulate cigarettes?
A. Yes.
Q. And there was extensive testimony offered to Congress on smoking hazards?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And isn’t it true that the Surgeon General has never recommended banning cigarettes?
A. Yes. So far as I know, the Surgeon General has
not recommended that.
Q. And has any medical, social, or public health authority recommended banning cigarettes?
A. I don't know. Maybe some have.
Q. Would you agree that from 1964 forward, the primary goal of doctors and public health authorities was to convince current smokers to quit, and discourage nonsmokers from starting?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'll have the question just one more time. I'm sorry.
Q. Would you agree from 1964 forward that the primary goal of doctors and public health authorities was to get smokers to quit, and tell people who didn't smoke not to start?
A. Yes.
Q. And was that also the goal of the government and the US Public Health Service?
A. Yes, I think so.
Q. And was that also the goal of medical associations such as the American Lung Association and the American Cancer Society?
A. That was their goal.
Q. And was that also the goal of physicians?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, it’s hard to characterize physicians. But I'd say for the most part, that would be standard of care.
Q. And since the 1964 report was issued, isn't it true that millions of people have quit smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. And isn't it true that 90 percent of people who have quit have done so without any medical assistance?
A. I think that’s accurate.
Q. And is it also true that when the 1964 report was issued, 42 percent of adults smoked, but by 1989, only 26 percent were smokers?
A. Yes, that’s my understanding.
Q. And haven't you expressed the view that the decline in smoking was a strikingly impressive public health accomplishment?
A. I believe that it is, especially in the face of the entire social situation and — in the context of the marketing, for example, it’s especially impressive.
Q. Since 1964, has there been a large volume of scientific research published by people with no
ties to the tobacco industry?
A. Yes. There’s been a lot of research on tobacco.
Q. And the scientific research on smoking has been included in several government reports since 1964, including the Surgeon General’s Reports?
A. Yes.
Q. And I believe you have written that after the 1964 report was issued, the tobacco industry began its campaign of deception to dispute the evidence on smoking and health, true?
A. Began after '64?
Q. Yes.
A. No, I — you know, my understanding is that
campaign began, you know, sometime before that.
Q. Have you written that the campaign of deception by the tobacco companies began in 1964?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I may have written that at an earlier time. But, you know, subsequent research demonstrates, you know, hand over hand that deception began way before that. And, actually, I now have done considerably more investigation on an earlier period so — than I did. I think the paper that you’re citing is 1990. Is that the paper
you’re —
Q. Well, I probably have it, and I'll probably pull it out later, but I'm not sure of the date right now. I'm sure it was probably written in the '90s.
A. Yeah. I think that’s probably the first paper I published on tobacco. And it’s not that it’s inaccurate that deceptions occurred after '64.
But I have no question based upon, you know, very careful analysis of many archival materials now that the process of deception had begun well earlier. And, in fact, I would tie it to a long history of public relations in the companies. It probably begins with the hiring of Edward Bemays at American Tobacco in the late 1920s. So, the process of reaction to concerns about the cigarette is one that goes far back.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Haven’t you characterized the campaign of
deception by the tobacco companies as the Tobacco Wars?
A. No, I don’t call that — it’s not the campaign of deception that is the Tobacco Wars. It’s the efforts of public health officials to reduce
tobacco consumption and protect youngsters from becoming smokers, versus the tobacco companies’ interest in promoting continued and intensive use of the product that constitute the Tobacco Wars.
Q. And you’ve written that the tobacco industry is losing the Tobacco Wars, right?
A. No, I don’t remember writing that they’re losing. That I think it's, you know, been — that battle's been vigorously contested, you know. And sometimes they've had losses, and sometimes they have victories, just as would be true for the interests of public health. But I don’t recall ever saying that the tobacco industry is losing the Tobacco Wars, but —
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Do you view the tobacco companies as a reliable source of information about smoking and health? MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, it depends on what you would say is
reliable. But, you know, we would have to ask a question like that in a historically specific way around, you know, what kinds of information at what time? But I’d say there is a considerable body of evidence which would suggest that the
tobacco industry’s been a highly unreliable source of information about tobacco and health.
Q. And the public scientific community has never viewed the tobacco industry as a reliable source of information about smoking and health, right?
A. I think it’s varied. You know, I think that some people in the scientific and medical communities at some times viewed them as reliable. I think their sort of currency of reliable, you know, came to be unwound over the course of the last two or three decades. So, again, it's a historical question.
Q. Well, are you aware of any public health authority that has ever relied on the tobacco industry to conduct research into the biological effects on smoking?
A. Anyone who has relied on the tobacco industry to conduct research — I don't recall. I think maybe Gori did. I just don’t know. I just — I do not know the answer to that question.
Q. Are you aware of any public health authority that relied upon the tobacco industry to interpret the science on smoking and health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, yes, I think there are probably examples of that. You know, I mean, probably early assessments of addiction. There may have been instances where public health officials relied, in part, on the industry. You know, the industry submitted materials to the first Surgeon General. You know, I would assume that those were taken, you know, with a degree of seriousness. And, as you pointed out earlier in your questions, tobacco industry materials are cited in Surgeon General's Reports.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Are you aware of any specific instance that you've seen in documents?
A. Well, I think that the episode with the Tobacco Working Group was one in which there was — you know, I'd have to study it in greater detail, but it would seem that federal officials were relying on data from the tobacco companies about research.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Now, in the late 1970s there were a number of studies published about the health hazards of side stream smoke, is that true?
A. In the late 1970s?
A. Yes.
Q. And the studies concerning the health hazards of side stream smoke were widely publicized?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, we would have to come to some agreement about what "widely publicized" means.
Q. Well, as you use the term, were the studies on side stream smoke widely publicized?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, I think that there was attention to the rising concerns and science about side stream smoke in the public media.
Q. And you've written that the studies on side stream smoke that came out in the late 1970s tipped the balance in favor of antismoking forces, true?
A. I think it was an important component to get away from the traditional industry perspective that smoking was essentially voluntary behavior; that smokers themselves, as individuals, should make informed decisions about. And, so, in that sense, it energized public health interest in the problem of tobacco.
report on the hazards of side stream smoke in 1986, true?
A. Correct.
Q. And a number of restrictions on smoking in public places were enacted after the studies on side stream smoke came out, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, a number did — were passed.
Q. And haven't you written that the studies on side stream smoke further encouraged the ongoing process of delegitimizing cigarette smoking in American culture?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I wrote that.
Q. Now, the public health efforts regarding tobacco is described in the Surgeon General's 1989 report, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm sorry. I need the question again.
Q. The public health effort regarding smoking was described in the 1989 Surgeon General’s Report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
that the percentage of smokers in the United States had fallen from 42 percent in 1964 to 26 percent in 1989, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And half of all living Americans who have smoked have quit, is that true?
A. I think that was the report in the Surgeon General's Report.
Q. Isn't it true that the Surgeon General described the public health effort regarding smoking as successful?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know how he described it. There were certainly elements of success, for sure.
Q. Didn’t the Surgeon General say that there had been dramatic progress in reducing smoking?
A. Yes, I think at the same time that the Surgeon General says that there's dramatic progress, there's also this recognition that, you know, fully one in four Americans continue to be smokers; that we haven’t always met benchmarks for healthy people, you know, at the decennials that have been set. So, I think that the public health officials appropriately took some credit in the
reduction of smoking and also recognized how serious the continuing problem was.
Q. Would you agree that by 1989 the efforts of public health officials and the government had led to dramatic progress in reducing smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, it would depend on sort of, you know, benchmarks for dramatic progress. But, you know,
I would certainly say significant progress, especially when one considers, you know, the addictiveness of the behavior, it’s impressive that public health officials were able to assist in a campaign to promote smoking reduction.
Q. Didn’t the Surgeon General also state in the 1989 report that its 1964 report had brought about a revolution in behavior regarding smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I need the question one more time. I’m sorry.
Q. Did the Surgeon General in 1989 say that it's -the Surgeon General’s 1964 report had brought about a revolution in behavior concerning smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know what the '89 report said about the '64 report.
Q. Haven't you said that there had been a revolution in behavior regarding smoking caused by the 1964 report?
A. I wouldn't say it was caused by the '64 report exactly. But I think the '64 report is a critical marker in an ongoing shift of the meaning of smoking in American society and culture, and the sort of dissemination of understanding of its harms was crucially aided by the '64 report.
Q. And haven't you written that there's been a revolution in attitudes and behaviors relating to smoking?
A. I believe that. I think that’s accurate.
Q. And didn't the Surgeon General in his 1989 report state that efforts against smoking had been a major public health success?
A. I don't know what the '89 report said, but I would not, you know, disagree if that’s what you say it says.
MR. BRODY: Your videotape is about to end, and it would be a good time for a break anyway.
MR. SMITH: Okay. Sure.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 4:28 p.m.
We’re off the record.
(Recess was taken.)
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 4:38. We are recording and on the record.
Q. Isn’t it true that the Surgeon General stated in the 1989 report that there have been tremendous changes as a result of the public health efforts regarding smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I haven't recently reviewed the '89 report, but I think that, you know, if that's what the Surgeon General said, that's what he said.
Q. Didn’t the Surgeon General also say that the
achievements of the antismoking campaign had few parallels in the history of public health?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think he did say that. I would just expound on that by saying, you know, we know that it's difficult to encourage behavior changes for prevention. We know that it's especially difficult in instances where the problem is associated with an addictive behavior. So, the ground that was covered in reducing smoking in the period from 1966 to the present, you know, is an
achievement in the history of American public health that any historian of American public health would want to understand better and would want to characterize the extent of that change.
Q. Didn't the Surgeon General in the 1989 report engage in an examination of the factors that it had helped reduce smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. As I said, I haven't recently reviewed the '89 report. I'd be happy to review it with you. I am assuming that the quotations you’re reading are accurate.
Q. You were involved in the 1989 report, were you?
A. I was, but I haven’t reviewed it. So, I mean, specific statements on the part of the Surgeon General, Did he say this? You know, I'm presuming that, yes, he did.
Q. Did the Surgeon General in the 1989 report state that publicity surrounding publication of the 1964 Surgeon General report had reduced consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, you know, my impression from my own investigation of the '64 report is that it briefly
reduced consumption, which returned; and then began to fall, you know, in the following year or two.
Q. And did the Surgeon General state that the
antismoking TV campaign had reduced consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think that would be one element of the public health campaign that had an impact.
Q. And did the Surgeon General state that peer pressure had also reduced the consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Apparently, yes, yes.
Q. Well, in your view, has peer pressure reduced the consuming of cigarettes in the United States?
A. I think peer pressure cuts both ways. It both
has, in some measure, led to some people stopping. And we also know that peer pressure is an important element of some younger people beginning. So, it cuts both ways. It's a complicated phenomenon, peer pressure.
Q. Didn’t the Surgeon General state that the
reduction in social acceptability had reduced the
consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And do you agree that a reduction in social acceptability of smoking has reduced cigarette consumption?
A. It probably has been one important element.
Q. Didn't the Surgeon General state that workplace and public smoking restrictions had reduced the consumption of cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And in your view is that correct, that workplace and pubhc smoking restrictions have reduced the consumption of cigarettes?
A. Yes. I believe that's an element in the larger process of reduction.
Q. Now, throughout the period considered by the Surgeon General, from 1964 through 1989, isn’t it true that cigarettes were sold and advertised?
A. Yes.
Q. And throughout that period, from 1964 to 1989, the tobacco industry continued to make statements about smoking?
Q. And between 1964 and 1989, CTR continued to fund research?
A. Correct.
Q. Now, is it true that the Surgeon General also evaluated certain tobacco industry activities in the 1989 report such as their work on low delivery cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I didn't hear the last part of your question.
Q. Did the Surgeon General evaluate certain tobacco industry activities in the 1989 report, such as the work on low delivery cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And did the Surgeon General also evaluate tobacco advertising in the 1989 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes.
Q. And did the Surgeon General also evaluate tobacco industry lobbying in the 1989 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think so.
Q. Did the Surgeon General also reveal what had been
learned about quitting smoking in the 1989 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think so.
Q. Isn't it true that smoking cessation programs initially focused on providing smokers with information about the health effects of smoking?
A. I think that must be one element of cessation programs.
Q. Haven’t researchers found that focusing on the social environment of smokers is more effective in reducing smoking?
A. I'm not an expert on the science of cessation.
Q. Are you familiar with the Surgeon General’s statements that motivation is the key to quitting smoking?
A. I'm not that familiar with the details of the '89 report right now. I haven’t reviewed it recently.
Q. Isn't it true that the 1989 Surgeon General's Report didn't come to any conclusion that the tobacco companies had impeded anybody from quitting?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. My sense is that that wasn't the focus of the report, the activities that the industry, in
impeding quitting. It was about, you know, an assessment of the general trends in terms of quitting and cessation.
Q. What was your role, exactly, in the 1989 report?
A. You know, I really have to say I have to review it. I think I was a peer reviewer and must have been sent a section. There are two ways I sometimes participate in the process. One is where I get sent a chapter, and usually that’s at an earlier stage of the process in which a reviewer can have, you know, some credible assessment and critique of whatever's been sent. And then there are other times where my understanding, if I remember correctly, where I would get galleys or something at a much later stage for kind of general, you know, Do you agree with the general findings of the Surgeon General this year? And I just — I don't — I'd have to check my records on the '89 report. I think there was a subsequent report where I responded more substantively to a chapter. But my memory of the '89 report was that I was not -- you know, I was included as a peer reviewer at a late stage of the process.
Q. Who asked you to become involved with the 1989 report?
A. I think you asked me that before, and I just — I really do not remember who it was. I don't — I just would have to check my records on that.
Q. And did you also say that you didn’t recall generating any documents regarding the 1989 report?
A. I think I have a document on a later report, but I don’t think I have a document on the '89 report.
Q. Okay. Were you sent any documents by others working on the 1989 report?
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. And did the US government ever tell you to retain any documents you may have created when you were working on the 1989 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't remember that they told me to retain documents, but I think that they would say, you know, Send the document back. That’s my memory of it. But these are things that I probably could check.
Q. How would you check that?
A. I would look at my files.
Q. Okay. What of your files would relate to whether the government told you to retain documents?
A. Well, I might have the letter from the government explaining to me the process of review.
Q. Could you check in your files for that; and would you be willing to provide us that letter if you have it?
MR. BRODY: Any request for documents can come to counsel.
A. I, you know, yes, I would provide it. You know, I think it's like a mimeographed letter, secret personal correspondence form an administrator at HHS.
Q. Now, you've written that the ability to
effectively communicate the risks of smoking to the public has reduced the prevalence of smoking, true?
A. I think that would be an element.
Q. And the federal government’s role in providing authoritative information concerning the risks of smoking has reduced the prevalence of smoking?
A. It would be an important component in a process of encouraging reduction.
Q. And you've also written that the organization of
the consumer movement with an effective political lobby has also reduced the prevalence of smoking?
A. I think it’s been effective, but it's not a direct
link to the reduction. But the consumer movement is an element of this larger social historical process I'm describing.
Q. Has the consumer movement and its political lobby indirectly caused a reduction in the prevalence of smoking?
A. I think it’s had a beneficial impact on the reduction of smoking. But, again, I’d have to think about how to analyze how important an element it is.
Q. And you've written that the recognition of public health advocates of the power of the media in shaping health consciousness has reduced the prevalence of smoking?
A. Again, their ability to utilize media effectively is one element of a larger program that, at the end game, might lead to fewer smokers.
Q. And you've also expressed the view that physicians have played a significant role in reducing smoking by giving information on health hazards to their patients?
A. I think that's been, you know, again, one of the important elements in understanding why there are fewer smokers percentagewise in American society now.
Q. You've also written that changing social mores about cigarettes served to create an environment hostile to smoking, which further encouraged reductions in smoking, true?
A. I believe that's true.
Q. And you've written that regulatory efforts such as banning smoking in certain public places have decreased cigarette consumption?
A. I believe that that's true.
Q. And you've written that the United States has had considerable success in controlling cigarette smoking?
A. It’s done better than many nations in reducing cigarette consumption over the last 25, 30 years.
Q. And you also wrote recently that the public was well informed about the hazards of smoking?
A. I'd be surprised if I wrote that quite in that
way. And I’d rather have it in context, because I think there's a lot of differential public knowledge about the risks of smoking; and I don’t
know whether that’s a quote or that’s a characterization of something that, you know, you read. But that’s not exactly the way I would frame the character of public knowledge.
Q. Didn't you write in an article you published with Surgeon General Richmond that the public was well informed about smoking?
A. I think what the article with Richmond said was that the litigation is one mechanism for effectively informing the public about the harms of smoking; and that was certainly the argument of the piece that I did with Doctor Richmond. So, I don’t think we assessed sort of the character of public knowledge. But, certainly, public knowledge has grown over time about the harms of smoking.
Q. And do you view this litigation as fulfilling a mechanism of informing the public about the hazards of smoking?
A. Yeah. I believe that’s one element of what our judicial system is about. That’s why it takes place in public. That's why the public is welcome to trial. That's one element of our judicial system that it's accessible to citizens. So, yes,
I believe that.
Q. You've also stated that there’s now a powerful antismoking social environment, true?
A. Yes, I believe that is true.
Q. And you’ve also written that smoking is now viewed as a repulsive behavior?
A. By some. You know, I didn't say everyone viewed smoking as repulsive behavior. I think, you know, in the culture, you know, a number of people view smoking as a repulsive behavior.
Q. Have you also written that in the culture in
general, smoking is viewed as a deviant behavior?
A. Increasingly, it's viewed as marginal and deviant.
Q. Also, haven't you written in the last years of the 20th Century the American smoker became a pariah and the object of scorn and hostility?
A. I did write that. And I think in the broader context of restrictions on public smoking that made it increasingly difficult smokers to participate in the rituals of smoking in ways that had been conventional at an earlier time.
Q. What’s the time frame of your historical analysis in this case?
A. In this case? My expert report focuses on the
period from the '40s to the '80s, or early '90s.
But there are elements in my expert report that actually reflect my understanding of the growth in the industry and the popularity of cigarette smoking that predate the 40s, and we go back even earlier.
I think in my statement it’s clear that I referred to early medical literature on smoking and health, and the rise of smoking as a popular behavior. So, I don’t know if I would put — I don’t know how I would put exact parameters around it, but certainly, you know, I'm prepared to testify about aspects of the history of smoking from the late 19th century to the present.
Q. Is there anything in your report about smoking after 1999?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. We could check the report, but I don't think that I cited any literature from, you know, after the mid 1990s, but some of the historical trends that I’m interested in, you know, don't stop in the '90s. So, you know —
Q. In 1997, you expressed the view that widespread knowledge about the hazards of smoking had forced
tobacco industry officials to finally acknowledge that smoking causes disease, true?
A. Well, I think that there was at least, you know, an inclination on the part of the companies to develop changes in their web sites and so on that acknowledged, but in different kinds of language, that smoking causes harms. But, for example, this letter that I mentioned that Julius Richmond provided me, which would show that there continues to be activities that, in spite of some cursory public acknowledgments, would continue to call into question the commitment to that view. So, I remain to be convinced that the companies have fully acknowledged the harms of tobacco.
Q. But you wrote in 1997 that in your view they had — the companies had acknowledged the harms of tobacco, right?
A. I'd like to see the entire text of what I wrote. Because I’m generally fairly cautious about categorical statements like that. And we could look at it together. It’s possible that I did write that. And at the time, it appeared that the companies had made a decision that they would do that. But, you know, whether that remains intact
and so on, you know, remains to be see. Like I've seen some of the acknowledgments from the companies that say smoking causes lung cancer and other serious diseases. Then I've seen other acknowledgments that says according to most public health officials and scientists, smoking causes lung cancer and disease. And, so, one would require a very careful delineation of the precise languages of those statements in order to continue to confirm what you read, apparently, from one of my articles.
Q. Well, did you review the web sites of the companies that they put up in it 1990 — in the 1990s?
A. Yeah, I have looked at those web sites.
Q. And don't the companies state in the web sites they put up in the 1990s that smoking causes disease?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, you know, I think I’d like to look at it again, because the language on the web sites varied from site to site in terms of the clarity of those statements.
Q. And you reiterate your statement in 1998 when you
stated that the tobacco company executives had admitted that smoking was harmful.
A. Well, I think they've admitted it in some venues, and in other venues they haven't. So, you know, I remain to be convinced that the companies are convinced that, you know, smoking is a serious cause of serious disease. You know, for example, you take the issue of addiction. There's a lot of hedging around the addiction issue where it says, Well, by some definitions, smoking is addictive — or by the definitions, you know. But they often don’t say, We believe smoking is addictive. Our company knows that there is scientific evidence demonstrating that smoking is addictive. So, there's just, there's a range of perspective in terms of the companies moving towards a position that would fully acknowledge some of the scientifically known harms associated with the product.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Now, have you expressed the view that progress in epidemiological evidence has turned the medical profession and the public powerfully against smoking?
A. Yes, I probably did say that.
Q. And you’ve also expressed the view that the medical profession and the public have accepted that smoking — that secondhand smoke is harmful?
A. I wish I had those things that you’re reading to me in context, because I think they’re general characterizations of something that, you know, you or somebody read; and they don't always seem to me to sharply reflect what I would have written. You know, they don't sound like my language exactly.
So, if they are direct quotes, you know, it would be good if they were identified as direct quotations, and I had their sources.
If they’re general characterizations of my writing, I sometimes find them, you know, a percentage of degree, you know, shifted. And, so, I’m uncomfortable agreeing with that, Did I write that? You know, by whose characterization am I writing? And if we had direct quotes, then I would say, Yes, that’s in the piece. You know, let’s read the whole paragraph or whatever it was that really makes it clear.
Q. Well, sitting here today, can you remember if
you’ve written that the medical profession and the public have accepted that secondhand smoke is harmful?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't think that's — I don’t think that’s a quotation from me exactly.
Q. Okay. Have you written that the medical profession and the public have accepted that nicotine is addictive?
A. I don't think, again, that would be an accurate way of the way I would characterize that. I think, you know, many in the medical profession and much of the public is convinced. But there remain important, you know, failures in the dissemination of this knowledge. So, I rarely, in my work, make such a global characterization of, The public believes that. It's not how I write or work. So, when my writing gets characterized like that, it doesn’t sound right. But if you show me that it's a direct quotation or that it hasn’t been qualified or that, then, well, I would say well, Yes, I wrote that. But to be perfectly honest, I would characterize it somewhat more sensitivity than I did in the past. So, I think
that’s how I would respond to that.
MR. SMITH: Objection.
Q. Haven't you expressed the view that the cigarettes is one of the most well-studied consumer products in American history?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I do believe that. I think that the
cigarette has been intensively studied. And, you know, maybe the deposition is not the right time to explain why it's been so intensively studied, but I have a lot of historical knowledge about why the cigarette has been so repetitively and vigorously studied.
Q. And do you agree that society cannot completely eliminate all health risks?
A. Yes, I do believe that.
Q. And do you agree that there may be very
significant costs to society when it attempts to reduce health risks?
A. It would depend on the particular risk and how it attempted to do it.
Q. Do you agree that the public health officials have a duty to warn children and others about the health risks associated with smoking?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Do you agree that teachers and educators have a duty to educate children about the health risks associated with smoking?
A. I believe they do.
Q. And do you have a — do you agree that doctors have a duty to warn their patients about the health risks of smoking?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Do you agree that when public health officials working for the US government have information about the health risks associated with smoking, they have a duty to make the public aware of that information?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, a duty to — they have a duty to warn. But to make them aware is more complicated a process. So, I'm a little bit cautious, again, about the language.
Q. Well, let me rephrase my question, okay?
A. Sure.
Q. Do you agree that when public health officials working for the US government have information about the health risks associated with smoking,
they have a duty to warn the public about those risks?
A. You know — yes.
Q. And would you agree that scientists have published a massive amount of information concerning smoking and health over the years?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. We could debate what "massive amount" means, but there's a lot.
Q. And scientists have always published a massive
amount of information about smoking and addiction?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, with my concern about "massive amount" being, you know, poorly defined, there's a lot of information.
Q. Now, isn't it true the public health authorities constantly review published scientific literature concerning smoking in order to inform themselves of recent findings?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That public health officials — could you read it again?
Q. Well, maybe I can back up a second. You've had some interaction with the government and the
public health officials in the government, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And isn’t it true that the public health officials in the US government constantly review the public scientific literature on smoking to apprise themselves of recent findings?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think, generally, that's true.
Q. And other scientists outside the government also review the published scientific literature concerning smoking in order to inform themselves of recent findings?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, I assume that that’s generally true.
Q. Okay. Would you agree that the US government is engaged in a massive effort to make the public aware of the scientific findings regarding smoking?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Again, I, you know, you would need to define for me a "massive effort" in order for me to know — you know, it's a value term. There's no way of measuring what "massive" means. And I just — you know, there's been a concerted effort on the part
of public health officials over the last three decades to reduce smoking. It's a goal of our Public Health Service. I can imagine a much more vigorous campaign, for example, than the one that has existed. So, is it massive? I don't know.
Q. Well, in your view, would you do more than the US government has done to date to make the public aware of the health hazards of smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. What additional measures would you take?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. You know, this, again, borders on my area of expertise. But now, you know, you’re asking me for, you know, a set of policy proposals or advocacies. You know, I think there are many possibilities about, you know, more aggressive limitations on advertising than currently exist.
There are, you know, potentials for better therapeutic approaches to smoking reduction and further research that could be done there. There are, potentially, innovative programs for kids.
We could be investing more in the public media for messages that are effective and learning better what messages are effective; and that there are
potentials for potentially safer products; that it's quite striking that 50 years after the first, you know, data relating to smoking and health, you know, that first categorical data that led to this scientific shift, 50 years later it’s not clear that we have safer products or that they have been appropriately evaluated and so on. So, there are a lot of possibilities.
Q. In fact, you’ve advocated banning all tobacco advertising right?
A. At one time, yes, I did.
Q. And has the US government ever taken up your suggestion to ban all tobacco advertising?
A. No, of course not.
Q. And would you advocate that the US government spend more money or researching safer cigarette products?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I just — I have not advocated that. I just — I haven’t evaluated that question. It's a question that I think is an interesting one, but I don't have a position on right now.
Q. Now, there have long been charges of wrongdoing brought against the tobacco industry, true?
A. You know, there’s always things come into question like wrongdoing, but, yes, there have been accusations of inappropriate behavior on the part of the companies.
Q. Isn’t it true that the tobacco companies were first sued back in the 1950s based on their alleged wrongdoing?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There was litigation, you know, certainly as early as the '50s.
Q. Have you viewed any of the allegations in any of these prior smoking and health lawsuits?
A. Only in a cursory way. I haven't aggressively investigated the early liability actions. But it did become clear that, you know, in terms of the liability issues, in terms of product risk and harm, you know, that the industry, once the scientific evidence, you know, began to emerge clearly, would potentially be vulnerable to suits.
Q. Are the allegations of the government in this lawsuit similar to those by plaintiffs in prior smoking and health lawsuits?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There have been many suits. I think there have been over 300 — maybe 500 suits. And I think the allegations in different suits — more. Anyway, the allegations in many suits are variable. So, you know, are they the same as others? You know,
I don't know that much about the law, but I know that very often there are very precise, you know, claims in suits. And in order to answer that question, you know, you'd have to know, Are the ones in this one similar to which ones? You know, and I -- you know, I don't think that the question can be answered, you know, in general.
Q. You haven't undertaken any effort to determine whether the government’s allegations here are similar to those in prior lawsuits?
A. You know, my sense is that some of the allegations here are similar, for example, to claims that were brought by the attorneys general in different states and some are different.
Q. Isn't it true that there are departments of the US government, such as the Department of Health and Human Services, that are charged with the responsibility to communicate public health information to the public?
A. Well, of course.
Q. Do you believe the US government has an obligation to communicate public health information to the public?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. If the US government withheld information
regarding public health issues from the public, in your view, would that be wrong?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'd have to know the context. You know, it gets back to my interest, both in history and in ethics. You know, what’s the piece of information? What is the context in which it is provided or it isn’t? Public health officials often have concerns, for example, in the face of epidemic disease about causing, you know, anxiety or fear that would have other harm. So, asked in a theoretical way like that, without knowing what the piece of information was, was it withheld?
Was it in the process of being evaluated? You know, I can't answer a theoretical question like that. It's, you know, I can’t answer it.
Q. Is the government today being deceived by the tobacco companies in any way?
A. How could I possibly know that? If they were, they wouldn’t be telling me, right?
Q. Do you know — you're not aware of any way,
though, that the US government’s being deceived by the tobacco companies?
A. It’s just — it’s such a complicated question, you know? I don't know what the companies are doing. They don't share what they're doing with me. You know, I don’t know whether they’re deceiving people, you know, deceiving the government or not. I just don’t know.
Q. Do you know whether the US government is providing -A. Have they been forthcoming, for example, about additives? Now, you know, does the government know everything that’s put into tobacco, or are there still trade secrets? Are there proprietary issues in tobacco production that might be useful for the government to know? And is that a deception? You know, it’s a complicated question.
I can’t answer it.
Q. Do you know whether the US government today is providing any specific smoking and health
information to physicians who treat patients receiving government benefits such as Medicare?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know.
Q. Can you identify any number of smokers that would not have gotten sick if a different design of cigarettes had been used?
A. I haven't done that kind of analysis. So, you know, it's just — I don't know.
Q. Can you identify any different design of cigarettes that would have affected cigarette consumption?
A. Well, I think the one thing we know about
cigarette consumption is that consumers who were smokers and were concerned about the growing evidence of smoking s harms, you know, quickly and thoroughly moved to filtered products. And we also know that they did that on the basis of their desire to reduce the harm.
So, those are the two things that we know, I think.
Q. So, in the 1950s when the evidence about or the statements in the media about the harmfulness of smoking came out, it’s true that a lot of smokers
switched to filter cigarettes?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, a lot of smokers switched to filters. And I think by 1970, probably 90 percent of the products sold in the United States were filtered products. And if you went back to the 1940s, it was, you know, tiny. So, that’s a very big change. The way I interpret that historically is that many in the public sought to reduce their harm; and many in the public believed that the industry had provided them with a safer product.
Q. And isn’t it true that smokers switched to filter cigarettes because they had health concerns about smoking?
A. I thought that's pretty much what I just said.
Smokers switched to filter cigarettes because they had health concerns about smoking. I agree with that.
Q. And that trend occurred --it started back in the 1950s?
A. It started in the '50s when filters were aggressively promoted as protective.
Q. Now, would you agree that it’s been known for centuries that once you smoke, it’s hard to quit?
A. It’s just a little bit too general. I think there is a perception that for some people it would be very difficult to quit. And that, certainly, that was one element of smoking. But, you know, but I don’t think it was uniformly understood for everyone that it would be hard to quit. And, clearly, some people can quit more easily than others. So, there's a human gradient to the process of quitting, as we know.
Q. But that was something that was publicized as soon as cigarettes were available, that it could be hard to quit, right?
A. Absolutely. There was some knowledge that it, you know, it could be hard to quit. People explored quitting, you know, from an early time.
Q. And isn’t it true that nicotine was isolated as a constituent of cigarette smoke back in the early 1800s?
A. Yes.
Q. And it was known at the time that the nicotine had effects on the nervous system and the brain, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think it was known at the time.
Q. And in the early 1900s, there were people that wrote that nicotine is a drug that’s responsible for the appeal of tobacco?
A. That’s responsible for its appeal? There were people who wrote that.
Q. And as early as 1942, Johnston's publication characterized cigarettes as a nicotine delivery system?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm not sure of the precise source that you’re using, but I — you know, it's possible that — who is Johnston?
Q. You haven't reviewed Johnston's 1942 publication in the Lancet?
A. I may have. I just — you know. I d have to review it.
Q. Isn't it true in the lay press in the early 1900s, smokers were called addicts?
A. Yes. On occasion they were called addicts, feinds, things like that.
Q. Have you reviewed the Larson and Silvette book on tobacco at all, or have you just heard of it?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, at one time I did review it.
Q. Okay. And isn't it true that the Larson and Silvette book talked about nicotine having pharmacological effects in being addictive?
A. I think that they did do that.
Q. Isn’t it also true that CTR sponsored published research before 1964 that described smoking as an addiction?
A. That certainly is possible.
Q. Are you familiar with a Knapp article, K-n-a-p-p, that was published in 1963?
A. No, I haven't reviewed that.
Q. The government hasn't provided you with a copy of the 1963 Knapp article?
A. The government did not provide me with the Knapp article.
Q. And the government didn't provide you with a copy of the 1942 Johnston article?
A. I think I have the Johnston article in some file, but —
Q. I think you mentioned in your report that the
Royal College of Physicians recognized smoking as an addiction in 1962?
A. I don't think it says that in my report.
Q. Are you aware that the Royal College of Physicians called smoking an addiction in their 1962 report?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes. Yes, I'm aware of that.
Q. Now, the 1964 Surgeon General's Report also
addressed the issue of whether smoking was a habit or addiction, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, it did.
Q. And the Surgeon General's Report in 1964 used the criteria developed by the World Health Organization in 1957, is that true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That's correct.
Q. And the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report concluded that smoking was a habit?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, that’s correct.
Q. The Surgeon General did observe in the 1964 report that smoking was not intoxicating, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, that’s what he said.
Q. Later Surgeon General's Reports described smoking as a dependence, true?
A. I think that is true.
Q. In the 1988 Surgeon General’s Report, the Surgeon General described smoking as an addiction?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Correct.
Q. And the Surgeon General used different criteria for determining whether smoking was addictive in the 1988 report than he had in the 1964 report, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I guess what I would say is that, you know, the — that there were changes in the science of addiction during that period, as well as new knowledge became available. But, apparently, there was also a debate in the '64 report about whether to more aggressively pursue the question of addiction versus habituation. And Seevers, who was the pharmacologist on the first Surgeon General's Committee, resisted any more thorough look at that as a question. And, in part, that might explain where the first Surgeon General's Report came out.
Q. Isn't it true that today the American
Psychological Association labels smoking a dependence?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I haven't seen the American Psychological Association statement.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed the APA diagnostic criteria manual for tobacco dependence?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. And in the APA diagnostic manual it refers to smoking today as a dependence, not an addiction, true?
A. Yeah, the distinction between dependence and addiction is, you know, is one that requires further definitional issues. And I've reviewed a series of contemporary textbooks in the '90s on addiction; and, generally, by the '90s, nicotine is contained in those books. Whereas, at an earlier time, they were not.
Q. But the APA today labels it a dependence, right?
A. Well, you know, once they include it in the diagnostic manual, it’s a, you know, it’s a category deserving of therapeutic attention. So, in terms of disease models of dependency and addiction, you know, we would need to look more
closely at the definitional issues of the difference between dependence and addiction. But even according to the American Psychiatric Association, it fulfills the criteria of tolerance, withdrawal, and so on.
Q. The 1988 Surgeon General's Report didn’t use the 1957 World Health Organization criteria for determining whether smoking was addictive, true?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. No, it did not.
Q. It used a different set of criteria, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, it did use different criteria.
Q. Are you aware of any scientific study showing that the 1988 Surgeon General's Report had any incremental effect in increasing quitting rates?
A. I hadn’t really looked thoroughly at the impact of the '88 report. But I think that it did help spur the development of pharmacologic approaches to treating nicotine dependence or addiction, depending on how one would define it. So, you know, I think in that sense one could look at the '90s as a period in which physicians began a process of exploring pharmacologic intervention,
as opposed to other approaches to cessation.
Q. But are you aware of any scientific studies
showing that the 1988 Surgeon General's Report caused quitting rates among smokers to increase?
A. No, I'm not aware.
Q. And would it be fair to say that the Surgeon General has used a variety of labels, including habit, addiction, and dependence, in describing smoking over the years?
A. Yes, many labels have been used to describe tobacco use.
Q. And would it be fair to say that when scientists discuss addiction today, they have many different meanings for addictive?
A. No, I don’t think that would be fair. I think that there's been actually a growing consensual view about the pharmacokinetics of addictive substances, how they are — how they affect the brain, and the processes of withdrawing addictive substances, and how they can be treated. So, I think that actually what you would see is a consolidation of nomenclature over time.
Q. Is there any agreed-upon definition or criteria for assessing nicotine addiction?
A. I think that I’ve mentioned, you know, it’s these source of measures of tolerance and withdrawal that characterize the dependence on a particular substance. And I think there is a fairly consensual view within the addictive sciences about this.
And there are some, you know, excellent textbooks which I've reviewed that explain what is an addiction, what are some of the common neuro pathways that are triggered around some of these substantiations.
Q. Isn't it true that there have been several
scientists who have maintained that under the definition of addiction used in the 1988 Surgeon General's Report, caffeine would be addictive?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think some people said that.
Q. Aren’t there witnesses for the government in this case, such as Doctor Benowitz, who have stated that under the 1988 Surgeon General’s definition, caffeine would be addictive?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I don't know what Benowitz said about it.
Q. The US government hasn't told you what Benowitz has said about addiction?
A. The US government doesn’t tell me that much. They did not tell me what Benowitz said about addiction.
Q. Have they shared with you Doctor Henningfield's views on caffeine addiction?
A. No, they haven't.
Q. Based on your review, is there any particular thresholds of nicotine and cigarettes below which cigarettes are not addictive?
A. I just don’t know. I don’t know that.
Q. Have you worked at any of the World Health Organization's definition of addiction or dependence today?
A. Today?
Q. Yes.
A. I certainly looked at the one that was utilized in the first Surgeon General’s Report. I haven’t recently looked at what the current WHO definitions are.
Q. Do you know if the current WHO definitions of addiction are different than the ones used in the 1988 Surgeon General’s Report?
A. I don't know.
Q. Have you reviewed a book written by Reuven,
R-e-u-v-e-n, Dar, D-a-r and Hanan Frenk, H-a-n-a-n 17:27:35 F-r-e-n-k, on nicotine and addiction?
A. No, I haven't seen it.
Q. And the government hasn't provided you with the Frenk and Dar book?
A. It would be great if the government did so much research for me. But, no, they don't do that.
Q. And you didn’t consider the Frenk and Dar book in forming your opinions in this case?
A. I did not.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the published articles by Ian Hindmarch, H-i-n-d-m-a-r-c-h, on nicotine and addiction?
A. No, I'm not familiar with that work.
Q. The government hasn't provided you with any Hindmarch articles on addiction?
A. No, they did not.
Q. And you haven’t considered any of Ian Hindmarch's articles on nicotine addiction in forming your opinions in this case?
A. No, I did not.
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Isn’t it true that much of the pioneering work done in the area of nicotine pharmacology in the late 1960s and early 1970s was published by scientists who received funding from the tobacco industry?
A. I just, you know, I just don't know.
Q. Isn’t it true that the tobacco industry funded the studies by scientists who published some of the earliest work on compensation in the 1960s and 1970s?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I said that I’m not an expert on compensation. I just haven't looked at that question in preparing my report.
Q. Okay. Isn't it true that the US Surgeon General in the Surgeon General's Reports has stated that there's no such thing as a safe cigarette?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I think that that's true.
Q. Do you agree that —
A. I mean, I think that the industry has agreed with that. Because they would not, you know -- they kept saying — well, they thought there was a safe cigarette, because they said no cigarette is
unsafe. But they — you know, I think there is a possibility of, certainly, products which could be safer than the ones that were traditionally manufactured. But I don't know that any cigarette is, you'd need — you know, I don't know how. You'd have to evaluate its — you know, the harms that it has, the possible risks.
Q. Just to focus on what the Surgeon General said, hasn't the Surgeon General said there's no such thing as a safe cigarette?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Yes, I think the Surgeon General has said that.
Q. And do you agree that there's no such thing as a safe cigarette?
A. I certainly agree that at this time we don't know that there is such a thing as a safe cigarette.
And to my knowledge, a safe cigarette has yet to be produced.
Q. And you're not aware of any cigarette design that’s available to make a safe cigarette?
A. You know, it's interesting. My understanding is that the language that the industry is using is not a safe cigarette, but a harm-reduced cigarette. So — or a safer product. But, you
know, I do not know of a safe cigarette.
Q. Okay. Is there any recognized test to determine if one design of cigarettes is less risky than another?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Well, I already — I already said that I'm not an expert on cigarette design. I know a little bit about the valuation of different kinds of medical devices in pharmacy and so on; and, so, there could be strategies for evaluating, you know, what's accomplished when one changes the product. You know, and the industry periodically, you know, has clearly attempted to evaluate different kinds of filtration devices, nonburning cigarettes, and so on. But whether there's such a thing as a safe cigarette, I don't know.
Q. Now, you're a member of the institute of medicine, right?
A. I am.
Q. Isn't it true that the institute of medicine in
its 2001 "Clearing the Smoke" report stated that there was no battery of tests for evaluating whether one cigarette design was less risky than another?
A. I hadn’t read that, but that's pretty much what I said. I don't think that there's a clear methodological approach for evaluation, but I think what I was saying before is that one could explore what are or — are the types of tests that one would use to assess, you know, relative safety versus relative harm.
Q. And even if you could develop a new cigarette design that appeared to be safer under some battery of tests, wouldn't you need to make sure that it was acceptable to smokers?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. Wouldn’t I? I wouldn't. Would the industry? You know, that might be one of their considerations.
I don't know.
Q. Well, if you don't produce cigarettes that nobody wants to smoke, then they won't smoke them, right?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. That just, you know, is not an issue for me. I mean, I don't know what you're asking me. That seems to me, you know, you may be telling me that’s an important consideration for the industry. And, you know, on that I would agree
with you. But when you're asking me wouldn’t I need to do that? I mean, I don’t make cigarettes.
And I don't, you know, so, you know, it’s a hypothetical question that — you know, I don't make cigarettes.
Q. Well, why don't I rephrase my question to be clear, okay?
A. That would be good.
Q. If the tobacco industry came up with a cigarette design that could be demonstrated to be safer under some battery of tests that we don’t know about yet —
A. Yeah.
Q. — wouldn’t the tobacco industry need to make sure that it was acceptable to smokers?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I assume that that would be one of the
considerations they would raise. You know, I think that, you know, for consumers, the balance between sort of what they like about smoking and its safety would be, you know, an issue that would be a subject of consumer investigation.
(Discussion off the record.)
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever trying to
develop safer cigarettes?
A. I haven't studied it, but, you know, I think the
discussion in the Tobacco Working Group, you know, at least encompassed the potentials of a safer product. But I haven’t studied the government’s efforts in that area.
Q. Well, was the Tobacco Working Group a forum to try to research safer cigarettes?
A. I think it — my expectation -- that was one of the issues that must have been on the table for them, but that the group didn't make much progress; and, you know, it was disbanded.
Q. Other than the Tobacco Working Group, are you aware of any other US government efforts to try to develop safer cigarettes?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you aware of the US government funding any research by outside scientists to develop cigarettes that are less hazardous?
A. I just don’t know, no.
Q. Are you aware of the US government funding research by outside scientists to develop cigarettes that are not addictive?
A. I am not aware.
Q. Are you aware of the US government funding research by outside scientists to develop cigarettes that do not cause cancer?
A. I'm not aware of anything.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever trying to reduce the amount of nitrosamines in cigarettes?
A. I am not aware.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever expressing the view that eliminating nitrosamines from cigarettes would make them safer?
A. Don’t know.
Q. And are you aware of any research showing that eliminating or reducing — strike that, okay?
A. Okay.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever doing any research on nicotine analogs?
A. I just don’t know about it.
Q. And are you aware of the US government ever expressing the view that using nicotine analogs would make cigarettes safer?
A. I don't know.
Q. Are you aware of any research showing that using nicotine analogs would make cigarettes safer?
A. No.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever doing any research on charcoal filters?
A. Don't know.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever expressing the view that using charcoal filters would make cigarettes safer?
A. I don't know.
Q. Based on your review, are you aware of the US government ever doing any research on cigarettes containing palladium or other catalysts?
A. No, I’m only aware of the Liggett & Myers work, but I don’t know about government work on that.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever expressing the view that palladium or other catalysts make cigarettes safer?
A. No.
Q. Are you aware of any scientific research showing that palladium or other catalysts make cigarettes safer?
A. Of any scientific research that would show that it was safer?
Q. Yeah.
A. I've seen the reports of, you know, Mold’s work and some of the work that was done at Arthur D.
Little and their enthusiasm for the project and the move towards marketing. You know, I have seen reports that certainly indicated that they felt they had a substantially safer product.
MR. SMITH: Strike that. Objection, rather.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever doing any research on nonbuming cigarettes?
A. Not aware.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever expressing the view that nonbuming cigarettes are safer?
A. Not aware of that.
Q. Are you aware of the US government trying to develop ways to eliminate carcinogens in cigarette smoke?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever stating that eliminating environmental tobacco smoke from cigarettes would make them safe?
A. Would make the cigarettes safe?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
Q. Let me rephrase the question, okay?
A. Okay.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever stating
that eliminating environmental tobacco smoke from cigarettes would make them safer?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I'm not aware.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever trying to develop ways to ensure that environmental tobacco smoke from cigarettes was safer?
A. I just — I'm not aware, you know, I think,
obviously, the kinds of OSHA/NIOSH concern about ventilation in buildings and things, you know, may have, you know, stemmed — in early years, especially before the EPA and Surgeon General's Report — from concerns about, you know, environmental tobacco smoke. But I don’t know if that would constitute a yes answer to your question.
Q. Well, let me rephrase it. You're not aware of the US government ever undertaking any research on cigarette designs to make environmental tobacco smoke less harmful?
A. No, I’m not aware.
Q. Are you aware of the US government ever trying to develop cigarettes that are not addictive?
A. I thought we did that one. But, no, I’m not
aware.
Q. Okay. Are you aware of the US government ever trying to develop any products that would be alternatives to cigarettes?
A. I don't know if the government funded research on Nicorette or not, so I just — I don't know. My understanding is the government doesn't make products, so —
Q. Okay. Now, you’re writing a book on the history of tobacco, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And when did you start writing your book on tobacco?
A. I think I first had the idea of doing that book around the time I was finishing my first book on the history of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV. And then, even though I had written maybe a rough outline of sort of ideas for it at an early time, the rise of the HIV epidemic caused me to put some of my smoking research on hold. And I had a period in my scholarly work where I was focused on historical analogs to the HIV epidemic and HIV policy. But, then, I would say beginning in the — beginning in the late '80s, I published
that preliminary essay in Daedulus. That was sort of my first publication on tobacco. And since the early '90s, I’ve been working on this bigger project on the history of cigarette smoking.
Q. So, can you say what year you began working on your book on tobacco?
A. Well, I would say, you know, I probably began working on the book around 1990.
Q. Do you have — have you completed a manuscript of your book?
A. I have not.
Q. Do you anticipate publishing your book before this trial starts in the summer of next year?
A. No, I don’t think it will be done.
Q. When do you think your book will be done?
A. I hope that it will be done, you know, probably in the following year, probably sometime in 2004, but, you know, it’s taking me longer than I anticipated. I hadn’t anticipated the wide range of resources, of archival resources that are available around issues of tobacco. And, so, there was a time when I began where I thought,
Well, here’s the research map of tobacco, and, you know, as you know, the volume of material on
tobacco expanded exponentially only really in the last decade, so —
Q. Who have you discussed your book with?
A. I've discussed it with many people. I talk about my book a lot. I talk to my students about it, my colleagues. It's been a — it's been a sort of intense intellectual investment of mine. And, so,
I teach about it. I use examples of research problems I've confronted in the book. So, you know, I think it’s widely known in the historical community that I've been working on this project.
Q. Have you completed any portions of your book?
A. I haven't really completed any portion of it,
because everything's in a kind of, you know, crude draft form that is in writing, and much of it’s not in writing.
Q. Have you shown any drafts of your book or portions of it to anybody?
A. No, I haven't. Although, what I have done is periodically published an essay that derived from research that was targeted on the book. So, there have been a series of publications that are oriented to the book and been my chief way of, you know, sharing the work with colleagues in the
profession during a phase in which I am still researching and writing.
Q. And did you — did the government lawyers tell you that we had requested a manuscript of your book?
A. They didn't tell me that, but, you know, they don’t have a manuscript of my book, and I don’t have it. So, it would be hard to — in one sense I would — nothing would make me happier than to be able to say, Hey, here's my book. But they don’t have it; I don't have it; therefore, none of the lawyers have it.
Q. Are you aware Amazon.com says your book is coming out in August 2002?
A. Yeah. I saw that, much to my concern, because those things are related to sort of I think electronic communications between publishers and Amazon. And I can assure you, my publisher doesn’t have the book either; and I don't know how that occurred, but I think it got onto a list of prospective books; and then Amazon, which is very aggressive about wanting to list books that are coming out — for obvious marketing purposes — puts it up. But the book does not exist.
Q. Have you ever told your publisher that you'll have
the book done by a certain deadline?
A. Yeah, I've missed some deadlines, and the publisher's been very supportive, because my publisher has understood that the dimensions of the project shifted as the historical materials available shifted. So, my publisher understands, you know, that the deadlines that we have had in the past, you know, are no longer, you know, in play. And we’re talking about, you know, new prospects for when I will complete it.
Q. How many deadlines for your book have you missed?
A. Well, I've only missed one deadline that was in writing. But I have a very conscientious and thoughtful editor, and, you know, we talk about sort of anticipation about when I will get, you know, get the book done. But he's been quite flexible. And I think that they’re eager enough to have the book that they haven't, you know, raised any objections to its delays.
Q. And when was that deadline that you missed that was in writing?
A. I think it must have been in the — sometime in the — I don't know. I could check. But it was probably in the late '90s. So, I had originally
had the idea, I had a proposal. It went to a number of publishers. Basic Books very much wanted the book; and, obviously, I would have liked to have met that deadline, but some of the opportunities for investigation have been enhanced by missing them; and it's not that unusual for authors to miss book deadlines. But, you know, that's a little bit defensive on my part, but I'd like to finish my book.
Q. Is your book on tobacco being supported by any grants?
A. I have over time had some support for the research on tobacco; and the Rockefeller Foundation once gave me a small grant, the Rockefeller Humanities Foundation supports work like this. And then I also had some support from the Culpeper foundation, which supports research in the medical humanities. So, along the way I have had, you know, some of that external support.
Q. Did the government give you any grants for your work on tobacco?
A. No, I never had a government grant.
Q. Have you ever applied for any government grants?
A. I once applied for a governmental grant when I was
a graduate student, and I didn’t get it.
Q. And was that a US government grant?
A. I think it would have been. It was a grant from the National Library of Medicine to support my work on the history of sexually transmitted diseases. It was through a program that very rarely supported graduate students, but I sent in the application and didn't get it.
Q. Who are some of the people that you talked to regularly about tobacco related issues?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. I've talked — you know, I've talked to my
colleagues. I have an excellent Department of History of Science and Medicine that teaches undergraduates and graduate students. I’ve talked to my colleagues there about the work, especially Charles Rosenberg, who I mentioned, Barbara Rosencrans, who's a noted historian of public health in the United States. So, both of them are familiar with the work. Some of my colleagues in my other Department of Social Medicine are, you know, quite familiar with my research -- Julius Richmond would be one, but there are others, as well.
Q. How about outside of Harvard? Is there anybody you talk to regularly about tobacco?
MR. BRODY: Objection.
A. There have been historians who I've talked to about my work. I've talked to — Nancy Thomas is a historian at SUNY Stonybrook, who I have very high regard for. I've talked to Judith Levitt about my work at University of Wisconsin, and Ronald Numbers. I have a colleague at the University of California San Francisco; Warwick Anderson knows my work well, and who, you know, I’ve described some of the arguments and materials I’ve used with him over the years.
So, there's a pretty small -- it's a relatively small community of professional medical historians in the United States, but I think they know my work well generally; and that some of these people have been very helpful, you know, in terms of, you know, trying out ideas, and so on.
MR. SMITH: We can start again tomorrow.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
VIDEO OPERATOR: The time is 5:50. That concludes today's deposition. And this is the end of Cassette No. 4. We're off the record.
(Deposition recessed at 5:50 p.m.)
DEPONENT'S ERRATA SHEET
AND SIGNATURE INSTRUCTIONS
The original of the Errata Sheet has been delivered to Stephen Brody, Esq.
When the Errata Sheet has been completed by the deponent and signed, a copy thereof should be delivered to each party of record and the ORIGINAL delivered to Douglas Smith, Esq. to whom the original deposition transcript was delivered.
INSTRUCTIONS TO DEPONENT
After reading this volume of your deposition, indicate any corrections or changes to your testimony and the reasons therefor on the Errata Sheet supplied to you and sign it. DO NOT make marks or notations on the transcript volume itself.
REPLACE THIS PAGE OF THE TRANSCRIPT WITH THE COMPLETED AND SIGNED ERRATA SHEET WHEN RECEIVE]
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Middlesex, ss.
I, P. Jodi Ohnemus, Notary Public in and for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, do hereby certify that there came before me on the 15th day of August, 2002, the deponent herein, who was duly sworn by me; that the ensuing examination upon oath of the said deponent was reported stenographically by me and transcribed into typewriting under my direction and control; and that the within transcript is a true record of the questions asked and answers given at said deposition.
I FURTHER CERTIFY that I am neither attorney nor counsel for, nor related to or employed by any of the parties to the action in which this deposition is taken; and, further, that I am not a relative or employee of any attorney or financially interested in the outcome of the action.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my seal of office this 18th day of August, 2002, at Waltham.
P. Jodi Ohnemus, RPR, RMR, CRR Notary Public,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts My Commission Expires:
4/21/2007
ATTACH TO DEPOSITION OF: ALLAN BRANDT, Ph.D CASE: US VS. PHILIP MORRIS ERRATA SHEET INSTRUCTIONS: After reading the transcript of your depositi any change or correction to your testimony and the reason ther on this sheet. DO NOT make any marks or notations on the tra volume itself. Sign and date this errata sheet (before a Notary Public, if required). Refer to Page 354 of the transcript for errata sheet distribution instructions.
PAGE LINE
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
__CHANGE:_
REASON:_
I have read the foregoing transcript of my deposition and except for any corrections or changes noted above, I hereby subscribe to the transcript as an accurate record of the stateme
made by me.
ALLAN BRANDT, Ph.D.
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME
Witness' Signature Page
1 have read the transcript of my deposition, taken August 15-16, rrect transcription of answers made by me to the questions therein r& ceptions and/or additions reflected on the errata sheet attached herett
gned this	day of September, 2002.
Allan M. Brandt
ite of ^KiULAsOuJlJjUl tfGZ •unty
bscribed and sworn to before me this	-
yof yU^hjml>4X) _,2002._
-
>tary Public_;_
V commission expires:	^ &l00 'J-
sat)	Helen £ Martins	:
NOTARY PUBLIC
My ccr^“'on cv^'T’ Wcj. 1.2007
-Errata Sheet - Deposition of Allan M. Brandi
August 15-16, 2002
United States of America v. Philip Morris, Inc., et at, 99-CV-__Papp__I Jnefsl__Change frtnn__Chanpe to
z cnrv	U iu vl 171	^ M I. V#	XTtntncv
84	6 Heyman	Hei
98	8	Rothenburg	Roth
rt)t)	T6	commented	comr
109	15 Marie	Ma
159	5 priority	prop
174	22	convention	conv<
180	5	Dahl	I
--180--12--Richards Dahl--Rich;
180 22	Bemie	Bi
--1-86--9--Alvin Feinstein--Alvan
204 10 Jeffrey Gei --212--2J--found--foi
Errata Sheet — Deposition of Allan M. lirandt August 15-16, 2002
_United States of America v. Philip Morris, Inc., et al., 99-CV-i
..... Page--Line(s)--Change from--Change to—
222	8	Shelling	ScE
227__6__Dahl__D
259	3 Bemie Bu
272	21 Marie Seevers Mauric*
272	21 LaMastra LeM
272	25 Feiser Fii
272	25	Hickman Hie
273	2	Hickman Hie
275	6 Dahl E
278	9 Bemie Bu
291	23__healthy people__
309	2 see si
1 "V	enhctantiatrnnt:	snhu
-Errata Sheet — Deposition of Allan M. Brandi
August 15-16, 2002
United States of America v. Philip Morris, Inc,, et aL, 99-CV-
__Page__Line(s)__Change from__Change tn_
353	6	Thomas	Tc
353	8	Levitt	Le
--374--H)--Johnson--Jo
420	17	advertise	chars
436	21	premier	Prc
--43?--L2--Premier--Prt
470	2	to	t
........ 497--H--Bonzhalf--Ba
588 8 defect de ----------603--X7--Dahl--1