IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FOURTH JUDICIAL CII IN AND FOR DUVAL COUNTY, FLORIDA CIVIL DIVISION
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES CASE NO.: 2008-CA- ] TOBACCO LITIGATION	DIVISION: TOBACCO
Pertains to: Carolyn Hiott, as Personal Representative of the Estate of Kenneth Hiott Case No: 08CA391-IXXX ____________/
DEPOSITION OF KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D.
VOLUME 1
April 4, 2012 9:00 a.m. - 5:30 p.m.
19 West Flagler Street Suite 1020 Miami, Florida
Taken before W. THOMAS HUGHES, RPR, RMR, RDR, CRR, FPR-006, and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at large, pursuant to Notice of Taking Deposition.
APPEARANCES:
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF: MILBERG LLP
BY: JANINE L. POLLACK, ESQUIRE ONE PENNSYLVANIA PLAZA NEW YORK, NY 10119
ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT RJR: JONES DAY
BY: BRADLEY HARRISON, ESQUIRE 901 LAKESIDE AVENUE CLEVELAND, OHIO 44114-1190
ALSO PRESENT:
PAUL KOETHE, ESQUIRE
INDEX
KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D. DIRECT CROSS By Ms. Pollack	4
By Mr. Harrison	334
EXHIBITS
PLAINTIFF'S DESCRIPTION PAGE Exhibit 1 CURRICULUM VITAE	5
Exhibit 2 NOTICE OF DEPOSITION	9
Exhibit 3 EXPERT DISCLOSURE	29
Exhibit 4 COPIES OF DISKS	31
Exhibit 5 RELIANCE LIST	35
Exhibit 6 AHA DOCUMENT	62
Exhibit 7 "THE BELL SYSTEM" DOCUMENT 68 Exhibit 8 WINSTON ADD	109
Exhibit 9 SALEM ADD	114
Exhibit 10 VICEROY ADD	131
Exhibit 11 GUNSMOKEADD	134
Exhibit 12 L&M ADD	134
Exhibit 13 "INSIDE NASCAR" DOCUMENT 144 Exhibit 14 HILTON HEAD PRESENTATION 150 Exhibit 15 LOST EMPIRE DOCUMENT 153 Exhibit 16 GUIDING PRINCIPLES & BELIEFS 175 Exhibit 17 FORT LAUDERDALE NEW ARTICLE 181 Exhibit 18 "DEBATE ABOUT SMOKING" ARTICLE 185 Exhibit 19 SURGEON GENERAL REPORT - 1989 200 Exhibit 20 SURGEON GENERAL REPORT - 2012 218 Exhibit 21 FTC DOCUMENT	225
Exhibit 22 FTC DOCUMENT	246
Exhibit 23 HILL & KNOWLTON DOCUMENT 263 Exhibit 24 "HISTORY OF WARE COUNTY" 283 Exhibit 25 PHOTOGRAPH	297
Exhibit 26 VARIOUS DOCUMENTS	312
PROCEEDINGS
Thereupon,
KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D., being by me first duly sworn to tell the whole truth as hereinafter certified, answered the oath, and testified as follows:
THE WITNESS: Yes.
DIRECT EXAMINATION BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Lipartito.
A. Good morning.
Q. My name is Janine Pollack. I represent plaintiff Hiott in this case, the estate of Mr. Hiott, and I'm here to ask you a bunch of questions today.
A. Okay.
Q. If you do not understand my question, please let me know. I will do my best to rephrase it.
If you answer, I'll assume you understood.
Your counsel may object to the form of the
question. You know, if you understand it, you can answer.
You should, of course, listen to your counsel. I don't intend to ask any questions that are somehow privileged; I'm not sure how they would be,
5
but, you know, I'll do my best to keep the questions clear.
And if you need a break, please let me know.
I can assure you I will need breaks.
A. Very good.
Q. Okay. Would you please state your name and address for the record.
A. Kenneth Lipartito. My address is 10545 Southwest 129th Court, Miami, Florida 33186.
Q. And what is your business address?
A. It's the department of history at Florida International University, Miami, Florida 33199.
Q. Great.
What is your current employ?
A. I work at Florida International University.
Q. And what is your position there?
A. I'm professor and chair of the department of history.
Q. How long have you been at Florida
International University?
A. I arrived in 1998, so 14 years.
Q. Okay. That's a long time.
MS. POLLACK: I'm going to ask this to be marked as Exhibit 1.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs
6
Exhibit 1 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I believe you have provided us with your CV, and I believe this is the CV we received.
A. Yes. It's pretty much --1 don't know if there's a more recent one that I have, but this is pretty representative.
Q. Well, you just anticipated my next question, which is, is this up-to-date?
A. It looks like a slight -- it looks like it's a slightly -- perhaps slightly earlier one. I mean,
I -- it's hard to remember, I'm sure.
Q. Let me ask it this way. Is there anything that is very recent, within the last few months, that you could add -- that you would want to add to it? And we can, of course -- we get an updated copy, if possible.
MR. HARRISON: Yeah. I mean, we can -- will see, sure. If he has an updated copy.
MS. POLLACK: He says it's not the most -you know, sometimes people update it last week, you know.
THE WITNESS: Right. Yeah.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you can get us the most recent, you know,
7
afterwards, that would be great. It's not an emergency.
A. Okay. The only thing I see is I think this is now a slightly changed title --Q. Let me jut point out what you're pointing to, because the record won't reflect it -A. Right.
Q. -- so it's understood "Publications"?
A. Right.
Q. And then under "Articles and Chapters"?
A. Right.
Q. And you're saying something under there is not -A. The very first listing.
Q. Okay.
A. That has a slightly different title. And it
has a little --it's now --it's now under --it's going to be -- or it's under review to be published in a journal called "The Business History Review," but it's under a different title.
Q. Okay. What title is it going to be under?
A. Good question. I can't remember what it's titled now.
Q. It's not important.
A. Yes.
8
Q. We'll see it when it's on the updated CV.
A. Yeah. Okay.
Q. Is there anything else that you think would be different?
A. No. I think under "Grants and Fellowships,"
I	received in 2011 or -- 2011 a grant from the Florida Department of Education.
Q. And what was that grant related to?
A. That's called the "Teacher Quality Grant."
Q. Was there anything in particular you were going to be studying?
A. It's really to train high school teachers in history.
Q. Okay. Does that seem like it covers the
updating?
A. Yes, I think it does.
Q. Okay. Great.
Is there anything on this curriculum vitae, as it stands, that is specifically tobacco-related?
A. Not specifically tobacco-related.
Q. Okay. So none of the grants and fellowships were specifically tobacco-related?
A. No.
Q. None of the publications or articles?
A. No.
9
Q. Public presentations are not tobacco-related?
A. No.
Q. None of your university service is tobacco-related?
A. No.
Q. Okay. What is your specialty as a professor of history?
A. I'm a professor of American history, specifically modem, which is to say the period from the late 19th to the present, and I also specialize in issues related to the economy, business, and technology.
Q. So none of that is tobacco-related
specifically?
A. No.
MS. POLLACK: We'll ask the reporter to mark this as Exhibit 2.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 2 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is plaintiffs notice of taking deposition duces tecum.
Have you seen this before?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. If you would turn a couple of pages
10
in. I guess it starts on page 5. It says "Schedule A."
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. And do you understand that this asks you to bring certain documents with you to the deposition?
A. I do.
Q. Okay. Have you brought any such documents? A. I have.
Q. Okay. Am I going to see them?
A. If you want, sure. Do you want me to bring
them all out?
Q. Yeah. Sure.
MR. HARRISON: Let's go off for one second just while he pulls the stuff --1 think it's in his backpack.
MS. POLLACK: Sure. Sure.
(Off the record.)
MS. POLLACK: Back on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you've pulled out a bunch of materials that you're turning over to me or at least showing to me.
A. Sure, yes.
Q. Would you say those are the ones that are
11
responsive to Schedule A?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Just describe generally what's in that pile, if you would.
A. Okay. Sure. I have the disks that are copies of my reliance material. I have the depositions in this case. I have some files with notes and I think, actually, a CV. I think there's invoices, and I would have to look to see what else is in here.
Q. Okay. Great. Well, I may have to take a look at those at lunchtime just to not waste the time now.
A. Sure.
Q. Do you have notes on the depositions?
A. I have markings on the depositions.
Q. Okay. All right. Well, I'll look at all of that at lunchtime, and I'll go back to it if need be.
A. Okay.
Q. Let me just ask you a couple of questions on this Schedule A.
If you look at No. 4, it says "any and all written reports provided to you in the course of formulating and preparing to render any opinions pertaining to the subject lawsuit."
12
Did you produce anything with respect to
that?
A. Any written reports? I certainly have depositions. I have just some material that came through the process of research, some notes that I took.
Q. Okay. Look, if you would, at No. 10. It says "copies of all speeches or presentations or
drafts of speeches or presentations Dr. Lipartito has given relating to addiction."
Do you have anything relating to that?
A. No.
Q. No. 11, "any internal tobacco documents provided to Dr. Lipartito which Dr. Lipartito relied upon in formulating any opinions pertaining to the subject lawsuit."
Do you have anything like that?
A. No.
Q. No. 12 says "any cigarette advertisements Dr. Lipartito relied upon in formulating any opinions pertaining to the subject lawsuit."
Do you have anything like that?
A. I believe in the materials that I have from magazines and newspapers, there are advertisements.
Q. So that would be in your reliance materials?
13
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. No. 14, "reports of any other experts which Dr. Lipartito read in formulating any opinions in connection with this case."
Do you have anything like that?
A. No.
Q. So you didn't read any other expert reports?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And I think you may have told me this already.
In that little that manila folder there, is that -- are there any -- is that just your own notes?
A. There's some notes. Also, there's some research assistants put together for me and some lists of documents identifying certain materials that were sent to me.
Q. Okay. Just -- if you would turn to No. 19 on page 7, it says "all correspondence, including e-mails and faxes, between Dr. Lipartito and any lawyer representing any defendant regarding this litigation or tobacco litigation generally."
Did you produce anything like that?
A. Yes, there are some copies of e-mails.
Q. Okay. Great.
We'll just look at those at lunchtime, then.
14
MR. HARRISON: I just want to state for the record as well that we did file or serve objections to the schedule, so all of the documents being produced are subject to the objections. I won't run through them all --
MR. HARRISON: Okay. Just to put it on the record. I just--
MS. POLLACK: Fine. Fine. I know that you --1 know that you did, and I agree that it's all subject to the objections filed by your counsel.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I think you said that you've got some invoices in there regarding this litigation?
A. I do.
Q. Okay. Do you have any invoices in there regarding other tobacco litigation, not this one?
A. No.
Q. Okay. All right. So would you say that you made a pretty exhaustive search regarding our Schedule A request?
A. Yes.
Q. And you feel like you've complied with that? A. I do.
15
Q. Okay. Now, do you understand what I mean when I refer to the "Engle cases"?
A. Yes -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: -- in a very general way.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Why don't you tell me what you understand, because we're going to probably talk about the Engle cases during the day, and I want to make sure we both understand what those are.
A. Okay. Well, what I know is that there was a suit, I guess, called "Engle" or a lawsuit that I think had to do with a class action suit that went through a long and lengthy process that I don't really understand or follow that resulted, I believe, in a rendering or decision by maybe the Florida Supreme Court that I think -- all I know from that point is that the cases that were involved in what had been a sort of a class action are now being tried individually.
Q. Do you understand the Hiott case to be one of those?
A. I think so. I can't say I really know for certain.
Q. I will represent to you that the Hiott case
16
is one of those Engle progeny cases -A. Okay.
Q. And so when I refer to the "Engle cases" -you've pretty much got the story right, so we're on the same page. And if I refer to the "Engle cases," pretty much I'm referring to the progeny of the Engle class action, which is all of those cases are being individually litigated now, at this point. They're individual cases, of which Hiott is one.
A. Okay.
Q. Okay. Have you testified by deposition in any other Engle case?
A. Well, I believe I did. I think it was an Engle case.
Q. Okay. And what was the name of that?
A. I think it was Willis.
Q. Okay. That's what I have down as my understanding as well.
A. Okay.
Q. As you sit here today, is there anything in the Willis testimony that you gave that you feel is inaccurate in any way?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't really have a copy of
it, so I haven't looked at it for quite a while.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you feel like you testified accurately in that case, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. That's sort of my memory. I mean, it's -- there has been time between that and what I've done subsequent, and I've done a lot more research on the specifics of the Hiott case.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure. I guess my question really is, are you going to in this case give any opinions that are different than at the deposition you gave in the Willis case?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I don't think so, but I don't have that to compare or review.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure. I understand.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Have you testified in any Engle trials?
A. No.
Q. So the Willis case did not go to trial?
A. As I understand it, no.
Q. Okay. Have you ever given any testimony,
either deposition or trial, in any non-Engle case?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: A non-Engle case involving tobacco; is that what you mean?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Not involving tobacco.
A. Not involving tobacco.
Q. Let's talk first about a case -- did you ever give any testimony, either deposition or trial, in a case that was not tobacco, not Engle?
A. I have given a deposition.
Q. Okay. What kind of case was that?
A. It involved lead paint.
Q. Okay. Were you retained as an expert?
A. I was.
Q. For plaintiff or defendant?
A. Defendant.
Q. Okay. What did you generally testify about there?
A. Well, again, that's been quite a while.
I think it had more to do with the -- boy. I have to really go back. The -- something -- well, it's about the history of the industry, about some issues of public awareness, some fairly, I would say, technical issues about -- about the nature of changing
technology of painting. Those are the things that stand out most, I think.
Q. Okay. I'm going to just read you what you said about at the Willis deposition -A. Sure.
Q. -- and if you want me to pull out the transcript, I can and mark it. But I was hoping not to do that, because it's very big, and I'm trying not to bulk up this transcript unless we need it. But if you want it, I have it -A. Okay.
Q. -- okay? So I have a couple of sentences here, and I will tell you what page they were at, and you can tell me if they're accurate.
The first thing you said was: "The substance concerned the records of one of the defendants with respect to knowledge about the dangers of lead paint and other matters related to their business."
Fair enough?
MR. HARRISON: And I'm going to object to this style of questioning to the extent it is deposition testimony. It's a form objection --1 just want to put it on the record -- as to each of the -- reading back previous testimony and asking if he agrees or disagrees.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you want, I can pull it out and we don't have to mark it. You can just look at it.
A. I would like to look at it.
Q. Sure. That would probably be good. That way you don't have to guess at what's in there.
This is like this. Okay. Now, you can follow along. I'm looking at page 77. It says -sort of towards the top of the page, you say,
"Sure" -- the question is: "Sure. What did you give an opinion on? What was your opinion?"
And you answered: "Oh, I'm not sure I was even asked my opinion in a direct way like that, but basically, since I never" -- "the cases did not either come to trial or I didn't testify at a trial, so I have never given a sort of direct testimony. But the substance concerned the records of one of the defendants with respect to knowledge about the dangers of lead paint and other matters related to their business, oh, that sort of thing."
Does that sound accurate to you?
A. Yes, that's what's there.
Q. Okay. And then turn to the next page, page
78, you're still talking about the lead paint, and I'm going to read you -- starting with "much broader than
21
that." Okay.
"It had everything from the history of the company to the history of the industry to the different aspects of the company and its operations and how it was organized, and then with respect, I think, to specific questions about internal records that might have related to whether they had records related to knowledge of the dangers of lead paint and whether I had found anything like that."
Does that sound accurate?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So is it fair to say that part of your retention in that case, in the lead paint case, involved what was known internally by the company versus what was known externally by the public and the industry about the dangers of lead paint?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Actually it involved both.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. It was both.
But in some respects, was there a comparison, the company versus the public?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, actually there wasn't.
22
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So it was just both. You were interested in both sides?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I was interested -- well, I mean --1 don't know if I was interested. I looked at records that involved both public knowledge and company history.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And why did you look at the company record?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it just had to do with the questions that I was asked to address in that case.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Can you describe generally for me what those were?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, going back pretty far.
Yes. I mean, I think what I said there is pretty much consistent with I'm saying; that they wanted to have a historian go through their records and find out what was -- what was in the records about these issues.
23
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So would you say that that was a fairly standard procedure, to look at company internal records?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know if I'd use the word "standard." It really completely varies on the type of question you're trying to answer, the historical issue you have before you.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you see any sort of parallels between that case and this case at all?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. In the sense of the questions I'm addressing here are really about -much more about public knowledge and public information.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Why were you interested in the other case in
knowing what the company knew?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it had to do with the way the question was -- you know, the issue that I was asked to research. They said, Would you tell us what is in the record with respect to these
24
issues as part of a broader review of the history of the company, its organizations, its operations, and specifically the types of products that it made.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And is there any point of crossing; in other words, can the internal records tell you something about what the public knew?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I think these are really distinct things.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So we can put this away for now. We don't have to mark it.
A. Do you want these back?
Q. Yes.
How did you first get involved in testifying
in your first Engle case -A. Well, again, I --
Q. -in Willis?
A. In Willis.
Well, again, I can't quite recall exactly how it came about, but I had been researching the history of public knowledge in Florida, specifically about tobacco and the dangers of smoking. And beyond that,
25
I think I was asked to be an expert or to give testimony in that case, so I did research specifically on that case that supplemented what I had already done.
Q. And why were you already looking into the tobacco issues?
A. Because I had been asked by a law firm if I -- if I could -- if I could do historical research of that sort. And since I'm located in Miami, I think they were especially interested in Florida, specific knowledge. So I said yes, and I began doing the research.
Q. Was it in connection with a case at that time?
A. Yes. I don't think it was a specific case.
I think there were perhaps -- and I think this was --
again, I'm not an expert on the law, but I believe this was before Engle cases, that there were some cases maybe in Miami or in the South Florida area that were in some process, and they were -- they wanted someone to be able to testify on the issues of public awareness and public knowledge.
Q. What law firm was that?
A. Johnson, Tyler & Purvis.
Q. Okay. Do you remember anybody in particular
26
there?
A. I believe I met --1 believe I met a Tyler and a Purvis. I don't know if I met a Johnson.
Q. Okay. Were those the same lawyers who approached you to testify in Willis?
A. No. I believe at that point, I was called by a different firm, Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. Okay. And on whose behalf are you going to testify in the Hiott case?
A. Behalf?
Q. Who retained you?
A. The law firm of Jones Day is the firm I've worked with here.
Q. Now, that's the law firm, but who is the
client of the law firm?
A. I think it's some tobacco companies or company.
Q. You don't know which one?
A. Well, I think the one that I've seen the most reference to, just from the depositions, is RJ. Reynolds, because that seems to be the product that he used, was a Reynolds product.
Q. So do you believe you've been retained by R.J. Reynolds?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
27
THE WITNESS: As I see it, I've been retained by a law firm to participate in a legal proceeding.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And do you issue your bills or invoices to the law firm?
A. I do.
Q. Have you received any payment yet from the law firm, any checks?
A. I have.
Q. And all it says on it is -- well, it says "Jones Day"?
A. Yes. I mean, that's what I recall from the check.
Q. Okay. About how much time have you spent to date on the Hiott case?
A. I think with the most recent, it's maybe 120 to 130 hours.
Q. And I assume you get paid by the hour.
A. I do.
Q. And I think that the disclosure says your rate is $250 per hour?
A. Correct.
Q. And that's for anything that you do, no matter what it is, whether it's testimony or research or whatever?
28
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now, I'm sure I'll see when I look at the materials you brought, but have you issued invoices on this case to date to Jones Day?
A. Yes.
Q. Are they up-to-date?
A. I usually send in an invoice the first weekend of the new month, so I probably will send one in this weekend, when I have time to make my invoice up.
Q. Okay. Have you been retained for any other
Engle cases?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think there was another case that I was working on that I think was an Engle case as well, yes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, you said "was working on."
A. I haven't worked on it for a while, for a little while.
Q. Is it still going on? Are you going to testify?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah - I don't know. Again, it's --1 think for legal reasons, that case
29
perhaps was going to be scheduled, but seems now to have moved into a different schedule.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, I think in the disclosure that your lawyers filed or served us with, it says that your involvement as an expert witness has averaged about 5 to 10 percent of your time devoted to professional activities in the past three years.
And I'm assuming -- it says "as an expert witness," so I'm assuming it means in any kind of case
in the last three years.
A. Oh. I think it would probably be higher, if you include everything -- sorry. Actually, I'm misunderstanding your question.
Q. Why don't we take a look at it, and that way you don't have to guess at what it means.
Okay. I only did the cover page and the pages that relate to you.
A. Okay.
MS. POLLACK: Mark this, please.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 3 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. The first page is -- just to show you what it is, expert disclosure by R.J. Reynolds.
30
Okay. The second page, if you see your name about halfway down the page?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So this is where your lawyers are going to disclose that you are one of the experts in the case.
And actually if you'd look at the last page where it says "Fees and Prior Testimony," so it says
that your billing rate is 250 per hour, that you've only worked for defendants in the past three years; that you've given -- you've only given testimony in the following case, Willis, in the past three years.
Is that accurate?
A. Yes, I believe that is accurate.
Q. And it says: "During the past three years,
Dr. Lipartito's involvement as an expert witness has averaged approximately 5 to 10 percent of his time devoted to professional activities."
Would you say that's about right?
A. So if you included all research, I suppose it was expert witness that was -- in terms of actually testifying or giving depositions, obviously, it would be much, much smaller. I think if you included all of the research, it would be more in the 10 percent of...
Q. Okay. And we'll come back to that shortly.
31
Now, you produced to plaintiff in this case six disks and a reliance list; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So I have...
MS. POLLACK: Mark this next.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 4 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is Exhibit 4. I made a copy of all of the disks, which I believe you have in your possession here.
A. Correct.
Q. And are these all the reliance materials that you have?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. The disks. But I think --1 don't think the depositions are in the disks.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So the depositions are produced here physically as opposed to on the disks?
A. I believe so. I don't think we put those on the disks.
Q. Okay. Are those all of the depositions that were taken in this case or just some of them?
32
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: These are all that I have, and I don't know if they're still --if they've finished all of the depositions. I'm not sure. Sometime I receive depositions over time, but these
are all that I've received.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you intending to have as part of your reliance materials every deposition of a fact witness in this case?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I do. I do read all of the depositions, yes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Why don't we -- would you mind just reading to me the ones that you have there?
A. Okay.
Q. Just, you know, the cover page, the name of the person.
A. Sure. Sure.
Q. That way, we at least know what we have here. A. Okay. Okay. This actually are interrogatories.
Okay. Depositions. All right. Ann Marie Landis, M.L. Ricks. This is a multi-volume one, so
33
I've got four volumes of Carolyn Hiott. Fayda Johnson, James Hiott, Terrence Hiott. This is also multiple. Two volumes of Linda Beverly, Evelyn Rowell, R-O-W-E-L-L; the second volume of Evelyn
Rowell, Ann Ralesback, Robert Figueroa, Thomas Evans, Louis Colee, C-O-L-E-E; Polly Colee, Cesar Perales, P-E-R-A-L-E-S, Harry Piper, Robert Bonk, B-O-N-K, Joanne Boe, B-O-E. I think that's it.
Q. Okay. Great.
As long as you're running through what you got there, let's just finish it up and tell me what else you got there.
A. All right. Second amended complaint adding survivor Terrence Hiott only, plaintiffs notice of serving amended consolidated responses to defendant R.J. Reynolds first set of interrogatories, plaintiffs notice of serving supplemental answers to defendant R.J. Reynolds's first set of interrogatories, plaintiffs notice of serving answers to defendant R.J. Reynolds's first set of interrogatories, plaintiffs notice of serving second amended consolidated responses to defendant R.J. Reynolds first set of interrogatories. There are dates on these. I don't know if --Q. Okay. No. That's fine.
34
Okay. And then you've also got with you just the physical disks?
A. Correct.
Q. And that's six disks, and those are reflected on the exhibit that I gave you, correct?
A. Yes. This looks like copies of the disks --Q. Great.
A. -- that I have.
Q. Okay. Great. Great.
So is this the totality of what your reliance materials are going to consist of maybe except for if there's any other depositions that come your way?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: The only other thing is that there still could be some materials that I'm gathering or my research assistants are gathering. There are some other newspapers that I might have a chance to take a look at that would supplement these.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And I assume you would give those to us before trial?
A. Of course.
Q. Okay. We would definitely request to have those before we walk in the courtroom.
A. Understood.
Q. All right.
MR. HARRISON: We will cross that bridge when we get there.
MS. POLLACK: Yeah.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And I'm not saying we're going to agree that you can do that, but I figured I'll at least make the request. Okay.
MS. POLLACK: Mark this.
(The document was marked as Defendants'
Exhibit 5 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Is this the reliance materials list that you produced in this case?
A. Yes. This looks like it.
Q. Okay. Did you prepare this?
A. It was a process involving me putting together a list of things I had, and then I sent those lists and other materials to Jones Day, that then I think put together the final form, which then they sent to me, which I reviewed and then said, Yes, that looks -- that looks good.
Q. Okay. Now, how did you make the decision as to which materials to put onto your list?
A. Onto this list?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, certainly materials that pertained directly to the life of Kenneth Hiott were -- were important, so newspapers that he read, the educational materials that he would have seen.
Then I had done a lot of research over the years in sort of the national media, magazines, newspapers.
I include that because I think that, you know, we live in a nation; he lives in a nation, so I think it's important to have a larger national context, and then some more -- so between those two newspapers, like the Miami Herald and the Fort Lauderdale paper, that are kind of part of a -he lived in Florida and he lived near Florida, so that's part of the Florida context materials that reflected areas that he lived in, so that -- and then a lot of the other material concerns education and curriculum, a lot where he lived.
I have done a lot of research on, again, the Florida context, and so I think I include that just as part of the standard body of research that I've done that helps me understand the issues generally in every case. So there's a sort of basis for my ability to
then go specifically into the materials that pertain to an individual case.
Q. Now, if you came across something in your research that you weren't going to rely on, but you came across it and you did read it, would it be on this list?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, not necessarily. For example, if I had done research, as I have, in cases involving more distant locations that have no -- don't pertain to the client, that would be -I would see that as maybe too much of a stretch.
It's certainly part of my knowledge; I can't forget it, but it doesn't seem --1 just try to keep the list to a reasonable length. If I included everything I ever read, it might become clearly unwieldy.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is it fair to say this is a reliance list as opposed to a knowledge list?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: By "knowledge list," you mean what?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Anything you know about tobacco.
A. Yeah. I think that would be almost impossible, to construct such a list.
Q. So this is only things that you would consider showing to the jury, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, that's -- you're getting into areas that I'm a little unfamiliar with. I'm not sure what the legal distinction between what can be shown and what is on a reliance list.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yeah. I'm not looking for a legal distinction. I'm just looking for, in your own mind, what you put on this list and why.
A. Yeah. I mean, it's generally -- and as I said, if there were some material that may come in to supplement this, I --1 think this covers everything that I see as relevant to the case that I've researched. You know, it's possible there's something else, but I -- this is what I'm relying on.
Q. Just as an example, supposing you came across something that supported the plaintiffs case instead of the defense case and you didn't want to talk about that document? Would that not go on this list?
THE WITNESS: Well, I think the reliance list
39
represents the material that supports my opinions, and so my opinions, which are in the whatever you call that that I gave you -- so I certainly couldn't --1 couldn't put everything on it. The idea is for me to sort of provide the evidence for my conclusion, so I see this as supporting my -- my opinions and conclusions.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Great.
Now, I think you said that you put some Florida materials on here, and I do see quite a bit of Florida material on here.
A. Right.
Q. And he pretty much grew up most of his childhood in Georgia, correct?
A. Yes, his childhood, in Georgia.
Q. Okay. And I guess the Florida stuff is more pertaining to when he moved to Florida.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think it's two things. One, I think -- again, Florida and Georgia are pretty close, so it's a kind of regional thing. I
think it helps to support the Georgia material.
I think it also gives a sense of -- again, the more general state of public knowledge in
40
Florida, where he did live for part of his life, so it seemed to me unlike if it was California material, perhaps. It seemed to me this is pretty relevant to understanding Mr. Hiott's situation.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And you have towards the back here letter N.
A. Hold on. Whoops. Okay. N.
Q. Page 8.
A. Yes.
Q. It says "Reports of the Surgeon General of the U.S. Public Health Service."
A. Right.
Q. Are you going to rely on those reports?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, it's a part of my reliance list.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. In what way are you going to use the Surgeon General reports?
THE WITNESS: By "use," you mean -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. At trial.
A. --at trial? I can't really say at this
41
point.
Q. I noticed that you only run up to 2006, but there are at least two that I know of after that, 2010 and 2012.
A. Right.
Q. And those are not on your list?
A. They are not.
Q. Is there any reason why those are not on your list?
A. Well, for the most part, I focus on material in the historic era that I'm talking about rather than more contemporary material, so most of my research in this case and other cases tends to sort of begin to cut off after about 1990.
I do have some later Surgeon General's reports, partly just --1 think, you know, it's like what I would call "secondary literature," like with books, which is part of the general reading in the area to be informed.
Q. Now, how did you decide which books to read, which are Category O?
A. I mean, again, I -- the same way I would in any other historic project. I would look to see what literature was available, try to pick books that were perhaps most related to the issues. Some I think I
42
read very early as just an attempt to understand a bit more about the history of the industry and tobacco generally.
Q. Have you heard of a book called "Cigarette Century," Allan Brandt? I don't see that here. That one -A. I'm sorry. I must have --1 believe I have actually read that book. I -- yeah. I think, actually, I have read that book.
Q. Okay. And I believe there's a new book out by Robert Proctor, something about --1 know it's tobacco-related, but I can't remember the name of it.
Have you heard of that one?
A. I've heard of it, but it's not something that I've got a copy of or read.
Q. Okay. And would you say that the books you've read inform your opinion in this case?
THE WITNESS: In a very general way. I mean, sometimes you read material that's not necessarily going to shape your opinion, but just to give you enough knowledge to understand other materials that you're reading.
So, you know, what I would say is that's just part of the standard historical research process.
43
If you're beginning a new topic, you want to read some of the things that are available to help you prepare to do research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did you have an opinion on Allan Brandt's book? What did you think of it?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it's been a little while, and perhaps I didn't include it because I didn't think it was that useful.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, I read it, and I thought it was very interesting and informative just from, you know, a history perspective, so I'm just curious what you, as a historian, thought of the book.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: The main thing I recall from that -- it's been a while since I read it. The main thing I recall is that it seemed to me he had not done the kind of research I had done, and so he missed a really important part of the story. So it wasn't that helpful to me.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Which part did he miss?
A. He hadn't done the intense research on public
44
awareness using the variety of materials that I have.
He really -- it seemed to me if -- the issues that I was interested in, I think, are the most important ones. His research really didn't have a lot of -- it just didn't provide, I think, the kind of depth of knowledge that I would have been looking for. Q. You didn't think it was informative?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, some things were informative. Most books are.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Have you reviewed any medical records in this case?
A. Medical records pertaining to Mr. Hiott?
Q. Right.
A. No, I have not seen any medical records.
Q. Do you intend to offer any opinions on medical issues about Mr. Hiott at trial?
A. Not about Mr. Hiott's medical conditions.
Q. Have you published any work on smoking or the history of cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Have you published any work on the health
45
dangers of smoking cigarettes?
A. No.
Q. Have you published any work on tobacco at all?
A. No.
Q. Is part of your course work in your class or any of your classes currently related to tobacco in any way?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, if you talk about -- you're talking about 20th century American history, it could certainly come up.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Has it come up?
A. I can't recall off the top of my head.
I haven't used a book that deals with tobacco, but it may have come up by students' questions. It's not something that I would necessarily give a lecture on, for example.
Q. So in other words, you don't have a syllabus that involves tobacco discussions?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Only time I can think it came up was discussing juvenile delinquency and Marlon Brando in the 1950s.
46
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. How did it come up in that respect?
A. Smoking was also seen as a sign of juvenile delinquency.
Q. Okay. Have you ever given any public talks or speeches on tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you consider yourself to have expertise in marketing?
THE WITNESS: I mean, I'm not a marketing professor, or I'm not -- I'm not an expert on marketing issues generally. I'm a historian. So I certainly sometimes would deal with things that might come under the category of marketing in terms of the history or, you know, part of the history.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Same thing with advertising?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. Again, I'm not a - I'm not a -- I'm not an advertising professional. But I certainly have advertising -- advertising can be part of history in looking at historical materials.
47
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you planning to offer any opinions at trial in this case on marketing or advertising by the cigarette companies?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it will come up in the context of the general information environment, and advertisings are some of the things that I looked at.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What type of advertising did you look at?
A. Advertising for cigarettes that appeared in newspapers, magazines. Mostly the newspapers and magazines.
Q. I think we will get to that a little later on, so we'll talk about that a little later.
Do you have any expertise on addiction?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, in a medical sense as a doctor, I'm not a doctor, so, no. But addiction is one of the topics that comes up in discussions in the documents that I looked at and public awareness issues.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would you say that some of your reliance
48
materials deal with the issue of addiction?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: There are definitely discussions in the reliance materials about -about addiction, the addictive nature of cigarettes, the habit-forming nature of cigarettes, yes. There are materials that concern those issues.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And as you sit here today, do you know what your position is going to be on addiction at trial?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I would talk about is as part of the public knowledge about the dangers -- health-related issues and dangers of smoking, that one thing that had been discussed for a long period of time was that cigarettes were habit-forming and could be difficult to quit.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would you say it was talked about in the press? Is that what you're suggesting?
A. In the press and in educational materials and materials put out by the American Cancer Society and a variety of materials.
Q. Do you want to take a break for five minutes?
49
A. Yeah.
(Off the record.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. What are the general opinions you plan to offer at trial in this case?
A. That there was widespread public knowledge of the dangers of smoking that goes back actually quite a
ways in history; that -- in the period especially that Mr. Hiott was living, that knowledge was pervasive, available and that there's evidence that he absorbed that, got the message about both smoking and cancer and other health problems and addiction and that the -- there was quite a good amount of public awareness from multiple sources on these issues.
Q. Do you have a time frame that you're going to talk about generally?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, my research goes -- could go 400 years back. But it's -mostly it will be concentrated in the -- from the late 19th to the 20th. And I think the vast majority of it would be during his lifetime, naturally, but there's certainly a bigger context that could extend back to the beginning of the 20th century and forward in time to his birth and then
50
beyond that through the 1990s, certainly.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think that things like the 2010 Surgeon General's report are relevant to your opinions?
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, since Mr. Hiott died in 1994,1 -- as a historian, I want to concentrate on materials that reflect the time period that's relevant to this person, so I don't think it would be a very important thing for me.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would you say that's pretty much it -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I mean -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. -- in a general sense?
A. Again, just to repeat, it covers -- it could cover, you know, more than 100 years of history, so there's lots of things in there that I could go -that could go into more depth. You know, there's importance of context about the stories. There's the story of Mr. Hiott; there's issues specifically related to particular parts of the health dangers, materials that he would have seen, materials that were
51
widely available.
So again, it covers a pretty broad -- like on the reliance list, quite a bit of material and time.
Q. In terms of your reliance materials, did you
do all of that research yourself? Did you pull all of those documents yourself?
A. So -- research is a complex process in history, as I see it. I did some work literally sitting in front of -- you know, myself. Some, I had research assistants do. In some cases, I was able to secure materials from elsewhere and then did a process involving verifying the materials. It's been a combined effort, I think, which is pretty typical of historical methodology.
Q. I think you said something about verifying.
Do you want to explain that?
A. Sure. If I received materials that I either didn't collect or didn't have research under my -researchers under my direction collecting, I would -I would go through different processes to verify them. So, for example, if I could actually check some of the material myself, or in some cases, I have a research assistant do a kind of sampling of the material to see if it lined up with what they found, therefore what I would have found myself, yes, things of that sort.
52
Q. Are you able to explain generally what your methodology was in gathering your reliance materials?
THE WITNESS: Well, again, generally I began with looking for publicly available material in various media: newspapers, television, magazines, education, brochures, reports of public health authorities. Essentially it's a process of adding material as one goes beginning with perhaps what are more easily available and then branching out into other areas. Often you discover things that you think might -- as you read, you discover, well perhaps I should look at this now.
So it's --1 think it's a very standard historical methodology. You know, you begin with a question. You look at -- or you try and figure out what might be the most relevant material -- as you do research, you gather more material, and then as you understand the topic, you perhaps branch off into other areas at greater depth.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you confining your opinion to public knowledge of the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Public knowledge, public
53
information, and information that bears upon the
creation of public knowledge. There could be many things in there. I just don't want to talk only about, say, newspapers.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. When you say "information that bears upon the public knowledge," what do you mean by that?
A. So, for example, a school textbook, which could -- which is, I suppose, in one sense, public, but it's public in a different sense than a newspaper is public, so it would be something that's used in schools. And I think it informs members of the public as students.
So	not everything is available to everybody, but if you look at the different materials that affect a person's life, the things that they're actually available to be read by -- by someone like Mr. Hiott or seen.
Q. Did you review any internal R.J. Reynolds materials?
A. I don't know that I've seen any internal R.J. Reynolds materials.
In the course of reading, I have seen what might be sort of internal documents that are mentioned in some of the books, for example, that I've read.
Q. And were any of those materials -- internal materials things that you -- when you saw it as a reference in -- for example, Cigarette Century, I know that there are lots of references to internal materials in there.
A. Right.
Q. Did you think to yourself that you ought to go look at any of those?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Because my focus was on things that the public could have seen, so getting into internal documents just wasn't part of the methodology that got answers to the questions I was asking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did somebody tell you that you should only look at what the public could have seen as opposed to internal materials?
A. No. I mean, the question I was asked to address had to do with public knowledge.
It was the same way that I -- there's lots of things that I wouldn't look at if -- because they're not relevant to that question, so it was just a natural division between -- public knowledge has to be things that are available to the public. There could
be lots of internal materials of all sorts of organizations, but they wouldn't be relevant to understanding public knowledge.
Q. What if there were an internal RJ. Reynolds document that said something like, you know, We know that the public believes X.
Would that be relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: We know that the public believes X.
Well, I mean, again, the closest perhaps might be opinion polls.
But I'm less concerned with what RJ.
Reynolds thought the public believed and more concerned with actually doing the research to see what the public would have seen.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So it's not relevant at all to your opinion what R.J. Reynolds believed the public believed?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Unless it was something they expressed to the public, in which case then it would have been something I would have seen in the course of my research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So it's not important to your opinion if R.J. Reynolds is making internal business plans to, for example, address something they think the public knows or doesn't know?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, what's relevant to my research and what's important to my research is -- are things that actually appeared in public.
Public knowledge has to be publicly available.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What if, for example, there were an internal RJR -- when I say "RJR," you know I'm talking about Reynolds?
A. Reynolds.
Q. --an intern Reynolds document that said,
Here's a news article that was in the paper yesterday, and we know that that's not at all what the public thinks.
Would that be relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, no, really, because it's not what RJR thinks; it's what is available to
the public. There could be other people who say all sorts of things about what the public thinks.
57
I didn't concern myself what people said the public thinks in their internal deliberations; I concerned myself with what was said to and communicated to the public. Those are the things I looked at.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. What if R.J. Reynolds did an internal -- it internally conducted market research -A. Um-hum.
Q. -- would that be relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, I'd have to see specifically what you're talking about.
But again, market research wasn't my -- my focus.
What I was interested in is what did the public see, and to the extent we can know this, what sorts of information do we have about -- about what the public thought.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And no one specifically limited you to look at only what the public would have seen?
A. There were no limitations on my research.
Q. So is it fair to say that you decided that you would make this dividing line between what the
58
public saw versus what they would not have seen, such as internal documents?
A. Right.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I focused on the things that I thought could best answer the questions. Those had to do with the publicly available information or information from the public or specifically in the case of Mr. Hiott, information from his life about what he knew and what he saw.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you a member of the American Historical Association?
A. I'm not sure if my membership is current or not. I have been at times, and at times I've maybe let my membership lapse.
Q. But you've been a member in the past?
A. I have.
Q. And did you mean to let your membership lapse --
A. Well, sometimes --
Q. -if it did?
A. -- you know, you can be a member of lots of organizations. I tend to be a member if I'm going to go to their annual meeting. I tend not to be a member
59
if I haven't gone for a few years.
Q. Are there other historical societies such as that one that you belong to?
A. Again, I belong to a variety of them. The Business History Conference is one that I belong to.
The Economic History Association, I believe I'm still current with, the Society for the History of Technology. I don't know if I have a current membership to the Organization of American Historians.
Again, I have been a member of those organizations either currently or in the past.
Q. Are you familiar with the terms "primary and secondary documents"?
A. I am.
Q. Or perhaps they're referred to as "primary and secondary sources"?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Would you describe for me, in your own words, the difference between those two terms?
A. It's a very good question, as I try to explain to my students, so it will take a little bit of time.
At one level, the difference is that primary sources or documents are those produced at the time under study.
60
Secondary sources are reflections or commentaries on history by others usually at a later point in time.
There is a kind of gray area between those things.
So sometimes documents are produced more or less at the time, but they're not produced perhaps by people directly involved in the issue; they're reflections or commentaries on the issue.
And then what constitutes a primary source depends very much on the type of question you're -you're asking.
Q. Would internal company archives be primary sources?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: They could be, depending on what question you're asking.
Q. Do you feel that you used primary sources in this case for your reliance materials?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And in what way did you use primary sources?
A. "In what way" meaning how did I use them?
Q. Which materials would you consider to be primary sources in this case?
61
A. I would say most of the materials on the reliance list are primary sources, because they are public communications that concern issues related to tobacco, cigarettes, and health. And so if my topic is public knowledge and public communication and public information, the primary sources for that have to be the media of public communication.
You know, likewise, educational materials is another form of it. Movies, films, public service announcements, they're all public communications, and therefore, they are primary sources for understanding public knowledge and public information.
Q. So you would say that internal tobacco company documents would not be primary sources?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What I would say is they would
not be primary sources that would be useful for understanding public knowledge and public information.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did you ask R.J. Reynolds to provide you with any documents?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I did not ask R.J. Reynolds to provide me with documents.
62
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 6 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is Exhibit 6. I'll ask if you've ever seen this statement on the Standards of Professional Conduct for the American Historical Association.
A. I think I have seen certain versions. I don't believe I've actually necessarily seen this. It looks like it's 2011, and I don't recall looking at it or such a statement recently.
Q. Fair enough.
If you look at the paragraph that starts with "We honor the historical record"?
A. Would you give me a page?
Q. Yeah. Sorry. Page 3.
A. Roman III or --Q. Page 3.
A. Okay. Go ahead. Could you -- sorry. Which paragraph?
Q. "We honor the historical record but understand that its interpretation constantly evolves as historians analyze primary documents in light of the ever expanding body of secondary literature that places those documents in a larger context.
By 'documents,' historians typically mean all
63
forms of evidence, not just written texts, but artifacts, images, statistics, oral recollections, the built and natural environment, and many other things that have survived as records of former times."
Now, doesn't this passage suggest to also look at artifacts and actual documents from that time, which would include RJ. Reynolds's internal materials?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think you're misinterpreting what's being said here.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Fair enough.
A. What's being said here is that the body of the primary sources could consist of any of these things. It's not making a prescriptive statement about which should be used in which case, and I think that's the crucial distinction; that a basic methodology of history is not to look at primary sources, which could get you nowhere. It's to look at primary sources that can answer the questions that you need to be answered.
Q. And isn't it true that you made the decision in your own mind not to look at RJR internal documents?
64
A. I made the same decision I always make when I do historical research. I look at the materials that can help me do the research I want to do and answer the questions, and I don't look at things that are not going to help me do that.
Q. So is it fair to say that in your mind, no internal Reynolds materials would help you understand what the public knew about smoking at the time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I mean, I think the-the only thing --1 don't know if it's an internal
document or not -- would be materials that they -that they put before the public, because that would be -- so in that sense, if that is something that's from Reynolds and it's before the public they make a statement, that would certainly be part of the things that I would have done research on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, I think you -- when we looked at the Willis testimony, you said that you did look at internal documents in that case.
A. Yeah. I was trying to remember if it was Reynolds materials. I believe there's some public opinion polls that I came across, and I'm not sure if they were ones that were published or ones that were
65
internal.
I looked at -- that is to say. I --1 -- you know, I did consider internal documents, and I did spend a little bit of time seeing if any internal documents could be relevant, but once I determined that they couldn't, I didn't go any further with that.
Q. And that was with respect to the Willis case?
A. I think it began with earlier research, right.
Having done that at some point in time and
having determined that these were going to be internal documents, they're not going to really bear on the questions that I'm looking at, then I have not done any further research. That may have actually gone back before the Willis case in the early part of my research.
There's something called "tobacco.org" that I've looked at at one time or another.
Q. Have you looked at -- other than tobacco.org, have you looked at any of the other Web sites that have now posted internal materials from the tobacco companies?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I can't remember which are which, but I know there were --1 believe there
66
were two that I looked at. There's one, I think, at the University of San Diego, and I don't know if that's tobacco.org. And then there's another one.
So certainly as part of my initial research,
I did consider that as a possibility. I did some examining. I've realized these were going to be internal documents. They weren't going to be very helpful. And after having done that assessment, I
decided that the internal documents weren't going to help me answer the questions, I moved on to sources that I thought could help me answer the questions.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, I believe that we looked at -- we looked at what you've described as the testimony in the lead paint case.
A. Um-hum.
Q. You said there you had looked at many internal documents -A. Right.
Q. --to determine what the company knew and also what was known in the public about the dangers of lead paint.
A. Right.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
67
THE WITNESS: Sorry. Could you say it again?
I just -- he --1 missed that last part.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I was just going to ask you why did you feel it was important in the lead paint case to look at internal documents to determine what the company knew about the dangers of lead paint and look at public
materials to determine what the public knew about lead paint.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, actually, I looked at the internal documents not to determine what they knew about the dangers of lead paint, but to really understand the history of paint, history of the company, what they did. That was because the issues in that case were different.
I've looked at internal documents of organizations in similar research and not in others. It really just depends on what it is that you're trying to learn.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let's look for a moment at --1 just got a piece of your book here. I did get your book.
A. Oh, very good.
Q. Hang on a second. Maybe I can shorten this
68
exhibit a little bit.
MS. POLLACK: Let's mark that.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 7 for identification.)
Q. Hopefully you won't mind too much that I made some copies of just a few pages.
A. Ask me and I'll let you know.
Q. Do you recognize --1 also have the book right here. I can represent to you that I copied these pages from your actual text.
A. Okay.
Q. Do you recognize this as the book that you wrote?
A. Yes, I believe this is it.
Q. And it's called "The Bell System and Regional Business: The Telephone in the South, 1877-1920," correct?
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. What is this book generally about?
A. I think the title is pretty descriptive.
It's about the history of the telephone in the southern United States from 1877 to 1920.
Q. Let's turn to the acknowledgements.
A. Okay.
69
Q. And did you write this?
A. The acknowledgements?
Q. Yes.
A. Oh, yes.
Q. And you say here: "Most of my research was carried out at the AT&T archives in New York."
A. Yes.
Q. Would that include internal AT&T documents? A. Yes.
Q. What type of documents?
A. Bear in mind, I wrote this over 20 years ago. You know, they're actually in the footnotes of the book. I mean, off the top of my head, it's hard for me to remember.
Q. Well, let's look at the back.
A. Okay.
Q. I think I gave you just the very beginning of the footnotes. I cut off the rest of them because I don't want to make this such a big exhibit.
But I just gave you one example -- one page of examples, up to page 228?
A. I only go to 227.
Q. You only go to 227?
A. That's all I've got.
Q. I meant to give you up to 228. Sorry. Let's
put that in there too. My fault.
A. Okay.
MR. HARRISON: Just for purposes of marking the record -MS. POLLACK: Yes.
MR. HARRISON: -- so we know what the exhibit is, it looks like we have the cover of the book.
We have the acknowledgements, which is page XV and XVI, and we have a title page, "The Bell System and Regional Business," and it looks like we have pages 1 to 6. And then we have a section in the back, notes, pages 227 and 228.
MS. POLLACK: Correct.
I also do have the full book here in case he -- you know, he needs to look at that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. You were saying, you know, if you had looked at maybe some of the notes, you could have an idea.
Well, let's just look, for example, at Note 7.
A. Um-hum.
Q. Does that look like some sort of internal company document?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. It's a letter book. As
71
I say, it's a recording of incoming and outgoing
correspondence.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And you felt that that was something of interest to your historical research on -- on this topic?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: In this particular case, yes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And why was that?
A. Because I was writing a history of the telephone industry and the telephone company.
Q. And would you contrast that to your research here where you limited yourself to just public awareness as opposed to a history of the tobacco industry?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I didn't see myself as limiting. I saw myself as focusing on the documents that would be best to answer the question and in the same sense; that I focused on the documents that I felt would be best and most useful to answer the question in all of my research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is there a reason why you're choosing to have
as the question only public awareness of the dangers of tobacco as opposed to a history of the tobacco industry during that same time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't - well, I don't really want to write it --1 was not asked to and -- nor am I particularly interested in writing a history of the tobacco industry. That's a rather different topic.
I mean, the question that I addressed and the question I felt I could address had to do with public awareness specifically in tobacco-related matters and in -- beginning in Florida and then other parts of the United States as well.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. In terms of the history aspect, do you feel that the internal documents of RJ. Reynolds bear on that subject?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So are you saying that the internal records of R.J. Reynolds don't bear on the history of tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's not what I said. I said
they don't bear on the question of public awareness.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. I was asking you a different question.
I was asking you, do they bear on the history of tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I mean, it depends what history you're writing. If you are writing about tobacco as an agricultural product, they may or may not.
If you were writing about -- you know, of other aspects you're writing about, you know, consumers and tobacco, they may or may not. It really depends on what questions you're trying to address.
Just like in that book, I looked at documents, and I didn't look at other documents because I felt that these were the ones that would help me get to the story I was trying to write.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. When you say -- if you're talking about consumers, that they may or may not, are we not talking about consumers here -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. --in the issue of public awareness of tobacco?
A. Yeah. Well, consumers in the sense of not in terms of public health, but really in terms of, you know, other aspects of consumption.
I focused specifically on public health, public knowledge, of the dangers of tobacco.
Q. But aren't consumers the ones who are consuming the cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I suppose that's true.
But again, I'm not interested in consumers in this case. I'm interested in what people knew about the dangers of smoking, indeed, whether they were consumers or not consumers.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, I'm not talking about only people who bought cigarettes as consumers. I'm talking about consumers in the generic sense, people who can consume any product.
A. Well -- okay. That's extremely broad.
I mean, my focus was specifically on public
knowledge about the dangers of smoking, not necessarily other aspects of consumption. I was
75
interested in what knowledge was available about the dangers of smoking.
Now, whether that went to consumers, whether that went to school children, whether it went to people who had never smoked, whether that -- it didn't really matter to me. So the question of being a consumer was not really relevant.
The only -- the only --1 guess you would say Mr. Hiott smoked. But again, he was part of the public, and I was interested in the knowledge that was available to him about the dangers of cigarettes and smoking.
Q. The public, as you've been referring to it, isn't that made up of people who can consume a product?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, "can consume," I'm not sure what you mean. But that is to say, in theory,
I suppose anyone can consume anything. But that's not very useful.
Certainly the public consisted of people who did smoke and people who didn't smoke.
Q. Well, let me do it this way. I think you've used the term "public knowledge" a lot here.
76
A. Um-hum.
Q. Who is the public you're talking about in your term "public knowledge"?
A. Well, I think --1 guess the American public.
I'm not really dealing with people outside of the United States, so, yes, citizens and residents of the United States, most broadly.
Q. In what sense? Aren't they consumers -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. --or potential consumers?
A. Well, I mean, I look at them as members of the public. I mean, they could be consuming anything, but it's really as members of the public that I'm looking at them.
Q. I'm just having trouble understanding the difference between consumers and the public. Isn't that one and the same?
A. No.
Q. Isn't anybody in the public really a
potential consumer?
THE WITNESS: Well, again, maybe. But that's not -- that's not my focus. My focus is on them as citizens who are informed about issues of the day.
77
You can look at people in many different ways, but the important thing here is to look at them as people who get access to information, who read information, who see information, who are informed about what's going on, who are learning about what's going on.
What they consume isn't really my focus, whether they, you know, consume X or Y. I'm looking at them as members of the public who receive information about issues of the day.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And that has nothing to do with whether or not they decide to buy a cigarette or not?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, the only thing I can say is that Mr. Hiott did smoke cigarettes, and so in that sense, you know, there is some -- that's the connection that I'm focused on. You know, what did he say perhaps about his smoking, how did it
relate to what he knew. I mean, those are questions. But, you know, beyond that, no. I mean, what he paid for cigarettes doesn't have much bearing on it, even where he bought them.
I'm interested in what he -- what he -- what he absorbed, to the extent that I can get at it,
78
about the message that was available to him about smoking and the dangers of tobacco.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. If you were writing a book on the history of the tobacco industry, would you then review internal company records?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it would depend on what type of history one was writing. Sometimes people would; sometimes they wouldn't. It's just too broad a question for me to really answer it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, when you wrote your history in this book about the Bell system and regional business, you certainly looked at internal company records there, didn't you?
A. In this case, I did.
Q. Okay. And did you feel that that material was informative?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it's not a question of what's informative; it's a question of what helps you answer the questions. If I were writing a different sort of book, these sources might not be informative at all.
79
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you believe that a company's records document its history?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it could be used to do a --1 wouldn't say it documents its history. I'm not sure what documenting history is.
I think if -- like in the statement you read from the American Historical Association, these are documents that historians can use to do certain types of historical research. There's no documenting of history. There are documents -there are different types of documents for different types of historical research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let me show you -- I'm sorry. This page did
not get copied, so I'm going to use the real thing here. It is page XIII in your book, and it's called "The AT&T Corporate Archives," okay?
It says: "AT&T's policy is," quote, "to preserve all company records and artifacts that document its history."
A. Yes.
Q. Would you disagree with that statement?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
80
THE WITNESS: I didn't write that. That's -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I understand.
A. Yeah. I mean --Q. But as a historian -A. Yeah.
Q. --do you believe that internal records of a company and artifacts document the company's history?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, what I'd say is they can part of a way of -- documents could be used for different types of history that can be part of the story. AT&T might feel these are part of the way it documents history.
I don't think a historian would say they're the only documents of the history or that they are the documents of the history.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Now, in connection with your research in this case to render your opinions, did you conduct any research on how cigarettes were portrayed in TV shows during the time that you were concerned with? A. I have some material on TV shows.
Q. And what generally do you have?
A. Generally, I have -- again, since my focus
81
was on issues of health and danger, I have some examples from different TV shows at different times that -- that discuss the issue of smoking and its health effects and it could be difficult to quit smoking. And it covers a -- TV shows; it covers a fairly long period of time, '60s, 70s, '80s.
Q. Were there some TV shows that portrayed smoking as something sort of cool to do?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Whether it was cool or not is not my focus. I was looking at things that had to do with discussions about cigarettes and health.
Q. So in other words, how a character in the TV show looked or acted when smoking was not your focus?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: How a character acted. I mean, again, if it was -- if it was related to something about health and cigarettes and addiction or habit, then it might be.
But in general, just in general, someone smoking wouldn't really -- wouldn't be that informative or wouldn't inform me of those issues.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What if the character was -- in the show was
82
saying something like, I just love these cigarettes.
These taste so good. I feel so good when I smoke these cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would that be something of interest to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Not unless it was perhaps in the context of something dealing with health or -- you know, I would really have to see that exact clip.
I mean, this is a case, I think, where the context of something is really crucial, so just pulling something out of context, I'd feel uncomfortable really commenting very much on that. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What if a character on a TV show were smoking and said, These are so good for you. I love smoking cigarettes. They're so healthy for you.
What would you think of that?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would give the same answer. You know, I don't know if that character is saying that in the context of some of a show that's actually saying, you know, that they're bad for
83
you, or I don't know --1 don't know really anything about it. So it's just very hard in the abstract to give an answer to that that's anything more than guesswork.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. But it potentially could be relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I would really have to look specifically at a document or an image or a
clip to be able to say that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would you say the same is true of movies?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah, I think that's right. I think they're similar.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. All right. Did you conduct any research on the cigarette ads placed -- cigarette ads played on TV during the time period at issue?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I mean, I did not find that a very easy thing to get to.
I think you can find some things on -- now, in particular, and, quite recently, and Internet --
84
in the Internet archives.
I didn't find a -- a way to systematically research that the way I could research other materials, so, you know, since my focus was not advertising, but public awareness, whereas in other cases advertising would be part of the medium -you know, if you look at old TV shows, you don't necessarily see advertising, though.
But again, since I wasn't focused on advertising, looking for advertising in and of itself didn't seem to be a very -- didn't seem, really, the direction that I should do research in.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What if a particular ad on a TV show said something similar to what I referred to before? You have, you know, a cowboy or somebody standing there smoking cigarettes and saying, These are great for you. You should smoke these because they're very healthy, and you'll -- your sinuses will clear right up with this menthol.
Would that be relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, without actually seeing something, you're asking me to speculate about documents.
85
I mean, as a historian, I really tend to make conclusions only based on actually seeing it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, I'm giving you exactly what was said -A. Okay. Yeah -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Q. -- that it's just a cowboy standing there next to his horse.
A. I really wouldn't feel comfortable giving any -- offering any opinion on that without actually seeing it.
Q. You have no opinion at all, whatsoever, whether that would even potentially be something relevant to you, to your opinions?
A. Well, I -
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: -- really try and be very systematic in my research. And just throwing something, or even describing it --1 mean, I wouldn't --1 wouldn't accept someone's describing a document to me as part of my methodology, so I would really have to see it before I could even comment.
86
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So your reliance materials don't include any cigarette ads played during TV at this time?
A. I don't believe there are any -- no, I don't believe there are any.
Q. Did you conduct any research on the cigarette ads on the radio during the time at issue?
A. I mean, again, cigarette ads, it was not a focus of my research, because I didn't see them as being part of the issue I was studying, which is -public health advertising, I see as a separate category.
Again, I don't believe that radio advertisements --1 don't have a lot of material on radio. I haven't found a way to get to it.
I'm sure there were public service announcements about smoking and discussion of the Surgeon General's report. There were probably ads as well.
But I have no body of research that I can say I've looked at systematically about radio.
Q. So if there were a public service announcement on the radio that said, This is a public service announcement. We want you to understand that smoking is dangerous, and it can cause very bad and
87
serious health effects. And you really ought to think very seriously about not smoking, because it's not good for you, would you consider that to be something relevant to you?
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Public service announcements --1 do have some TV public service announcements, so I certainly consider public service announcements relevant.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. But the flip side, where somebody comes on as a paid advertisement by Reynolds and says, These are great for you; you should smoke these; they're so good for your health, you can't say with any certainty whatsoever that that would be of any interest to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: All right. What I would disagree with is your characterization of it as the flip side.
I see them as two different things. I see a public service announcement is very much a discussion of public health issues, and advertisement is not -- is not a credible authoritative source on health issues.
88
And again, without seeing it specifically -most of the ads I saw, at least in the print media,
had nothing to do with public health or health or the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think advertising by the tobacco companies affects people's knowledge, the public's knowledge, about smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, that's a little too broad.
My focus was not on public knowledge of smoking. My focus was on the health dangers of smoking.
I did look at advertisements. I certainly saw them, considered them.
But as I saw it, they did not have an effect on the ability of the public to know the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And that would be true even if an advertisement specifically said, These are good for you. Smoke them?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, are you talking about
89
one advertisement? You know, I don't know. I'd
have to really see the advertisement. I didn't see an advertisement that said that, that said, These are good for you and smoke them. I don't -- you know, I don't know without actually seeing it and seeing it really in the context of where did it appear? Did it appear? How did it -- you know, I can't really give you an answer to that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I'm just trying to pose a hypothetical to you, which I think is a fair question -A. Okay.
Q. -- you know, and I'm trying to give you, you know, the very basic context, which in radio, there would be very little else to tell you, because it is just a voice that comes out and says, you know, I'm so-and-so.
You can use any famous person you want. I like cigarettes. I like to smoke cigarettes. I think they taste great. And they're -- they're great -- the menthol is great if you have a cold.
Would you feel that what I just said right there -- and you don't need anything else, because it's only a radio; it's only a voice, and if that is what it said, would you feel that that is something
that could affect the public's knowledge of the health issues or dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, I think the problem I'm having is that I don't --1 didn't --1 have a particular way of doing historical research, which I think is the way most historians follow it, and they don't -- it's very dangerous to talk about, well, this one little thing here, would that affect it, and you have to look at the whole information in context. All right? You have to look at all of the different sources of information, you know, whether one thing in that is important is, I think, really impossible to determine. You really have to look -- as I did, you have to look at everything; you have to -- you know, everything that appears before you as best as possible. If you pull one or two things out, I don't think you're actually doing a valid historical research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let's look back at what we marked as Exhibit 3, which is the expert disclosure.
A. Okay.
MS. POLLACK: Off the record.
(Off the record.)
Q. So we're back on Exhibit 3 now, which is the expert disclosure.
Underneath -- this is page -- on the bottom, it has page 53?
A. Right.
Q. Okay. And then on the top of that page, it says "Subject Matter and Substance of Expert Testimony."
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. It says down towards the bottom of the first paragraph: "Dr. Lipartito is also expected to testify that high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of cigarette smoking notwithstanding the presence of cigarette advertising and tobacco company statements in the public media."
A. Correct.
Q. Is that fair to say, that's going to be part of your testimony?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So does this suggest that you did some sort of analysis of the effect of cigarette advertising on public awareness about the dangers of cigarette smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think - as I said, certainly, I saw cigarette advertising. I thought about what cigarette advertising -- if it might or might not be relevant. We're talking just about cigarette advertising in that sentence, just to be clear.
I determined that cigarette advertising would not affect the ability of the public to know about the dangers of smoking and tobacco.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So what sort of -- was that the extent of your analysis in order to come to this conclusion, that high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of cigarette smoking notwithstanding the presence of cigarette advertising? And I will stop there.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Right. Notwithstanding.
In other words, there were ads. I certainly saw ads. You know, I considered ads, and I just -in my opinion, they just aren't really that -they're not really able to affect the public awareness about the dangers of smoking. That, I do
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you would say that cigarette advertising does not in any way affect public awareness about the dangers of smoking; is that fair to say?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Again, what I said before, I've looked at the advertisements; I considered them. I don't think they changed the message the public got. I don't think they stopped the public from getting the message.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And the sole method that you have of coming to that conclusion is just your opinion?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, looking at cigarettes -yeah. I saw cigarette advertising. I considered cigarette advertising. What I saw was that cigarette advertising would not affect public awareness.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And I'm just asking you is the sole basis for your conclusion that it did not -- that advertising
did not affect public awareness about the dangers of cigarette smoking, is the sole reason you say that and the sole source of your evidence on that, you just
94
feel that it didn't?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, no. I mean, again, just in the same way that I looked at many, many sources of information that were available. For example, in my research methodology, you know, to the extent that I could, I looked at everything that related to cigarettes and tobacco, say, in a newspaper or a magazine. I didn't limit myself. I said, Okay, if you are reading this source of information, what are you going to say that relates to? It could be about the tobacco crop; it could be about tobacco prices. I don't think tobacco crop information had any effect on public awareness. I don't think the stock price of tobacco, you know, affected public awareness.
But I think when you -- when you considered the entire corpus of information, the body of information in, say, a newspaper or a magazine, and some of that's going to be advertising, and you
look at all of that and you say, Well, what's the overall message here that relates to issues of smoking and health, I think it's very clear.
The overall message is cigarettes are dangerous. You know, scientists have determined
95
the credible sources are not cigarette advertising.
These are the things -- that they're the things that relate to the dangers of smoking.
And I think there is evidence again, when you look at, say, Mr. Hiott, that he got that message.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think that it's possible that Mr. Hiott saw some advertising and got the message that he should smoke cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's just a hypothetical. In my opinion, he got the message, and he understood that smoking was bad for his health.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And you know that because of what?
A. Well, I think statements that he made about smoking and health to coworkers, to his child, that his -- his friends and family believe he understood.
I mean, we can't know exactly what someone believes at
every given moment, but I think we do have some evidence that he, in fact, understood this for much of his life -- you know, as far back as we can see.
Q. So you feel that you are able to say with fairly good certainty that he understood the dangers of smoking, but you're not willing to say that he saw
96
any kind of ads and was affected by those to smoke?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: All right. Well, I can answer one part of that question.
I think he probably did see ads. I would never say that someone didn't see ads.
But I have no evidence that the ads -- if he did see ads, that they affected his decision to smoke.
And in any case, my focus is really on what he knew about the dangers of what he was doing, of smoking, and I think there's evidence in the record -- certainly there's evidence that he saw lots of messages on that and that there's some evidence that he did, in fact, get that message.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Just going back to your disclosure here, do
you have any sources that you're going to rely on for your conclusion that high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of cigarette smoking notwithstanding the presence of cigarette advertising?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I think it's - all of my reliance material is what I base it on.
97
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, your reliance material, as far as I understand, relates to what was out in the public and what the public knew about the dangers of smoking.
A. Right.
Q. And I'm just trying to understand how you are concluding that, notwithstanding advertising.
A. Right.
Q. That's the part I'm having trouble understanding, because you really only didn't -- you really didn't look at that much advertising. You said you looked at some things -A. Right.
Q. -- but you didn't look at everything.
And you aren't referring me to any studies or anything that say cigarette advertising has no effect
on what people know about the dangers of smoking. A. Right.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form to the extent it was a question.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I guess I'm having trouble understanding.
What are you -- what you are saying?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, my question is, what evidence do you
98
have that you're going to cite at trial to back up your statement that high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of cigarette smoking notwithstanding the presence of cigarette advertising?
A. Okay. So again, I mean, I looked at everything in the various media that related to cigarette smoking. I then considered all of that, including advertising; certainly if advertising appeared in the things that I looked at, I saw the advertising in relation also to statements by scientists or the Surgeon General. So I have an ability to look at the entire body of messages.
In addition to that, we actually do have statements that the public received the message,
statements from the Surgeon General, from scientists doing research.
We have the specifics in Mr. Hiott's case of him receiving the message. We have public opinion polls about people receiving the message.
So I guess by notwithstanding, that is to say, well, we know there was advertising --1 certainly would admit there was advertising -- there was advertising, but the public received the message. That's exactly what I mean by that.
Yes, there was advertising, but the public
99
received the message. And we have evidence they received the message, and we can even look at how that message was communicated.
Q. Is the purpose of advertising of cigarettes to sell cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I mean, I'm not an expert on advertising or cigarette advertising.
I -- you know, some general sense, but, really, I'm not studying advertising.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I understand.
I'm just asking generally, even as a
layperson, is the point of cigarette advertising to sell the product?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, I wouldn't feel comfortable just answering as a layperson. I would try to stick to the things that I can feel confident as an expert on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, you're the one who brought in cigarette advertising here, so I'm just trying to, you know, understand how you -- you know, what studies did you do to determine that there was public awareness
100
despite cigarette advertising, in other words, you're making the statement that the public awareness counterbalanced the -- strike that.
You're making a statement that the cigarette advertising was basically ineffective, saying, Buy this product; this is a great product, versus what the public awareness was of the dangers of smoking.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I'm not saying that at all. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So then what are you -- what are you
saying here?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Exactly what I said here and what I said before; that there was cigarette advertising, but that didn't have an effect on the message that the public received about the dangers of smoking; that there was advertising, but the public received the message that smoking was dangerous to their health.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you're saying the public didn't believe the advertising?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
101
THE WITNESS: I'm not saying anything about what the public believed about advertising. I'm just saying what I said.
There was advertising. That was certainly part of what was in the media, as there were other stories about tobacco and not smoking.
But the message about the dangers was clear, prevalent, pervasive, and there's evidence the public received it.
Q. Now, if you're saying the message about the dangers, isn't that from any source?
A. Well, again, I mean, I think the sources that I looked at, which are in my --in my material, are the ones that I think were -- the effective ones are the ones that I have in my reliance material.
So I'm not sure what -- I'm just having trouble with what you mean by "any source."
Q. Let's take it this way: The rest of that sentence says: "Dr. Lipartito is also expected to testify that high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of cigarette smoking notwithstanding the presence of cigarette advertising and tobacco companies' statements in the public media."
A. Right.
102
Q. So from that, I take it to mean that you're saying that despite the fact that tobacco company representatives disagreed that there were dangers to smoking, the public still believed and knew that there were dangers to smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Let me maybe put it in the way I see it.
Q. Okay. Go ahead.
A. That there were -- again, there were tobacco company statements in the media on occasion.
The statements that I read said that they believed that the link between cigarettes and cancer had not been definitively proved. The statements appeared on occasion, but that they did not -- they did not stop the message about the dangers of smoking from being clear, pervasive, and from getting through to the public and, again, in this case of Mr. Hiott, specifically to him.
Q. So you're saying nobody believed the cigarette companies' statements?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, that's not what I am saying.
103
What I'm saying is that -- that the cigarette companies said what they said, but that didn't stop the public from knowing about the dangers of smoking and cigarettes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, if you have on the one hand some public information that says, you know, Cigarettes are bad
for you or they could cause cancer and then you have tobacco companies' statements saying, That's not proven; We don't know that, and then you have cigarette ads saying, Smoke this product. It's wonderful; it is a great product, and you're saying you've come to the conclusion out of those three things out there, that people ignored the cigarette ads, and they ignored the tobacco companies' statements and that they instead believed that there were dangers to smoking.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I mean, that's what I take from this sentence.
MR. HARRISON: Form.
THE WITNESS: Okay. Well, again, let me go back to my -- my research and my methodology.
I don't see, for example, advertising as
104
being comparable to statements by doctors, public health officials, Surgeon General, that -- that the evidence that smoking causes cancer is clear. I don't see advertising, really, as addressing that any more than an advertisement for a car or
addressing the issue of whether you should wear seat belts. I think that these are two different things. That's number one.
And again, I think I've answered the question about -- about where advertising played in the body of the material that I've reviewed.
I think in there was also a question about cigarette companies' statements.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yeah.
A. Maybe we could -- could you state that again, just individually, so I can address that?
Q. Well, let me go back to what you said about the doctors.
Weren't there ads by the cigarette companies that showed doctors smoking and that said, More doctors smoke this brand of cigarettes. Isn't that great? You should spoke them too.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah-
105
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is that relevant to your analysis?
A. There were some early advertisements that featured doctors; that they did not address the issue
of smoking and cancer, smoking and emphysema, smoking and bronchitis. Yes, there certainly were some doctors that appeared in ads. But I don't think that really was related to the issues that I'm discussing about the health dangers of smoking.
Q. So you don't think that sends a message to the public about -- about whether smoking is an issue in health when you have a doctor saying, I'm a doctor;
I smoke these cigarettes? That's not relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. That's not relevant to what the public took away from that?
A. Again, if there were doctors in ads, you know, it did not stop the public from getting the message very clearly that smoking was not good for them.
Q. What do you think the public believed?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, I don't really know what the public believed. The public is far too
106
broad.
I mean, I really focused on this case,
Mr. Hiott, what he believed.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, we've sort of been talking for about two hours about what the public believed -A. Right.
Q. -- and knew, but now you just said you're not interested in the public.
A. Well, actually, I disagree with you.
We've been talking about what information was available for the public and whether they heard that message.
Now, what people may have believed about things is really a whole other area for which it's -you know, it's very difficult for me or anyone to make conclusive statements.
Q. So you're only interested in what was available to the public that discussed smoking and health?
A. No, no. I've certainly looked at, say, polls about public belief, and I've looked at statements by people who made claims about belief.
But I would say that -- A, that they are two different things; that -- that what matters first is
107
that do people know? Were they informed? Were they
aware?
Now, if they choose to believe, you know, that's a very individual decision, but I think the most important thing is that they knew, that they knew what the story was.
Q. So in your mind, you're not concerned in this case with what people believed; you're only concerned with what they had access to?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Again, I think I said I did look at belief, and I've certainly looked at evidence of belief in the case of Mr. Hiott. But I think they are two different things.
And I think that what we have very strong evidence on is knowledge, awareness, understanding, belief -- you know, people can believe that the earth is not round, but I don't think anyone can deny that they know that everyone thinks and everyone talks about the earth being round.
You know, I mean, that's -- I'm trying to just make it clear that I think individual belief is one thing, but knowledge is a little bit different.
Q. And you don't think cigarette advertising affects people's knowledge?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Not about public health issues, not about the dangers of smoking, not about cancer, emphysema, no.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you're not an expert in advertising?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not an expert in advertising.
All I can tell you is I looked at advertising in the context of the whole body of information available about smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And you came to the conclusion that notwithstanding advertising, there was a high level of public awareness about the dangers of smoking?
A. Yes, that's what I say.
Q. But you're not an expert in advertising?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I'm not an advertising professional. I don't make ads.
I certainly look at ads as part of the
research I do. I think any historian would see advertising as something that's part of history. I considered them. I used them in the way that I felt was appropriate, which was to address the specific issues of public awareness and the dangers of smoking.
MS. POLLACK: Let's look at two ads.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 8 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is Exhibit 8. Have you ever seen this ad before?
A. I can't recall this one in particular. I've seen ads like it.
Q. Okay. My understanding is this one is from around 1961.
A. Okay.
Q. It's an ad for Winston filters.
Do you generally understand that there came a time when the cigarette companies started putting filters on their cigarettes?
A. I do understand that filtered cigarettes were introduced, I think, in the 1950s.
Q. And do you know why filtered cigarettes were introduced?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I mean, I understand that people started smoking filtered cigarettes, and companies produced filtered cigarettes for them.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Why?
A. Specifically, I couldn't give you a definitive answer. I think there were probably a variety of reasons that people wanted filtered cigarettes.
Q. Like what?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It could have been taste; it could have been, you know, a variety of things.
I think some of it also was related to the awareness that -- that nicotine and tars in cigarettes, which have long been understood as being part of the -- part of the cigarettes, were some of the possible reasons or cancer-causing agents and that there were attempts to filter to reduce the levels of tar and nicotine cigarettes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So would you say that the addition of the
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Ill
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I mean, again, what I would say is that people became concerned about the facts of tars in cigarettes, and the filtering was one way in which people responded to that awareness, by trying to -- and, indeed, doctors and public health officials said it would be a good idea to reduce the amount of tar and nicotine in cigarettes, and so cigarettes were produced with filters and with lower tar and nicotine.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think that is relevant to your opinions that a filter went on the cigarettes; that had something to do with the way the public viewed the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it is some further indication that the public had gotten the message about the dangers of smoking.
And again, I would point out this was some of the things the public health officials were saying as well.
Q. And were the filters a way to allay those concerns in some respect about the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
112
THE WITNESS: Well, again, as I understood it, that this was something that people believed and public health officials believed might be a way of reducing the dangers of smoking. That's what was discussed in the newspapers and media at the time.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you know if Winston was one of the first filtered cigarettes?
A. No, I really don't know.
Q. So do you think that this type of ad, talking about extolling the virtues of the filter, would have any effect on what the public believed about the health issues of cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, I would see it more, I think, as a reflection of what the public knew and perhaps evidence that the message had got through to the public.
Q. And wasn't part of that message that -- smoke filters and that will be safer for you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think, again, some people believed that and some people were told that.
113
There was a time when doctors and public health officials were saying that this might be a way to reduce the risks, but I think the important thing is that the risks were understood; the risks were known by the public; the public was responding to those risks.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And wasn't the public responding to the filter by thinking that that was going to allow them to continue to smoke?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't - I don't know that. I think -- again, what I can infer from this in my research is that this is evidence that the message that the -- specifically the tars in tobacco were dangerous, carcinogenic perhaps, and it depends on what period of time.
You said '61, so I'd say probably they were thinking about cancer and that the response to that
was to say, you know, that filtered -- that there was an effort to promote, on the part of public health officials, to reduced tar in cigarettes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And wasn't it also the tobacco companies that were promoting the filter?
114
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think what they were doing is responding to what was out there.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let's look at this ad here.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 9 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this says: "Salem refreshes naturally."
I think this was from about 1972 or so.
A. Um-hum.
Q. And I guess it would be, since it's got the warning on the bottom.
A. Um-hum.
Q. And it says "natural menthol is why."
Now, in your opinion, do you think when somebody calls something natural that they're trying
to make some sort of a statement about it being more healthy?
MR. HARRISON: Object.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I have no opinion on that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So do you have any opinion as to whether calling something natural in an advertisement would
115
have any effect on what the public believes about the dangers of cigarette smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I really didn't study advertisements. I studied public health issues, so this is not something I have an opinion on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Right.
But this -- this statement that you have in your expert disclosure says that "Notwithstanding things like this, there was a high level of public awareness about the dangers of smoking."
A. Um-hum.
Q. And I'm just asking you if -- you know, if you saw this, would you -- would you say that it had no effect on -- on public awareness about the dangers
of cigarette smoking?
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I mean, I would - I would have looked at this again in the context of all of the other information; I would have seen this, including the warning, right down there at the bottom.
Now, as far as the fact that there was an advertisement for smoking -- in fact, there were
116
certainly advertisements, but I don't think they had an effect that stopped the public from understanding that smoking was dangerous.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Didn't the cigarette companies want that to be the effect, that people bought them anyway?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I really don't know.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So that's not part of what you are looking at, whether cigarette companies, by their advertising, wanted people to ignore the warnings?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
is not on anyone's wants. My focus is on what information is out there.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. You've sort of been referring throughout the morning as to what Mr. Hiott actually knew about the health dangers of smoking while he was alive.
Are you going to be testifying as to what Mr. Hiott actually knew about the health dangers of smoking?
A. Well, I am going to talk about the evidence
117
that I have, that indicates he received the message about the dangers of smoking.
Q. Okay. And I think you said before that that was based on what other people have testified that he said to them.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It is based partly on that.
It's based also on things that he said to other people.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Right. That's what I just said.
A. Oh, sorry. Okay. I thought you said what -maybe you better ask the question again.
Q. Okay. I think you said that the -- the way that you're going to prove what Mr. Hiott knew about the dangers of smoking was because you're going to point to depositions of other people, where they say, those people say, Mr. Hiott told me blank.
A. All right. Well, no. That's -- that's part of it. That's certainly part of it.
I'm also, of course, going to look at things -- messages that he received at different points in his life.
Q. And you know that he received those messages how?
118
A. Well, because of where he lived, because of where he went to school, because of what he studied in school, because of things that were going on around him in his life.
Q. But you can't be sure that he saw any particular thing, right?
A. There may be a few things that we can be a bit more sure of, but it's very hard to point to any one article or document of a historic record that I'm looking at that says, He absolutely saw this.
I think there may be a few things, but I
would have to really go back through the depositions. We don't -- you know, we don't have him to ask, but -or even at deposition to ask.
Q. You never met him, right?
A. No, I never met him.
Q. So you can't be sure that he actually saw something that said, "Cigarette smoking is dangerous"? MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think that this is sort of a very common matter of historical methodology, that historians deal with people in the past. We don't meet them; we can't talk to them. But that doesn't mean we can't have historical certainty about things that happened in
119
their life or the things that they -- that they saw.
I think we can -- like all science, I think history can only deal in probabilities. But when you get to extremely high probabilities, then I think you can draw a, you know, historical conclusion.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you're making some inferences here.
THE WITNESS: Well, looking at data. I'm looking at information that was very much a part of his world.
Again, I think like any historical question, like any reasonable scientific method, you -you -- no one can say for absolute certainty in a philosophical sense, but you deal in probabilities, the same way doctors or scientists deal. And I would say, based on that -- you know, I can say to a degree of historical certainty that he received messages about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, do you view the role of a historian as giving opinions on what a particular individual knew, his subjective perceptions, at a specific point in
120
time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, the word "subjective" is causing me to pause for a minute.
I mean, again, we have -- we have some evidence of things that he said or it was -- he was reported to say. In that sense, I would say that's subjective.
But I think in the sense of probing his mind,
I don't think anyone can do that for anyone, really.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I think my question was just a little bit different, which is, do you view the role of a historian as giving opinions on what a particular individual knew at a particular time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: There could be a role for that, depending on what you're trying to do.
I think in my case, what I'm trying to understand is -- say, in Mr. Hiott's case, something about what he, you know, knew or would have been exposed to.
I mean, your question is very broad, so I'm just trying to say in this case, I think what I can
121
do is connect the information that was there to the life experiences and life of Mr. Hiott to things that he said to other people and things that he -that he said during his life. That's what I concluded.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And I'm just trying to understand -- you
know, you're being put forward as an expert on history -A. Um-hum.
Q. -- as a historian, and what the public knew.
And I'm trying to understand how -- how you're going to give expert testimony on what Mr. Hiott, as a person, knew.
A. I think I just answered that. I have evidence, like as a member of the public, what he would have been exposed to. I have evidence specifically from his life of things that -- that were available to him. I have evidence from what people reported about him -- him having said, all of which add up to confidence that he saw and received the messages about the dangers of smoking.
Q. I'm just trying to understand if that's -- if that's sort of a role that a historian would play.
And maybe you can give me some professional
122
standards that you can point to which would -- which would qualify you to render an opinion as to what Mr. Hiott actually knew when he was alive.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
he actually knew when he was alive.
I think, again, I said that an -- a historian can certainly go back and look at the record and the available information, and they can find out where that information went. They can find out -they can relate the flow and sources of information to a person living in a particular place, growing up in a particular time, living in a certain sort of lifestyle.
I think that any historian can use historical methodology to do that and to therefore have a very high degree of confidence that Mr. Hiott was part of the public and that he would have been exposed to these messages.
In addition, in a more biographical way, I think we can look at evidence from his life that -that link those messages and that information to experiences that he had; and then finally, with -at least with depositions in particular, we can get some sense from others around him about those
123
messages being received by Mr. Hiott.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. I'm just trying to understand, you know, how your role as a historian qualifies you to
discuss the evidence about what Mr. Hiott knew as opposed to what was going on in history at the time, and you're making the link between what was available to him versus what he actually knew.
MR. HARRISON: Objection.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And that's why I'm trying trouble understanding what -- why -- why you should be able to opine on that -MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. -- as a historian.
A. Well, I mean, again, one more time, I think I'm doing exactly what historians do all the time, which is that they look at the evidence from the past. They look at people living at that time. They start to form opinions about what information was available. They begin to have confidence that this message was widely available and received by the public. Now, you know, that's one thing.
Then to get to Mr. Hiott, by looking
124
specifically at his life, I can make the connections between the information that was available, the things
that he would have likely seen and the evidence that he actually did see some of these things.
But again, it's -- it has to be --1 think for anyone, it has to be probabilities.
But I think it's -- or I feel confident that my -- my certainty is at a level that I would feel confident making a similar statement about -- about other things that I've studied and other things that I know.
Q. Okay. So you're -- let me understand this:
You feel confident saying that -- that Mr. Hiott definitely knew the dangers of smoking and all that that entails. He understood all of that. You feel comfortable saying he understood all of the aspects of the dangers of smoking.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I didn't say that.
Again, what I said was, I believe he understood that smoking was dangerous. I believe that he understood that there were warnings about the dangers of smoking. I believe that he saw, throughout his life, messages of people telling him that smoking could shorten his life or increase his
risk for cancer.
I believe he conveyed that sense of knowledge to other people during his lifetime. That gives me a high confidence that he received the message.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, are you comfortable testifying as to what else Kenny knew, for example, about advertising that he saw; that perhaps in Kenny's mind, yes, he knew it was dangerous on some level; maybe he had heard it was dangerous on some level, but perhaps the advertising was just so powerful that it won the day over the dangers?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you able to testify about that? Because you seem to be able to testify about what he knew, and that could encompass, could it not, things he saw on TV about people being portrayed as rugged people smoking and people in advertising being portrayed as -- you know, as advertising from things like the menthol ad that we just saw?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I mean, whether he saw ads or whether he -- whether he looked at ads or not, it didn't stop him from getting the message
about the dangers of smoking.
In fact, he -- there is very little evidence that I can see of him ever mentioning cigarette ads except -- actually, the one time I can remember was to actually sort of make -- make fun of Winston ads, so...
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. How did he make fun of Winston ads?
A. I think there was a joke that he told his coworkers -- they told him about this pun on, Winston taste good, like a cigarette should.
I mean, I don't know that that --1 mean, I'm just saying that's -- that's the one thing I recall, whether there's actually some evidence in the record about his relationship to advertising.
Q. Would you say that it's -- in your view, that there's no testimony about him recalling an ad for a cigarette manufacturer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, that's the one I remember, the Winston ad, and the joke that they used to make about it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you know if Kenny ever smoked Viceroy? A. I think in one deposition, there was some
talk about him perhaps smoking some Viceroy cigarettes, but that's -- that's all I know.
Q. Okay. Did you read the testimony of Reverend Ricks?
A. I did.
Q. And do you recall the discussion about "The Thinking Man's Cigarette?"
A. Oh, that's right.
There was another joke they used to make about Viceroy, so I was thinking of the Winston one, but, yes, they also used to joke about the ad -- the ad for Viceroy.
But I think -- again, from just what I remember about the depositions, if he smoked Viceroy, it must have been very little, because everyone said he smoked Winston.
Q. But there was a discussion, was there not, by Reverend Ricks where they used to -- him and Kenny used to joke around that it was "The Thinking Man's Cigarette," correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think I did - I think I did say that, yes. I do recall them making jokes about "The Thinking Man's Cigarette."
Q. Now, doesn't that indicate that Kenny saw some advertising about Viceroy cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. How would he know that?
A. Maybe he --1 don't know. I really don't know. I mean, all I can tell you is in that deposition, they used to joke around about that.
Q. Okay. And the reason I bring it up is because you're claiming that you knew -- you're saying you -- you are able to say within a reasonable degree of certainty what he knew about the dangers of smoking, and yet you're unable to say whether he counterbalanced that with positive ads about being "The Thinking Man's Cigarette" or some other kind of ads, which could have potentially lessened the seriousness in his mind of the dangers of smoking, and I'm just trying to point out that you're saying that you're confident that you can say what Kenny knew.
But you really can't say what Kenny knew, could you?
THE WITNESS: I didn't say that I could say that he knew. I could say that I had confidence
129
that he had seen and received the messages about the dangers of smoking. Whether he saw ads or whether he made jokes about ads, that doesn't change my opinion that he saw and received the messages about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And what if in Kenny's mind the powerful cigarette ads just overpowered that completely and he couldn't even believe it, really?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is that relevant to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's really just speculation. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But isn't your opinion just speculation?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. No. My opinion is an informed opinion based on research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And which research is that?
A. The research that's in my reliance material.
Q. So the research in your reliance material tells you what Kenny was thinking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
130
THE WITNESS: Well, among other things. It tells me what was generally available to the public. It tells me about his life and what he was exposed to and what he knew. I never said thinking. I said that awareness, knowledge, information. I don't think anyone can get into someone's mind and go through all of the things that they may be thinking. That really is in the realm of speculation.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But isn't awareness a function of all of the different things that you take in about a particular thing? I mean, he may have been aware that there was dangers of smoking, but we don't know the extent of the awareness. We don't know whether he believed it caused cancer or whether he knew it caused cancer.
Doesn't awareness really take in a big spectrum of things that he could have, in his mind, known about, and you really can't testify to that, can you?
THE WITNESS: No. I think awareness is very much about, you know, Here's a message. Cigarettes are dangerous, you know. Is this person -- is it -- is it, A, likely to a reasonable degree of
131
historical certainty that they saw and received that message?
What they might have done with it, again, as you move further into the realm of what's going on in someone's mind, I don't think anyone can say that.
What we do have is some evidence, at least on the issues of the dangers of smoking, that the message seems to have been received. People said, Of course he knew. People said -- Reverend Ricks,
I believe, was very confident that they had talked about the issues of dangers of smoking, and they even made a joke about smoking and then getting, I think, like a chest X-ray.
I mean, I think these actually are pretty good evidence, you know, reinforcing my sense that he received the message.
MS. POLLACK: Let's take a look at this and mark it.
(The document was marked as Defendants'
Exhibit 10 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this is around 1958. This sort of refers to Viceroy. "Only Viceroy Has a Thinking Man's Filter ... A Smoking Man's Taste."
132
And this is probably one of the types of ads that he and Reverend Ricks were joking about, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. You don't know. Okay.
Well, they did make a joke about the Thinking Man's Filter, right?
A. Or "The Thinking Man's Cigarette," I think, as I recall.
Q. "The Thinking Man's Cigarette."
A. That's what I recall.
Q. Okay. Now, do you think that this ad, as it stands here, makes any suggestion to the public that it was safer to smoke a cigarette with a filter, and you were smarter if you smoked a filtered cigarette?
THE WITNESS: Just looking at this ad now and giving you my sort of personal opinion, I would say no.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So this doesn't have any bearing, in your mind, on what the public knew about the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
133
THE WITNESS: I think it was like a lot of advertising. It certainly was there, but I don't think it was what --1 don't think that it had any effect on stopping the very strong message from authorities on public health who were speaking directly about the issue of the dangers of smoking, no. I don't think that this really -- this --1 don't think advertising like this or any other ads that I saw negated that message, stopped that message from being clear and consistent and getting through.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And the same is true with the tobacco companies' representatives who said things like the Surgeon General reports are misleading; they're not true; they're not proven?
THE WITNESS: Well, again, what I recall the tobacco companies said about the Surgeon General's report was something to the effect of, We knew this already, and we're -- we believe that -- that further evidence is needed.
Those statements were there, certainly, but they were clearly -- if you read documents and read the newspapers, they were relatively small. And
134
they were, I believe, quite overwhelmed by the very strong statements -- headlines, statements by authorities, that I think the public would trust more on health issues than companies. And so that's what I think.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Just along the lines of talking about Mr. Hiott personally, what television shows did Mr. Hiott watch?
A. I believe the one that I recall -- and I don't know if there were others -- was actually Gunsmoke of television shows, and he also watched the television news. I'd have to go back and sort of look to see exactly which ones he saw.
Q. Would it jog your memory if I said he watched Walter Cronkite?
A. It could be, you know, Walter Cronkite. I was trying to remember if it was ABC, NBC, or CBS, but Cronkite sounds familiar, I think.
Q. Let's start with Gunsmoke.
(The document was marked as Defendants'
Exhibit 11 for identification.)
MS. POLLACK: Actually, let me mark this one, too, as 12.
(The document was marked as Defendants'
135
Exhibit 12 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So Exhibits 11 and 12, have you ever seen these before?
A. I don't think I've seen these.
Q. So -
A. I don't know where they appeared, so...
Q. Do you know about when Gunsmoke was on TV ? A. It was on for a long time. That, I recall.
Q. Maybe the '50s to the '70s, something like that?
A. Vaguely, I think that's about right, but I'm not positive.
Q. So Exhibit 11 shows James Amess. It says: "Best wishes, James Amess." And then it says: "L&M Presents Gunsmoke."
So L&M was, I guess, the cigarette manufacturer, correct?
A. L&M is the cigarette manufacturer.
Q. So they were -- they were sponsoring the Gunsmoke show?
A. Apparently, though I don't know what time period we're talking about.
Q. At some point, from this ad?
A. It seems like that at some point.
136
Q. And this shows Mr. Arness with a cigarette in his hand, correct?
A. Yes, it does.
Q. Do you know if Mr. Amess was a cigarette smoker?
A. The actor, I don't. I don't know.
Q. Well, he certainly has a cigarette in his hand here, correct?
A. He does.
Q. He does.
Okay. And then in Exhibit 12, it says:
"James Amess, Star of Gunsmoke" at the top, right?
A. Um-hum.
Q. And it says: "Puff by puff, less tars" -A. I'm sorry. Which one are we on?
Q. 12.
A. Oh, sorry.
Q. It says: "Puff by puff, less tars, more taste. That's today's L&M."
Then it says in the comer -- underneath his picture, it says: "Be sure to watch L&M's Gunsmoke on your CBS TV station every Saturday."
A. Um-hum.
Q. So Gunsmoke was a show that Mr. Hiott watched, correct?
137
A. At some point in his life.
Q. Okay. And these ads -- I'm just giving you two examples of some ads that feature James Amess, star of Gunsmoke, with a cigarette in his hand promoting L&M cigarettes, correct?
A. These are ads with James Amess and L&M cigarettes.
Q. Okay. Now, isn't it possible that Mr. Hiott saw things like this?
THE WITNESS: Things like this or these themselves?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, it's possible he saw these particular ads, isn't it?
A. It is possible. But I don't know when these ads are from. I don't know when -- when -- when --Q. We know Gunsmoke ran during the entirety of his lifetime?
MR. HARRISON: Can he finish his answer?
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Again, I don't know when these ads were from.
And if Gunsmoke --if this was from --1 think it was the early '60s, he might have been 10 years old. I really don't know. There's no date.
138
There's no context, nor do I know where these ads appeared. I don't recall seeing them, for example, in the Waycross newspaper, which he would have read growing up and as a young man. So I don't see these as relevant at all.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, you have no way of knowing 100 percent for sure anything that Mr. Hiott saw, because he's not
here to ask, correct?
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I think we can be more certain. We see things in the medium that he read or if we see things that are related to his life in some way, like the Times.
He was actually watching Gunsmoke. These are not -- these do not -- these are not parts of Gunsmoke. These are advertisements with an actor who appeared in Gunsmoke at some undetermined time. I really can't comment on them beyond that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, my only question is to you, is it possible that he saw ads similar to this and took note of the fact that Mr. Amess was promoting cigarettes and was in these ads with a cigarette in his hand?
MR. HARRISON: Object to fomi.
139
THE WITNESS: I suppose anything is possible.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And so you don't -- you don't know that it's -- strike that.
So it is possible that Kenny was influenced by the fact that one of the characters in a show that he watched was featured with a cigarette his hand?
THE WITNESS: I guess I don't work that way.
I mean, I actually look at materials that I think is relevant to what I'm studying, not some ad from somewhere at some time that maybe someone might have seen.
I actually looked through the documentation of things that -- that Mr. Hiott was exposed to.
That, I think, is the basis for forming opinions, not some ads somewhere from some time.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, let's take it a little bit farther out than --a little broader than Mr. Hiott himself.
Let's just talk about the public generally. Okay?
A. Okay.
Q. So somebody somewhere saw these ads, correct? MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Probably, yes.
140
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Pretty high -- like you said, there's a pretty high likelihood that somebody somewhere saw these ads?
A. I guess if you put it that way, someone --
somebody somewhere.
Q. And this is a famous person holding a cigarette and encouraging people to smoke?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Does that affect the public's awareness of the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I think like all ads, they are -- they are certainly a part of the medium that -- that appears before the public. I don't believe that they change the message or the reception of the message or the availability of the message.
And I believe advertisements have to be read in the context of the time and place they appeared, and I believe they have to also be considered in light of all of the other forms of information that people received about the dangers of smoking.
141
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did R.J. Reynolds sponsor sporting events?
A. I don't know.
Q. Did R.J. Reynolds sponsor sporting events
that Mr. Hiott attended?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall any references to that in what I know about.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did Mr. Hiott like to watch car racing?
A. I think there was some discussion of car racing. I can't recall specifically beyond that.
Q. Do you know if he ever went to Daytona to see the NASCAR races?
A. I'm not recalling that. It's possible. I mean, there's a lot of depositions here. That's not one I recall off the top of my head.
MR. HARRISON: If you're trying to -- if you're looking for it, you want to show it to him, if you point to the page, we have --he has copies of all of the depos.
MS. POLLACK: Yes. And then we can mark it.
MR. HARRISON: Yeah.
MS. POLLACK: I was going to mark it, but I guess it's not really necessary since you have it
142
in front of you.
let's find it through the stack.
MS. POLLACK: Sure. Okay. So look at Linda Beverly.
THE WITNESS: It's close to the top. It's further down.
MR. HARRISON: Here is Volume 1.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. It is page 243.
A. Yes.
Q. And it says -- toward the bottom.
"Question: Let's talk about the car races.
How often did you and Kenny go to the car races? "Answer: Well, best I can remember, we went two or three times with his sister, Elaine, and Leon, her husband.
"Question: Is that two or three times over the entire course of your marriage?
"Answer: Yes, yes.
"Question: Were they here local?
"Answer: No. They were in -- gosh. I can't remember. It was in Florida where they have the big car races.
"Question: Daytona?
"Answer: Daytona."
So does that refresh your recollection that they went to the Daytona car races?
A. Okay. Sure.
Q. And to your knowledge, if -- like you said, the big car races, is that perhaps suggestive of NASCAR?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not a real expert on NASCAR, so I couldn't tell you.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you know who the sponsor of NASCAR racing was for a very long time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Did you ever hear of something called "The Winston Cup"?
A. It rings a bell.
Q. And are you familiar with the fact that RJR, Reynolds, sponsored the NASCAR races called "The Winston Cup"?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not, no. I'm not familiar with that.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 13 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is from NASCAR.com, and it's a news article.
A. Okay.
Q. And I'm just going to point you to the first -- the very first paragraph of the article.
A. Okay.
Q. Where it says: "The beginning of the end came on February 5th, 2003, in the form of a news release that rocked the NASCAR world. R.J. Reynolds, the tobacco company based in Winston-Salem, NC, had backed the sports premier division for 32 years. In the history of major American sports, there had never been a more symbiotic relationship between league and sponsor, entities in this case so intertwined that it was sometimes difficult to tell where one ended and the other began. RJR's red and white colors were as ubiquitous in the garage area as tires and fuel.
Winston was NASCAR and NASCAR was Winston, and an arrangement of any other type was simply unthinkable."
I'm just trying to see if that refreshes your recollection at all as to the sponsorship by Reynolds
of NASCAR called "The Winston Cup."
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I don't really have a memory. All I know is I've heard of something called "The Winston Cup," I believe, or I think I know -- it was connected to racing. And beyond that, that's all I know.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you believe that Mr. Hiott potentially was influenced by the fact that he was attending NASCAR in Daytona, which was called "The Winston Cup"?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. There's no evidence of that that I see.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. There's no evidence that he was influenced by -- by the advertising and the sponsorship?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Right. You asked and I said no. I see no evidence of that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Do you believe that this type of sponsorship by a tobacco company affects the public's perceptions about smoking?
THE WITNESS: Again, I would sort of say I don't know about smoking.
What I know about is the health effects, risks, dangers, diseases, caused by smoking, and in that regard, I don't see --1 don't see influence.
But I don't -- you know, it's not -- it's not something that I believe is part of the public awareness. I think it has much more to do with other things.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think that sponsorships such as this affect sales?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't really know about sales. It's not something I studied.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think R.J. Reynolds intends to influence people to buy its cigarettes through sponsorships such as this?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: It's not really an area I have any expertise in.
Q. Do you think R.J. Reynolds intends to affect the public's perception of the dangers of smoking
147
through sponsorships such as this?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Again, the research I do is about the things I think convey directly to the public the message, I think, about the dangers of smoking. What you've just told me is just kind of speculation. I try not to indulge in speculation.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So as a historian, you don't feel that it's pertinent to your research that -- the fact that R.J. Reynolds has sponsorships of sporting events?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, it may be a fact, but again, I think what matters is what is available to the public discussing the dangers of smoking. Sponsoring sporting events is not part of that -that body of information.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So is it your -- is it going to be your testimony at trial that only things that specifically discuss the dangers of smoking can affect the public's opinion about the dangers of smoking?
THE WITNESS: Well, I think certainly you have to look at things that discuss the dangers of
148
smoking and give them a lot of weight. I think there are other things that -- that are part of that. I think the things that I've -- again, if you want to begin with the -- as it were, the most important body of research and begin with the things that are most directly, then you branch out.
But I believe the things that I look at, one way or another, reference those -- those issues.
Now, there are other things out there. We've talked about ads. You've mentioned sponsoring sporting events. They're certainly there. But they don't stop the public from getting the message, because the message, I think, is loud, clear, and pervasive.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And you don't think that it was equally loud, clear, and pervasive that -- from the advertising that people should smoke?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't know about
should smoke, but what I do know is about smoking is going to cause cancer and other diseases.
That's what I focused on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do ads encourage people to smoke?
149
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, that's something that's not really my area of expertise.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I'm just trying to understand how you can completely carve out so much other information that was strongly out there in the public, like advertising and sponsorships, and only look at what was -- what actually discussed in words the dangers of smoking.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it's not just words, but -- but again, I think, first of all, if you're going to talk about what's the -- what's the available information and what can the public learn and know and see about the dangers of smoking, you should look at the sources that address that. I think that's just basic historical methodology.
As I said, I certainly would consider other things that appear that were related to tobacco or
cigarette companies as I read my material, but advertising, I believe, is really in another realm.
And I think sponsorship as well; you know, what ads are trying to do, what ads might be doing, that's a different issue. You know, I'm not -- I'm not claiming to be a global expert on -- on
150
advertising. I can simply say I see it as part of the information that I read about. I can see it as being in the media, what I read.
But I think the message is both -- are loud and clear, whatever sponsorship or advertising is out there.
MS. POLLACK: Let's mark this document.
(The document was marked as Defendants' Exhibit 14 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. This says on the top of the --1 guess it's kind of the second page -- "1975 marketing plans presentation. Hilton Head. September 30th, 1974." Okay? This is an internal R.J. Reynolds document. Have you ever seen this?
A. No, this, I have not seen.
marketing objective in 1975 and ensuing years is to reestablish RJR's share of marketing growth in the domestic cigarette industry. We will speak to four key opportunity areas to accomplish this.
"They are, one: Increase our young adult franchise."
Are you aware that Reynolds was targeting the young adults in their marketing?
151
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. The only thing I can say is that's what it says here.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And then underneath that, if you skip 2, 3, and 4, it says: "First let's look at the growing importance of the young adults in the cigarette market. In 1960, this young adult market, the 14-to-24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population. As seen by this chart, they will represent 27 percent of the population in 1975. They represent tomorrow's cigarette business.
"As this 14-to-24 age group matures, they will account for a key share of the total cigarette volume for at least the next 25 years."
Okay. Now, if you look at -- I'm trying to
figure out how can I get you to this page. Oh, let's go one -- after that page, go one, two, three, four, five, six pages, where it says "Chart No. 15."
A. All right.
Q. Actually not the double-sided, the single sides.
A. Got you.
Q. Chart No. 15 says "Special Events, Winston." And it says: "Each of our major special events is
152
directed against young adults. NASCAR with Winston reaches 8 million spectators with 63 percent of these under 35 years of age.
"Our participation takes two forms. The Winston Cup, Winston West Series, with 55 races, primarily in the Southeast and California; the Modified Sportsman, with 60 races in the Northeast and Midwest."
Then it says: "Thus, NASCAR gives Winston national coverage."
Do you have any understanding of what "national coverage" refers to there?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
of all, read the whole document before I would be prepared to comment on any of that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure. Well, I guess my question is, did R.J. Reynolds feel through this document, this marketing document, that sponsoring The Winston Cup was giving it national coverage throughout the United States for its product?
MR. HARRISON: I object to the form, and that is my only objection at this point.
THE WITNESS: Okay. Yeah. I mean, you
153
know...
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you understand. If you can make a comment.
A. I, again, would not feel comfortable commenting on one sentence from a long document. I would have to really read whole thing before I could give you much of a thoughtful answer to that.
Q. I think we talked a minute ago -- a little while ago about Walter Cronkite, that Kenny used to watch Walter Cronkite, correct?
A. That seems to have been one of the stations he watched.
Q. Do you know if R.J. Reynolds sponsored Walter Cronkite's broadcast?
A. I don't know. I don't, off the top of my head, know that one way or the other.
(The document was marked as Defendants'
Exhibit 15 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you'd turn -- this is a news article called "Lost Empire."
A. Um-hum.
Q. If you'd turn to the second page -- actually, it's down at the bottom of the first page.
154
"The slogan's first appearance was in a Pittsburgh newspaper in September 1954," and the slogan, I think, refers to: "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should." It says: "It would hit LIFE magazine the next month. During the summer, Winston took over as sponsor of Walter Cronkite's morning news show."
Does that refresh your recollection at all as to whether RJR or Winston specifically was a sponsor of Walter Cronkite's news show?
A. Again, all I can see is what it says here
from this document. That's all I can tell you.
Q. So if Mr. Hiott was a watcher of Walter Cronkite, might he have been exposed to a sponsorship by Winston cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think we can -- can say that.
To begin with, I don't know the -- of the credibility of this particular document. I don't know when they sponsored Walter Cronkite. He might have been a -- before he was bom or when he was a small child. So just beginning there, I really wouldn't feel comfortable going any further without more knowledge about it.
155
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If it's true that Winston was a sponsor of Walter Cronkite's news broadcast during Kenny's life, particularly his adult life, when he would have watched Walter Cronkite, would you say that he could potentially have been exposed to a sponsorship by Winston on the news show that he watched?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think he would have seen -- as we said, with advertisements, he
probably saw advertisements, sponsorship. That's true.
But I don't think that has anything to do with the fact that he also heard Walter Cronkite reporting on the Surgeon General's report or on the dangers of smoking. I don't see those two things as really related.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you're not able to say for certain that he didn't balance out in his mind the fact that there was a newscast that talked about the dangers of smoking and that he put that next to all the positive things that he had heard about smoking, right? You can't say for certain that he didn't do this balancing and come out, in his mind, on balance, that cigarette
156
smoking was okay in the end and that he wouldn't get cancer from it?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I really have no comment on that. That's a whole list of speculations that I really have no way to comment on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
that he knew all of the dangers of smoking.
A. Well, again, what I said was he was aware of the dangers of smoking. He was aware it was a health risk. Whether he chose to continue or other things that have to do with him internally, I'm not commenting on.
All I'm saying is that the message was there; that he got the message; he saw the message again and again. And there's evidence that he had -- he understood the message, and he conveyed that to other people.
Q. Now, when did the label first go on the -MR. HARRISON: If you're going to change gears, do you want to do lunch? It's 12:30.
MS. POLLACK: Sure.
(Off the record.)
157
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. We've been talking a lot about public awareness, and I know you used that term throughout your expert disclosure, correct?
A. Um-hum.
Q. Does the public that you're talking about there equally include children?
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, yes. I think in the broadest sense that it includes children. It depends what age, I think, we're talking about a little bit.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Why don't I ask it the other way: When you say "public awareness," in your expert disclosure, what age group do you include in the word "public" ?
A. Yeah. I mean -- you know, again, in theory, the public, I think, in the broadest sense does include everybody, but I think if we're talking about things that make people aware, you know, that are based on reading, for example, then it's -- it's -those -- those things may not affect or be related to a very small child.
On the other hand, some of the material that I have that deals with education and schools would
158
include very young children.
So some of the -- some of the television public service announcements would be more -- you know, would probably include children. So it's going to vary a little bit by the nature of the material.
But probably not infants, you know, preschool age children, three, four, five, you know. I mean, I think it's -- it's kind of a matter of degree, I guess is what I would say, in terms of what sorts of levels of awareness the people would have at different ages.
Q. Is there a particular age, in your mind, where people of a certain age may not process the information in the same way? For example, if somebody -- if a 10-year-old is exposed to a piece of paper that says Smoking is bad for your health versus a 40-year-old, who is exposed to the same piece of paper that says Smoking is bad for your health, does that make a difference in your analysis?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I would say - I'm not sure about process information, but I guess I would say that, you know, different people see things at different ages, and there are different ways of getting messages.
So a child's -- well, a 10-year old, I think,
159
could see, you know, smoking is bad for your health and pretty much get the message like an adult, but in addition to that, I think some of this is -they're getting some of these messages in material
that's more also age-appropriate, like an elementary school textbook.
They're also hearing it from, you know, parents. So for different people, different media and forms of information are going to perhaps be more important in their life, and others are going to be less important.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you think advertising affects children more than it affects adults in certain respects?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It's not something I have an opinion on. I don't have any expertise on those matters.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you have an understanding of the typical age when people start to smoke?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think probably the best way to answer that question is that in the documents that I've seen from different cases that I've been
160
involved in and, to some extent, materials that I've read, I have a general understanding that some
people begin smoking in their teenage years and some people a bit later. So I don't know that I have an average age in mind, no.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you familiar with the first label that went onto the pack of cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. The warning label.
A. The first warning label? Yes, I'm familiar with it.
Q. And do you know around when that went on?
A. 1966,1 believe.
Q. And what did it say?
A. Sorry. I'm just thinking about the various labels that I have seen. But I think that's the -and I probably have the words a little bit off -- "The Surgeon General has determined that smoking is harmful to your health."
Q. Okay. What if I told you it said "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health"?
A. Okay. That sounds familiar as well. I'm trying to remember which said which.
161
Q. Okay. So let's assume that I'm accurate.
And we'll look at it in a minute.
"Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." What do understand that to mean?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do I understand it to mean?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yes.
A. I think exactly what it says. If you smoke, you know, you are endangering your health. You may -you're increasing your odds or you may get certain diseases.
Q. Does it say you're endangering your health, or does it say it may be hazardous?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it says what it says. It says it may be hazardous.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Does that mean it will be hazardous?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, again, it says what it says. It could be "will"; it could be "may." I think it's making a pretty straightforward statement.
Q. Do you think if it said "Cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health" is different than "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health"?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Is hazardous? They're certainly different statements. You know, there might be some small difference in there, but I think the basic message is pretty much the same, the basic message about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you think somebody saying "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health" is the same message as somebody saying "Cigarette smoking is hazardous. There's no safe cigarette"?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Right. I mean, again, I can just say that compared -- you compared "may" and "is."
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. That's right.
A. And I'm just saying that the difference is -there may be some difference, but I don't think it's particularly significant. I think the message is basically still the same.
Q. Did the cigarette companies think that was a big difference? Did they fight for the language that says "may be hazardous"?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know, and it really doesn't matter to me if they did. The message that went on, it was there and available for everyone to see.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Now, does -- the -- saying "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health," does that say anything about cigarette addiction?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it talks about health. There is certainly a long tradition in the literature about addiction or habit-forming or hard to quit as being one of the issues discussed in relation to cigarettes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So when you say, you know, in your expert disclosure that you're prepared to testify or you're going to testify about the fact that there was widespread public awareness about the dangers of cigarette smoking, does that include the dangers of addiction?
A. Yes, it does include that.
Q. And was the fact that cigarette smoking is addictive, as well known as the -- during the entire time that you claim it was known, that it caused cancer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You have to ask it again. I'm sorry.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yes. That was a bad question. I will do it again.
Is it going to be your testimony that the hazards of smoking included that it caused cancer and other diseases as part of what you claim is the awareness of the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I would say that certainly cancer is among the things that are specifically discussed and, more generally, that cigarette smoking was -- was unhealthy, shortened life, caused a number of diseases, could lead you to have cancer if you continued to smoke.
Q. And it's going to be your position that that was well known and widespread in the public eye during
165
the entirety of the time that you're discussing here, from the --1 guess you would say the entirety of the 1900s?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think the specific messages about health change over time. I think that there is, over the entirety, information available to the public that was widespread about cigarette smoking being unhealthy.
I think knowledge of specific diseases evolved over time so that essentially more and more diseases were added to the list of things, most notably, of course, in the 1950s, cancer, lung cancer, and then other forms of cancer, emphysema, heart disease, that -- yes, so I think that answers your question. You might want to ask me again.
I'm not sure.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. That's fine.
And my next follow-up question is: During the entirety of the time that you contend that the public was well aware of the diseases caused by
cancer -- excuse me -- caused by smoking, was it also equally well known that cigarettes are addictive?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to form.
166
THE WITNESS: Well, I think the - the only thing I would be -- qualified a little bit is the word "addiction," because I think different language was used it at different times in concept, and that's really more of a medical issue, as to what constitutes addiction.
What I can say is, again, if you go back in the documents of the history of public awareness, that you find -- alongside discussions of health and longevity effects and disease, you find words like "habit-forming" and "hard to quit," and even stronger language sometimes, "a slave to nicotine, you know, all sorts of language.
Now, sometimes they used the word "addiction"; sometimes they didn't use the word "addiction."
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is it your belief that Mr. Hiott thought he was addicted to cigarettes and couldn't quit?
THE WITNESS: I don't think that I have ever made a comment on that. I think -- it's my belief that he understood that cigarettes were hard to quit; that he understood that that was a danger of smoking cigarettes.
167
I don't recall anything where he said he was addicted, or I don't recall perhaps even others saying he was addicted. But, you know, I would have to look at every deposition to know if there was some language like that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. What is your basis for your testimony that Mr. Hiott understood the dangers of addiction?
A. There --no. I'm going to forget what I was going to refer to.
I can't quite recall now. But I believe he has statements when he was talking to his son about starting would be hard to stop, but I have to say right now, I can't recall that. I would have to go back and really look.
Q. Okay. So let's assume that you're right and that he told his son, I'm addicted, and, you know, you shouldn't start because you can get addicted too.
THE WITNESS: That's not what I was saying. I think he may have said that starting cigarettes could be difficult to stop. I don't know that he said he was addicted. I don't recall him saying that.
168
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Would it change anything for you if he said he was addicted?
A. I don't think it would change the questions about public awareness.
Q. Would it change anything for you about Mr. Hiott's awareness?
A. His awareness, if he were addicted? If he were addicted, I think his awareness would still be his awareness.
Q. Is it going to be your testimony at trial that Mr. Hiott was aware before he started to smoke that smoking caused cancer?
A. I think we have pretty good evidence that he received messages in his daily life before he was 16 years old and certainly soon after he had perhaps smoked his first cigarette, strong messages about the
dangers of smoking.
Q. Now, when did he first start to smoke? How old was he?
A. What I recall is his wife said he was 16.
Someone else may have said he was 15. It's a little unclear. But sometime between the 15th and 16th years.
Q. And you believe that he knew that smoking was
169
very bad for you and you could die from it and he chose to smoke anyway?
A. I don't know what he chose to do. I do believe he received messages in his school and the newspaper. He would have heard about the Surgeon General's report. He would have seen -- he would have had lots of opportunities to receive the warnings. If he began at 16, that would have been 1967, '68. If he began in those years, he would have already had warnings on the cigarette packages that he was -- that he was smoking. So he would have had lots of exposure to the message.
Q. Is it going to be your testimony at trial that Mr. Hiott was aware before he started to smoke that smoking cigarettes is addictive?
messages were conveyed along with the dangers of smoking in, for example, textbooks he would have used in his health classes in school, you know, messages that were broadcast out about the dangers of smoking, that he would have seen Surgeon General's report and things of that sort.
Q. And you're pretty clear that all of those things that were around before he started to smoke, so sometime before 1966, that those things were clear,
170
that smoking is addictive?
A. Well, again -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think the language is really important here.
I don't necessarily know that people used the word "addictive" in the same way we did, and I think that's -- that's part of the process I did the historical research on, was to understand the context. People might not have said "addictive," or they might have said "addictive," because sometimes you do find the word "addictive" in books and articles.
But what seems clear is that whatever we
might mean by "addictive" today, at that time people used the language that indicated if you start smoking, it's going to be difficult for you to break the habit or to stop smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And it's going to be your testimony at trial that Mr. Hiott understood that cigarettes were addictive and could kill you, but he chose to smoke anyway?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, that's not going to be my
171
testimony.
I'm going to say that the messages were available to him and all of the public. They were widespread and widely available.
There is evidence that he received these messages. He saw these messages numerous times and that there's evidence that he absorbed the significance and meaning of the message.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you have an opinion as to why someone would choose to smoke if they are so clear on the fact that they could die from it and that it's addictive?
THE WITNESS: No, I don't have an opinion on that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Now, you're saying that he knew of the dangers. What exactly did he know of the dangers?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, the messages he would have been receiving were about the dangers of contracting lung cancer and other forms of cancer, the effect on lung and heart, the shortening of life, and then, of course, additional information on other diseases as time went on.
172
You know, he himself talked about the fact, for example, to his son specifically that smoking was unhealthy, and it was bad for you and it was dangerous.
So my understanding is that this -- in my understanding, this indicates that he had got the message, the many messages, really, about the various dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And when did he talk to his son about smoking?
A. Well, his son was bom --1 believe his son was bom in --Q. I think the son was bom in the '80s sometime. It could be '81.
A. All right. I was thinking '78. You could be right.
Q. '80,'81?
A. '80,'81.
Q. So he would have been talking to his son in the '80s whereas he started smoking in the '60s?
A. That's tme.
Q. Okay. So that evidence doesn't really pertain to prior to when he started smoking, right?
MR. HARRISON: Object to fomi.
173
THE WITNESS: Well, we don't know -- we don't know that he --1 don't think you can say that he only knew when he talked to his son; that's evidence -- that is evidence that he did know.
Now, when -- when before that he may have -he may have come to understand that, no, his talking to his son doesn't directly bear on that.
But there's -- there's other evidence from an earlier period of time that he talked to coworkers, you know, made statements that indicated that he --
he knew the stories about cigarettes and cancer.
He knew that, you know, he could possibly be someone who could get cancer.
So we do have knowledge that goes back before -- before that about -- about him.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So the only evidence that you have prior to his starting smoking that he knew that smoking was dangerous is by your conclusion that he must have seen the textbooks in school; he must have seen information out in the world?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I think this goes back to what I said before.
Historians can never be 100 percent certain
174
about things, but we can say with a strong degree of certainty that given the information and environment, that he would have seen these materials.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And -- and the same goes for the -the fact that it's addictive?
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think that was part of the information that -- that he was receiving about the health dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So other than the information that was out there in the wild about the fact that smoking is habit-forming or it's addictive and that could lead to serious illness, you don't have any other evidence that he knew that smoking was addictive before he started smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm just -- sorry. It's going to take me a while to think about what you said. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. That's fine.
A. I mean, any -- any other -- it's the other evidence --1 mean, the evidence comes from the
175
messages that he was receiving, that I am very confident that he saw as a member of the public because of the pervasiveness of the messages.
He did -- he did -- I'm just going back in his biography a little bit.
He did hear from his mother that she did not approve of smoking, that she did not -- she was
antismoking.
I can't recall off the top of my head if there was in that -- in that a discussion of habit-forming or addictive nature, but I know he did receive some communications as a young child and a young adult or teenager from his mother about smoking and kind of an antismoking message from her.
I would have to sort of think more about what I read about his life, although I can't quite give you a full answer off the top of my head right now.
Q. Let's take a look at this.
MS. POLLACK: I'm going to mark it as a single exhibit.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 16 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So this is something that I downloaded from Reynolds' current website.
176
A. Um-hum.
Q. Have you ever seen Reynolds' Web site?
A. The company's Web site?
Q. Yes, R.J. Reynolds's?
don't recall it.
Q. So what I did was I copied the page where it says "innovative in our thinking." It says "transforming tobacco," and then if you skip down, it says -A. Oh, sorry.
Q. Oh, sorry.
See where it says "transforming tobacco"?
A. Yes.
Q. Then if you look underneath that, in green it says: "Here's what we believe."
A. Okay.
Q. So if you click on to that, you come to this next page, which is "Guiding Principles and Beliefs."
A. Okay.
Q. So underneath "tobacco use and health," the first bullet says: "Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States. Cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic
177
bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and adverse health conditions."
A. Um-hum.
course of your research what is available to the public and what the public knows about cancer, correct, about smoking and the health effects of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I've been - right. The information available to the public about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Is this, in your view, information that's available to the public on the dangers of smoking currently?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Currently? It's -- again, you tell me it's from their Web site. I would assume that you're saying it's a public Web site.
If it is -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. It is a public Web site.
A. --a public Web Site, then in that sense, it's theoretically available to the public.
178
Q. Now, as I said, this is what pops up under "Here's what we believe."
So should a reader of this believe that R J. Reynolds thinks cigarette smoking causes cancer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you tell me again where you're pointing to?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yeah. That first bullet -A. Right.
Q. -- "cigarette smoking is a leading cause," blah, blah, blah.
A. Okay. So you're saying if you click that, it would bring you to page 2 here?
Q. That's right -A. Okay.
Q. -- under "Guiding Principles and Beliefs."
A. Um-hum. Um-hum. Yes. I think--could you ask the question again?
Q. Sure. I wanted to know if you think that somebody who reads this will be imparted with knowledge that R.J. Reynolds believes that cigarette smoking causes cancer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, I think you could say
179
could draw.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this is a statement by R.J. Reynolds, and this could affect what the public believes or knows about the dangers of cigarette smoking, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, again, in theory, it could today. You know, I can't really say, because I'd have to do the same type of analysis for the present that I've done for the past. So, you know, in the sense that it could be information that's available to the public and it could have an effect on the public, but just looking at it here, I don't have the full context that I have for the other material that I looked at, so it's -- you know, it's just one thing. It's not part of a whole body of research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, this is available to millions of people all over the world, right?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. On the Web site?
A. It's on the Web site.
Q. It's on their public Web site?
A. If you say it's on the Web site, it's on the Web site.
Q. Well, you can see. It says "RJRT.com," so that's where we got it.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, I'm looking at a printout, and you say it's from a Web site. I don't know anything about that Web site, how it's constructed. I -- you know, in theory, it could be available, but it's not something I can really give much of an opinion on. I don't have the Web site in front of me. I haven't done any research that involves this or other contemporary sources of information.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you know when R.J. Reynolds first publicly admitted that smoking causes cancer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What I do know is that RJR Reynolds put on its cigarettes in 1966 warnings that it could cause health effects and that later --1 don't remember the exact sequence of dates, but sometime in the '70s, there were other warnings that involved cancer. I'm sorry. I can't
give you the dates of all of the different warnings at this point.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And to your knowledge, did RJR employees make statements in the press publicly to the effect that there was actually not a proven link between cancer and cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Reynolds?
Sitting here now, I can't say for certain which statements Reynolds' employees may have made.
I have seen statements from, I think, some tobacco companies, but I can't really give you a definitive statement on what Reynolds said. I just can't remember who was who in the statements that were made.
MS. POLLACK: Let's mark this.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 17 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do you recognize this?
A. I'm trying to think. Let me read it.
I don't know if I recognize this particular article.
I have read the Fort Lauderdale News. The
general sort of -- the general nature of the article is somewhat familiar, but whether I've seen this particular one, I can't really recall right now.
Q. Okay. Let's look at -- let's see. It looks like the third column down.
A. Paragraph or column?
Q. Column.
A. Okay.
Q. It says: "David Fishel, public relations director for R.J. Reynolds -A. Got it.
Q. -- "said the reaction of the health organizations is another example why there is a need for us to state our position on some of these issues.
He said his company is not claiming that smoking is good or beneficial.
What we are saying is that the statistics raise questions that need to be answered, he said, adding that 30 scientists identified before Congressional committees in 1982 and 1983 that it was an open issue."
So this is a Reynolds public relations director stating that the link between cancer and
smoking is an open issue.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
183
THE WITNESS: Yeah. You know, there's some statement to that in an article that also has the American Cancer Society and the American Lung Association saying that the evidence is overwhelming. It has the director of the Connecticut commissioner for health services saying the debate is over.
So, yes, there is a statement that's in the larger article in which the -- there are also many other statements to the contrary and that emphasize, once again, that the disease is caused by smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So in your view, the reader walks away from this saying, R.J. Reynolds is just wrong; there's no way it's an open issue, and it's completely done and decided. And it causes cancer?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know --1 don't know what the reader walks away from. All I'm saying is that there's plenty of information here that emphasizes, as I've said, the widespread public
knowledge and availability of information about the dangers. This is one article out of probably hundreds or even thousands that would have appeared
184
on smoking in this time period, so it's there.
But in my opinion, it cannot overcome the vast majority of other articles, including information embedded in this very article about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So in your mind, it's sort of almost irrelevant that somebody from RJ. Reynolds is saying it's an open issue because the rest of the article talks about that there is a link.
So you'd say that it completely overpowers the R.J. Reynolds -- the R.J. Reynolds statement?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I'm saying is that even in this article, there's plenty of information to the contrary, but this is only one of many, many, many, many articles that I read or ones --1 don't know if it was this one in particular, but -that I read that -- in which there was no statement by Reynolds or anybody else and that there's only
information about the dangers.
So I did look at the number of times statements like this appeared by members of tobacco companies. They are, in my opinion, small and insignificant in the larger scheme of information.
185
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, this came from your own reliance materials, just so you know.
A. Sure. I'm not surprised.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 18 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Have you seen this before?
A. I have.
Q. And what is this, to your knowledge?
A. This was a --1 don't know if you'd call it -- it was a statement put into newspapers. This is from Time. So I was going to say probably other print publications that, as it says, "Can we have an open debate about smoking?" And it's put there by the Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Q. Do you know in how many papers it appeared? A. I don't. I don't know. I've seen it in a number of publications.
Q. Do you think they were in mainstream publications? This one says "Time."
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I've seen them in -- you know, again, I can't recall the thousands and thousands of newspapers and pages that I've seen,
186
whether there was one in the Miami Herald or there was one in The New York Times. I do know they appeared in various print media.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And this says "1984." Does that about comport with your recollection?
A. That seems to be about right, yes.
Q. Okay.
A. That seems about right.
Q. Now, this is not in your reliance materials.
A. Okay.
Q. I mean, at least not to my knowledge.
A. Okay.
Q. All right. Unless I'm wrong. You can correct me.
A. As I said, it appeared in a lot of different media. If you say it isn't, you're probably right.
But I did see it a number of times.
Q. So it says: "The issues" -- sorry. It says:
"Can we have an open debate about smoking?"
So who are they talking to here? Who's Reynolds talking to here?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Hard to say, but I guess if it's something that people read, then perhaps
187
they're saying someone who comes across this, it would be then.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So the public? Are they talking to the public?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: To the public.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. It says: "The issues that surround smoking are so complex and so emotional, it's hard to debate them objectively. In fact, many of you probably believe there is nothing to debate. Over the years, you've heard so many negative reports about smoking and health and so little to challenge these reports that you may assume the case against smoking is closed. But this is far from the truth.
"Studies which conclude that smoking causes disease have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary. These scientific findings come from research completely independent of the tobacco industry.
"We at R.J. Reynolds think you will find such evidence very interesting, because we think reasonable people who analyze it may come to see this issue not as a closed case, but as an open controversy."
188
Now, there's nothing else in this add, right?
It's just R.J. Reynolds speaking to the public, saying that there's no -- there's other evidence that suggests that smoking doesn't cause disease.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Sorry.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. My question to you is: Isn't this something that affected what the public -- what information the public had about smoking and health?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It was certainly part of the information that I saw. It appeared one time. It made some statements about what one company
believed. It was sort of a paid placement in a newspaper.
I think with all of that, it's level of credibility with the public would have been extremely low. I think when you balance that against the many, many, many, many other sources of information, again, it -- its effect is probably near zero. And what's more, the fact that they put this did nothing to stop people from getting the other messages, which they got.
189
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. You don't feel like it counterbalanced what the public health officials were trying to do when they say: "The public health officials are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary"?
That's what that says, right?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, that's just one company's opinion, a company that I think the public would have understood was not an objective source of information about health.
BY MS. POLLACK:
completely able to parse that out?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, when you again add in all of the other ways in which the public had access to information that had nothing do with what Reynolds said or any other tobacco company said and when you look at evidence about that people did get the message; that they stopped smoking; that they wrote in saying they knew that smoking was bad for them; that they were going to quit, when you add all of that in, I would say yeah. The evidence is the message got through. These things just had no
190
effect on stopping them.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But a lot of people also started smoking during that time, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: People -- some people did start smoking in -- at what time, actually? I'm sorry.
What time period are you talking about?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, during the time period that you're claiming that the information was out there and that
it completely overpowered things like what I just showed you that Reynolds said publicly.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Some people did start smoking in that period.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Many people did, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't give you a number off-
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Millions, in fact?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Millions started; millions
191
stopped, you know -- yeah. I don't have the numbers at my fingertips.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Wouldn't it make more logical sense if everyone really understood that you could die from smoking and didn't have any question in their mind, that it would only go one way, that people would stop smoking, but no one would start?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
what they do. I don't really get into individual belief.
All can I tell you is that they had the message about the dangers, and if they chose to do that, that's an individual decision.
Before you ask another question, could I stop for a break?
MS. POLLACK: Sure. Of course. You can always have a break.
(Off the record.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, let's look back again at -- oh, gosh. I haven't written down what exhibit number this is, the Web site.
MR. HARRISON: 16? 15.
192
THE WITNESS: 15 - no. Do I have that?
MS. POLLACK: Exhibit 16.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
MS. POLLACK: We might want to just maybe staple that whole Web site together so we know it was one exhibit. I'm going to do the same so I don't confuse myself.
Okay. Now, we're back on Exhibit 16 again,
and -- another part of the Web site, so it's the last two pages.
MR. HARRISON: I think I stapled them in reverse order.
MS. POLLACK: The top page should be what says "Innovative in our thinking."
THE WITNESS: Okay. Okay.
MS. POLLACK: Why don't we start there. Maybe put another sticker on it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you look at the last two pages, the top says "public health information."
A. Yes.
Q. The second to the last page: "Public health information making decisions regarding tobacco use." A. Got it.
Q. So underneath that it says: "R.J. Reynolds
193
Tobacco Company believes that individuals should rely on the conclusions of the U.S. Surgeon General, the Centers for Disease Control, and other public health and medical officials when making decisions regarding smoking. Links to the Web sites of the Surgeon General and other public health officials are provided below?"
And they've got -- after the first bullet, it says "2010 Surgeon General's report; 2006, 2004, Surgeon General's report; previous Surgeon General's reports."
Would you agree that that's stated here?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you seen this on their Web site?
A. No.
Q. Now, there was a time when R.J. Reynolds publicly disagreed with this conclusions of the Surgeon General's reports, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I believe what some tobacco industry people said -- and I can't speak for R.J. Reynolds in particular -- was that they believed that the case that cigarette smoking caused cancer had yet to be fully proven or that they were not certain that it was the case, that
194
cigarette smoking caused cancer.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And we just saw that in the document that I showed you that we marked as Exhibit 18, correct?
THE WITNESS: -- what it actually says here is an open debate about smoking. It talks about evidence, discussion, other studies that may have done, and it says that they are going to make statements in the future on those matters. That's all it really says.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So in your view, Exhibit 18's statements by R.J. Reynolds does not disagree with the conclusions in the Surgeon General's reports to that time period, to that date?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would have to read the whole thing carefully.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure.
A. All right. Yeah. I mean, all it really says is -- it makes a claim that they're going to talk about such matters in the future.
195
It does actually say that there's been lots of negative reports about smoking and health; that many people seem to have read and believed this, so for what that's worth.
It simply says, I think, what they have said before or had said before in other things that I've seen or at least other employees or members of the tobacco companies.
Again, I can't remember exactly what R.J. Reynolds's people said in this, but that -- that in their opinion, their opinion is that it's not conclusively proven, which is what they said, I think, all along.
Q. And isn't that sort of the opposite of what the Surgeon General's reports were saying all along, up until this point, from '64 on?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I mean, again, what the Surgeon General's report, for example, said is that the evidence shows that cigarette smoking is a serious health hazard, and they are saying they don't know.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you don't think that that's disagreeing with the Surgeon General's reports?
196
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
would be saying it's more --1 wouldn't say "disagreeing." I would say it says what it says. They said it's a controversy, and there's other points of view that should be discussed. That's all it really says.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So aren't they saying that the negative reports about smoking and health, okay, that's -that's not a closed case? There's studies which conclude that smoking causes disease, have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary, and you don't -- it even says "to the contrary" in there.
And you don't take that to, in your view, be Reynolds publicly stating that the Surgeon General reports and other things that say that it's decided that smoking is bad for you, is -- you don't think that's disagreeing with that?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, I think it doesn't say, no, they're wrong; we think it's healthful. That would perhaps be more of a disagreement.
I think it says what it says. It says in
197
their opinion, there are unanswered questions,
other things that can be looked at.
But the more important point is this is one statement by one company at one time that exists in a sea of information that says far different things, far stronger things, that are before the public day after day and in multiple media.
So it is what it is, but I don't see how it has any effect that could change the conclusion that the public was well informed.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you're going to be testifying about the conclusion of the public?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I'm going to testify what the public saw, what was available to them, the different ways in which the public learned about the dangers of smoking, to some extent the evidence that the public got the message and that Mr. Hiott got the message. Those are the things I'm going to talk about.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this statement by R.J. Reynolds that we know from at least -- this one says Time Magazine in 1984, and I think you yourself said that it was in
many other prominent papers and magazines. That wasn't a statement to the public that the public would have been exposed to?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I saw this. I looked at it. I considered it, as I just told you. And in my opinion, it did not change the public's awareness or knowledge of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Now, if you look on this, what we just read from the Web site, now it says: "R.J. Reynolds believes that individuals should rely on the conclusions of the U.S. Surgeon General."
That's in Exhibit 16.
A. Okay.
Q. Second to last page.
A. Okay.
Q. Now, this is who has retained you, correct,
R.J. Reynolds?
A. Again, I work with a law firm. I have no direct connection to R.J. Reynolds.
Q. Who do you think is paying your bills?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: My checks come from Jones Day.
Q. And you have no interest whatsoever in who your actual ultimate client is?
A. Well, I don't see them as a client. I see myself as being retained to do historical research. I don't know what Jones Day's internal billing practices are.
I do know that this case in particular does involve someone who smoked a product made by R.J. Reynolds.
But the more important thing to me is not the company or the product that they smoked, but their interest and awareness and any information they received about the dangers of smoking in general, whether it's R.J. Reynolds or anything anyone else.
Q. You understand that in a lawsuit, an expert is hired by one or the other of the parties?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Sort of a legal thing I don't know much about. All I know is that I'm doing research on a question I was asked if I could answer, and I charge for my time to do that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Now, the R.J. Reynolds' Web site is now, as of recent times, directing people who are on
its Web site to the Surgeon General reports, certainly 2010, '6, '4, and previous Surgeon General reports.
Do you think people should rely on the Surgeon General reports to get information about smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I do think is that the Surgeon General reports were part of the information that people got.
MS. POLLACK: Okay. So why don't we take a look at one example of that.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 19 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This is 1989, and I believe this one is, in fact, in your reliance materials, correct?
A. Um-hum, I think so.
Q. Okay. This is only --1 put the cover sheet on here of the -- and by the way, I do have the full -- as painful as it was to bring down here, I have the full one right here. So if you need to look at it for any reason, it's available to you. But I'm only going to mark this one chapter, which is
And if you look at the second page of this
201
exhibit, it says, "Chapter 4: Trends in public beliefs, attitudes, and opinions about smoking."
Do you believe that this is a reflection
of -A. I'm sorry. I'm lost.
Q. Yours is double-sided.
A. Oh, okay.
Q. "Chapter 4: Trends in public beliefs, attitudes, and opinions about smoking."
From a historical perspective, does this document what were the trends in the public beliefs, attitudes, and opinions about smoking as of 1989? A. What's the question?
(Off the record.)
(Whereupon, the deposition continued in Volume 2:)
IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FOURTH JUDICIAL CII IN AND FOR DUVAL COUNTY, FLORIDA CIVIL DIVISION
IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES CASE NO.: 2008-CA- ] TOBACCO LITIGATION	DIVISION: TOBACCO
Pertains to: Carolyn Hiott, as Personal Representative of the Estate of Kenneth Hiott Case No: 08CA391-IXXX ____________/
DEPOSITION OF KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D.
VOLUME 2
April 4, 2012 9:00 a.m. - 5:30 p.m.
19 West Flagler Street Suite 1020 Miami, Florida
Taken before W. THOMAS HUGHES, RPR, RMR, RDR, CRR, FPR-006, and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at large, pursuant to Notice of Taking Deposition.
203
APPEARANCES:
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF: MILBERG LLP
BY: JANINE L. POLLACK, ESQUIRE ONE PENNSYLVANIA PLAZA NEW YORK, NY 10119
ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT RJR: JONES DAY
BY: BRADLEY HARRISON, ESQUIRE 901 LAKESIDE AVENUE CLEVELAND, OHIO 44114-1190
ALSO PRESENT:
PAUL KOETHE, ESQUIRE
204
INDEX
KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D. DIRECT CROSS By Ms. Pollack	4
By Mr. Harrison	335
EXHIBITS
PLAINTIFF'S DESCRIPTION PAGE Exhibit 1 CURRICULUM VITAE	5
Exhibit 2 NOTICE OF DEPOSITION	9
Exhibit 3 EXPERT DISCLOSURE	29
Exhibit 4 COPIES OF DISKS	31
Exhibit 5 RELIANCE LIST	35
Exhibit 6 AHA DOCUMENT	62
Exhibit 7 "THE BELL SYSTEM" DOCUMENT 68 Exhibit 8 WINSTON ADD	109
Exhibit 9 SALEM ADD	114
Exhibit 10 VICEROY ADD	131
Exhibit 11 GUNSMOKE ADD	134
Exhibit 12 L&M ADD	134
Exhibit 13 "INSIDE NASCAR" DOCUMENT 144 Exhibit 14 HILTON HEAD PRESENTATION 150 Exhibit 15 LOST EMPIRE DOCUMENT	153
Exhibit 16 GUIDING PRINCIPLES & BELIEFS 175 Exhibit 17 FORT LAUDERDALE NEW ARTICLE 181 Exhibit 18 "DEBATE ABOUT SMOKING" ARTICLE 185 Exhibit 19 SURGEON GENERAL REPORT - 1989 200
Exhibit 20 SURGEON GENERAL REPORT - 2012 219 Exhibit 21 FTC DOCUMENT	226
Exhibit 22 FTC DOCUMENT	247
Exhibit 23 HILL & KNOWLTON DOCUMENT 264 Exhibit 24 "HISTORY OF WARE COUNTY" 284 Exhibit 25 PHOTOGRAPH	298
Exhibit 26 VARIOUS DOCUMENTS	313
205
PROCEEDINGS
Thereupon,
(The deposition continued from Volume 1:)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Exhibit 19, we've got the cover page of the Surgeon General's report from 1989.
This is in your reliance materials, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. So presumably you've seen Chapter 4 of this book.
A. At some point, I have seen it.
Q. Okay. The next page says "Chapter 4." And it says: "Trends in public beliefs, attitudes, and opinions about smoking."
Is it fair to say that this document is reflective of the public beliefs, attitudes, and
opinions about smoking at or about this time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And why not?
A. Because it is -- it is one document. It is one view of what the public trends about -- the trends in public beliefs and attitudes and opinions were. It
206
is one study of that issue. It is not reflective.
Q. But isn't this one of the things that you're relying on in your reliance materials to prove what people knew at the time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Among many other things.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you're saying that we can't look at Chapter 4 and believe anything in it?
A. No.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm saying we can't look at Chapter 4 and conclude that this is what the public believed.
Q. Okay. But this is in your reliance materials?
A. It certainly something I looked at.
Q. So this is relevant to your opinions?
A. It certainly is something that I used to educate and inform myself.
Q. Okay. Let's look at page 216 of the book, of the exhibit.
A. All right.
Q. Are you able to find that?
207
A. Yes, yes. It's actually marked 216.
But go ahead. Read me --Q. No, no. Literally 216.
MR. HARRISON: Literally page 216.
THE WITNESS: Oh, sorry. Thank you.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sorry about that.
A. It's two different numbers.
Q. Okay.
A. Got it.
Q. So it says "Addiction," correct?
A. In the middle of the page.
Q. Right. Okay.
And it says -- it has a whole bunch of
statistics and things like that, and it's fine if you want to take a look at that paragraph.
And then I'm going to ask you about the last sentence, which says: "These findings suggest that a large proportion of new smokers are unaware of or underestimate the addictive nature of smoking."
A. You said it's the last sentence?
Q. The last sentence of the first paragraph.
A. Oh. The last sentence of the first paragraph. Right. My fault. Yeah. Let me read it. Okay.
208
Q. Okay. So I'm pointing you -- after the document talks about teenagers, okay, who are unaware of the addictive nature of cigarette smoking and who therefore may be tempted to experiment with smoking, it gives a whole bunch of statistics?
A. Hang on. I lost you again.
Q. I'm just reading sort of the first lead-in sentence under "Addiction."
A. Oh, okay.
Q. So I'm saying there's a sentence that says "of particular concern are teenagers, who are unaware of the addictive nature of cigarette smoking and who
therefore may be tempted to experiment with smoking."
And then there's a whole bunch of statistics they talk about.
And then the last sentence, which I gave you time to read -- and the last sentence says: "These findings suggest that a large proportion of new smokers are unaware of or underestimate the addictive nature of smoking."
My question is: Did you consider this data and this paragraph here about addiction in forming your opinions about what the public knew, in your opinions -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
209
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. -- about smoking?
A. Again, I think I've said this is on my reliance list. It's something that I read. I considered it. But I also considered many other things.
Q. Is it relevant, in your view, to what the public knew about the dangers of smoking in 1989?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, it's -- just to be clear, it's actually talking about studies in '74
and '79. So which studies, I don't -- well, I don't know if they're actually in the Surgeon General's report.
It's simply making a statement about some studies show the following things that are summarized. That's certainly information, but it's one small piece of information in a much larger body of information. And it specifically is about the question of studies that talk about some teenagers and aspects of smoking, so it certainly can't inform the whole questions -- the whole set of questions that I addressed. So it is one thing that I read, yes.
210
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And do you disagree with the conclusion there, that these findings suggest that a large proportion of new smokers are unaware of or underestimate the addictive nature of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I think there's other evidence that suggests that people got lots of information about it. You know, these -- these are
just some studies. This is one type of methodology. I think you have to look at all sorts of other sources of information.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, isn't the Surgeon General of the United States concluding what it says here about these findings?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't that a conclusion of the United States Surgeon General?
A. Well, it was a conclusion in a report under the Surgeon General's name in 1989. That is true --Q. Okay.
A. I don't think -- sorry. I was just going to finish -- that historians don't rely on one piece of
211
evidence or one study or one body of opinion, and they have to look at the whole of the range of information, the whole of the sources that are relevant.
Q. Isn't R.J. Reynolds on its own Web site now sending people to the Surgeon General's reports?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Maybe so. But that's is 2010 and this is 1989. I don't see how those are
related or relevant.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, there's a whole list of Surgeon General reports on here. Unfortunately, I don't have the page --1 did not go into where it says "previous Surgeon General's reports." It could very well be 1989. I'm guessing it probably is, because it says "prior to 2004."
A. Yeah. I guess I'm having trouble seeing how this is related to my research, my expertise, or my opinion.
Q. Well, you put it on your reliance materials; that's how it's related.
A. Okay. I told you. Absolutely. I said I read it. It's one thing I looked at.
Q. Okay. So I'm just wondering if you, you know, disagree with the conclusion of the
212
United States Surgeon General in that sentence.
A. Well, again, they are talking about a couple of studies. They're making a -- statements that there's other evidence that suggests other things. I think it's part of the issue.
either that or nothing. I think that's simply one -one piece of evidence in the body of evidence that I looked at.
Q. Let's look at page 219 of the Surgeon General's report. It says at the bottom of the page: "Current gaps in public beliefs about the health effects of smoking."
Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Okay. First sentence says: "Despite the growing level of public knowledge noted above, a substantial number of Americans are still uninformed about or do not believe the health risks of smoking."
Did you take that into account in coming to your conclusions about -- about what people knew about the risks of smoking?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Do you disagree with that statement?
A. I think again, I would say that's -- that's
213
one interpretation of the evidence by one party. I think there's other evidence that would suggest otherwise.
This is a reflection by an organization; that is to say --1 guess it's the department of health and
human services looking at data.
I also looked at data. I also went back to sources over time and looked at evidence.
There's a lot of other evidence that, in fact, people were well informed, including other statements by the Surgeon General at earlier periods of time, different Surgeon General, probably, but at different periods of time.
So again, that's -- it is what it is, but it's only one piece of evidence. I don't think it would be good historical research to take a report written in 1989 as definitive of what historically and over time the public knew.
Q. Let's look at page 221 of this report. And it's about halfway down the page, where it says "Another gap in public knowledge involves teenagers."
Do you see that?
A. I do.
Q. "Youth may understand that smoking is generally harmful to health, but many may not
214
appreciate the addictive nature of smoking or may deny the personal susceptibility."
Do you agree or disagree with that statement?
A. I mean, I think there are multiple things said in this.
I think understanding that smoking is generally harmful to health does comport with other things that I found in my evidence, that the youth do understand it's harmful.
The question of "appreciate," I think, is a little vaguer. I'm not sure exactly what appreciate means in this context, whether people choose not to believe it.
As I said, it's often very difficult to get into issues of personal belief. People do believe different things for different reasons.
So I don't see it as inconsistent with what I'm saying. I think it largely reflects what I found; that there was a widespread public understanding of the harmful effects of smoking among teenagers.
Again, I mean, it partly depends on what period of time we're talking about. I mean, I focused my work in the period really before 1990, so I'm not sure if they're talking about 1989 or if they're talking about 1964. There's just not enough
215
information there for me to draw more of a conclusion than the one I've just given you.
Q. Well, this particular sentence quotes some people from 1987.
A. Okay.
Q. Referring to 1987.
A. Right. One study from 1987.
Q. Skip the Fishbein paragraph and then go into the paragraph after that.
"Persons may have knowledge or beliefs at one level, but not at another. For example, some smokers may be aware of the Surgeon General's reports and accept the general fact that smoking is dangerous, but do not believe that they will be harmed by smoking. The data presented in this report support this concept."
Do you agree or disagree with that sentence?
A. It's possible. But again, the sort of research I did is more like what follows; that 90 percent of smokers believe that smoking is harmful, which is in the next sentence that -- the previous paragraph talks about different ways in which people get information.
So, I mean, again, I think that a lot of this is consistent with what I found as to questions of
belief and what individuals believe.
And whether people can choose to decide to smoke anyway, I don't have any doubt that that can happen. I think that's very much a personal decision.
My concern is: Do they have the information; did they get the information? What they might choose to do with it or what an individual might choose to do with it, I think in the end, it becomes a personal decision.
Q. Let's look at page 223. Do you see where it says "Although empirical evidence is sparse"?
A. No, I don't. The top of the page.
Q. The top of the page.
"Although empirical evidence is sparse, tobacco industry activities, in the form of advertising and promotion, public relations, and lobbying, may interfere with public beliefs and personalized acceptance of the health risks of smoking. Because most individuals may not understand how smoking causes the diseases with which it is associated, many persons may be vulnerable to information that it tempts to cast doubt on such relationships."
Agree or disagree with that?
A. I agree with that's what it says.
But I think what it says is, empirical evidence is sparse. We don't really know. It may be the case.
I think that's the sort of statement that I really couldn't give much credence to, because it's a very weak statement, that even the authors admit they don't really know. It's an interesting hypothesis, but, you know, the evidence is pretty weak there.
And I think it contradicts other evidence that I have or other evidence that I have contradicts it.
Q. Let's look at the conclusions on page 244.
Let's look at No. 6.
"Some smokers today do not recognize their own personal risk from smoking or they minimize it.
In 1986, only 18 percent of smokers were very concerned about the effects of smoking on their health, and 24 percent were not at all concerned."
Did you take this into account, this type of information, when you were coming to your conclusions in this case?
A. Sure. I mean -- and again, I think this is a pretty good summary of the types of information, right.
So there's many statements in here, and
there's many other sources of information like this.
This is one thing. But also the fact that 92 percent of people know that it's a cause of lung cancer, those percentages go up over time.
I mean, there's lots and lots of pieces of information that you can't just read that one thing and draw any firm conclusions without looking at the context of all of the other information. That's interesting. It's kind of a -- sort of a bit of speculation.
I looked at that in relation to not only the rest of the information in the document, but again, many other sources of information about public knowledge, public awareness, and -- and public understanding.
Q. So basically what I'm taking away from this is that you read the 1989 Surgeon General's report, and there are certain conclusions in here. And you, in coming to your own opinions, have discounted those conclusions and come to the opposite conclusions.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Again, I think there's -like all the research I have, there's a variety of types of information. You have to pull all of that
together. You have to look at it. You have to
219
weigh -- as you said, even company statements have to be weighed in forming an opinion.
I looked at this. There's some information here that, you know, points one way, and there's maybe some that points a little bit at the other.
I considered all of that. I weighed it, and I came to my conclusions.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 20 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. This is the 2012 report of the Surgeon General. Have you seen this before?
A. I have not. 2012 is a little young for me.
I haven't had a chance to go and look at it yet.
Q. Okay. Well, let's take a look at -- this is Chapter 5. I only copied Chapter 5 for this exhibit, but I do have the full one here, should you need to review it. We could be here a week for you to review it.
A. Do you want me to start now?
Q. I think that's how long it took me to review
it.
But let's look at just a couple of things in
here. And I understand that this is not on your reliance materials and you haven't read it.
220
The first paragraph in Chapter 5, on page 508 -- do you have that page in front of you?
A. Yes.
Q. Underneath "Introduction."
A. I do.
"There is strong consistent evidence that advertising and promotion influence the factors that lead directly to tobacco use by adolescents, including the initiation of cigarette smoking as well as its continuation."
There are some cites there.
"The effects of tobacco advertising on tobacco use have been addressed by reports of the Surgeon General" -- it refers to 2000 and 2001 -- "and an NCI monograph, NCI 2008.
"As documented in these reports, promotion and advertising by the tobacco industry causes tobacco use, including its initiation among youth."
Does this sort of contradict what you've been saying today, do you think -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Q. --in your view?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Again, this is something
221
that I haven't read, so my ability to comment on it is extremely limited.
But what I would say is that first paragraph --1 couldn't say for certain, because I haven't really had time to read it. I don't think it necessarily contradicts what I said, which is that I think the public was well informed. I don't know what time period we're talking about with advertising. It's a very broad and a general statement.
I think in the time period that I looked at and specifically in this case, in relation to Mr. Hiott's life, I believe that whatever the case may be with advertising, again, the message about the dangers of smoking was widely available and widely absorbed.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, that's sort of not what I asked.
What I asked was, do you feel that this statement by the Surgeon General of the United States,
that promotion and advertising by the tobacco industry causes tobacco use, including its initiation among youth.
Does that contradict your position on advertising?
222
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Yes, I think I answered that.
I said I'm not making statements about advertising.
I'm looking at advertising in relation to other information, and I'm concluding that the message about the dangers of smoking, in all its forms, was widely available and absorbed by the public.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let's turn to page 517 of the document -- of the Surgeon General's report.
In the first column, all the way at the bottom, the paragraph starts "NCI," which is the National Cancer Institute, I assume.
Does that seem reasonable?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know. I really don't know.
Q. "NCI's tobacco control monograph, the role of the media in promoting and reducing tobacco use, NCI 2008, also examined the evidence on how tobacco marketing efforts affect tobacco use among adolescents.
"Using numerous studies and tobacco industry
223
documents, the report concluded that even brief exposure to tobacco advertising influences attitudes and perceptions about smoking and adolescents intentions to smoke.
"In addition, the evidence showed that exposure to cigarette advertising influences nonsmoking adolescents to begin smoking and move towards regular smoking."
Does that, in your view, contradict anything you've said today?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't think it does.
BY MR. HARRISON:
Q. So I think you said in your -- in your expert disclosure that despite cigarette advertising, there was -- awareness existed about the -- high levels of public awareness existed about the dangers of
cigarette smoking?
A. That's true.
Q. And so this seems to suggest that even brief exposure to tobacco advertising influences attitudes and perceptions about smoking and an adolescent's intentions to smoke.
You don't think those are incompatible?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
224
THE WITNESS: It doesn't say anything about what I said in my disclosure.
And I -- as I made clear, I'm not -- I'm not an expert on advertising, so it's not something I can really comment on in an expert way.
But I don't see how it contradicts the point I made; that there's advertising; nonetheless, the message is available and clear.
BY MR. HARRISON:
Q. Okay. Let's look at page 535. It falls under the category of "The influence of the design of tobacco products on the use of tobacco by young people." Okay?
And then it says: "Designing cigarettes for the youth market."
Do you see where I'm at?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you with me? Okay.
So about two sentences in, there's a sentence that starts with "Similarly."
A. Yes. Oh. Sorry. Yeah.
Q. Okay. "Similarly, the success of Winston cigarettes with young smokers in the 1950s and 1960s was attributed to increasing awareness of the health effects of smoking, which helped create the demand for
225
filtered cigarettes," and there's a cite to Burrows 1984.
Do you think that this is evidence of the fact that advertising was basically suggesting that filtered cigarettes were better for you than nonfiltered cigarettes and that that helped sell Winston cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think no, but there's two parts to your question. So I'm just going to say no. And if you want to ask me specifics about the two parts, we could go into that.
BY MR. HARRISON:
THE WITNESS: Do you want to read back the question?
(Whereupon, the requested portion of the record was read by the reporter as above recorded.) BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Why don't I do it this way.
Do you agree or disagree with this statement, the one that starts "Similarly"?
A. Again, my evidence, it seems -- it seems --1 think it's consistent that -- the increasing awareness of the health effects of smoking, and I believe that's
226
consistent with what I found; there was increasing awareness of the health effects of smoking, and that -- in part, some of that was reflected in people's search for low tar and nicotine and a promotion by public health officials of going to lower tar and nicotine cigarettes. I think those things were things that I found in my research.
As to whether the success of Winston as a particular brand, that's really kind of marketing and advertising question. That doesn't really concern me.
Q. Are you familiar with the Federal Trade Commission?
A. Yes.
Q. And are you aware that the Federal Trade Commission issued various reports over the years regarding smoking?
A. I believe in general I am, but you would have to show me or talk to me about the specific reports.
Q. Sure.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 21 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Have you seen this before?
A. Well, I have to say it may have been a while, if I have. I know -- I've read about FTC work. I
227
can't recall off the top of my head at this point whether -- whether I have seen this or not. I really can't.
Q. As far as I can tell, this is not on your reliance material list.
A. That could be. It could be. I may be remembering that I read about it rather than read it.
Q. Now, I know that you have all of the Surgeon General's reports issued by the U.S. Government on your reliance list aside from the last two, but I'm just wondering why you don't have the Federal Trade
Commission reports on that list when they are also issued by the U.S. Government.
A. The fact they're issued by the U.S.
Government is not relevant, in my opinion, as to what I look at.
The Surgeon General's reports and the Surgeon General is discussed extensively in the public literature that I looked at. It made sense, therefore, to put some effort into also looking at the Surgeon General's reports, since they're discussed a lot.
The Federal Trade Commission, there is some discussion of the Federal Trade Commission, as I recall, but it's -- the Federal Trade Commission, it's
228
not a public health authority.
Q. Do you believe that documents issued by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission to Congress are accurate?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I have no way of knowing.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. As a historian, do you feel that a document that was written by the Federal Trade Commission as a
report to Congress pursuant to the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act could be relevant to your opinions?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Could be, in the sense that many things could be. But, you know, I'd have to read it to know for certain.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Well, if you look at what's labeled as page 2 of the document, in the first paragraph, it says that "In preparing this report" -A. Oh, I'm lost. Page --Q. Sorry.
A. Oh, I see it. Page -- Arabic numeral.
Q. All right. Yeah. I'm sorry there are so many stamps on this thing.
229
MR. HARRISON: We'll fix that before trial.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. "In preparing this report" -- I'm sorry, "Introductory note."
"In preparing this report, the commission has used as source material the results of three surveys.
One was conducted by the commission hereinafter referred to as the commission survey, and the results
which are pertinent to the subject of this report are set out in Appendix A.
"The other two were national surveys of smoking behavior, attitudes and beliefs of adults, conducted under the direction of the United States Public Health Service in 1964 and 1966."
So given that introductory note, wouldn't you consider this to be something you should have looked at in understanding what beliefs or opinions or knowledge was during this time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I do have lots of public opinion polls on my reliance list. Whether I have something like this or a report on this, I can't recall right off the top of my head, but opinion polls are something that I've looked at.
230
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you didn't look at this document?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Do you have the appendices in here?
MS. POLLACK: I don't.
MS. POLLACK: That's a good point to note, that I don't have the appendices attached.
MR. HARRISON: Okay.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, I think the Federal Trade Commission is not the first place I would look for matters dealing with public health. There seem to be some opinion polls. Whether those opinion polls are among the things I saw -- for example, reports on them, I really can't recall, just sitting here.
I do know that the Federal Trade Commission did have some role to play in the labeling and advertising, but it seemed to be more of a kind of legal issue and a policy issue than the actual content of the messages that were getting out to people.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, isn't this a report on that very thing on what was being -- at that time, what was known to
231
the public on the hazards of cigarettes?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't that what this very report is? I'm sorry.
MR. HARRISON: I object to the form and to the extent that the document speaks for itself.
MS. POLLACK: Well, I'm asking him if he understands what this document is.
THE WITNESS: Well, I'd would have to really read the entire thing before I could give an answer to that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Well, you know, I think we'll -- we'll go through some things, but I'm just wondering, you know, why this isn't something that would have been interesting to you to look at in terms of -- you know, surmising what the public knew, what the awareness was at that time.
Isn't this a reflection of that -- of that exact thing?
MR. HARRISON: Again, object to form.
THE WITNESS: It's one document. I looked at many, many documents. I looked at many polls. I looked at many surveys, you know.
232
I really can't go back and reconstruct the history of what I thought about this at this point.
you know, I certainly considered the issues about public beliefs and attitudes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you didn't consider these -- this data issued by the United States Government in a report to Congress, right?
A. Well, again, to me report to Congress and issued by the United States Government are not very relevant for deciding whether it's worth looking at.
I think it's fine, but I think -- again, I looked at many other things, and I did read about what the Federal Trade Commission had done. I would have to go back in my reliance material to find examples or to find places where this report was discussed. I really can't really recall exactly, you know, the process that -- that led me not to have this. I mean, it's just been years ago, but...
Q. So basically you said you were aware that the Federal Trade Commission had done a report to Congress on this issue, but you -- and you read about it, but you chose not to go investigate it?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
233
THE WITNESS: Well, I think - again, I think I had sufficient information from other sources
that it didn't seem an important thing to do among the many other important things that there were to do.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let's look at page 7 of the document. Halfway down the page, it says: "The warning statement on the package."
Are you with me?
A. I am.
Q. "The warning statement on the package alone has proven to be ineffective mainly because few people seem to pay attention to it."
Now, does this affect your opinion that the public was aware of the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
And under the rule of completeness, since this witness doesn't recall seeing this document,
I'm asking you to continue the sections there.
MS. POLLACK: Well, he's free to read the whole page. I have no problem with that at all.
MR. HARRISON: Fair enough. I just wanted to make sure he reads it before he answers.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I was going to say, give
MS. POLLACK: Sure.
THE WITNESS: So, I mean, again, I think -you know, if you -- this is -- the importance of looking at information in context, if you look at the -- just in this one document, in fact, it does say that, you know, it has convinced people who might otherwise be in doubt. It has been used by educators. I mean, in other words, that there is also evidence that it has been effective in other -- in other ways.
And I think, again, there is evidence in other sources that the public was very well warned, including statements by the Surgeon General, by the director of the U.S. Public Health Service.
So, you know, put Gallup poll -- poll -George Gallup, the Gallup poll.
I mean, in other words, yes, this is a statement made by one entity that says that they believe it hasn't been effective, and yet they also say it has been effective.
So my answer would be, well, it seems to comport with what I found, that many people believe it was actually pretty effective.
Q. Okay. So let's look at the last paragraph on that page. It says: "If the public is to be effectively warned of the health hazards of cigarette smoking, the commission's convinced that the present cautionary statement on cigarette packages is not sufficient to accomplish the result.
"The motivations for smoking, physiologically, psychologically, and sociologically are complex, and a mere reminder of the hazards on the cigarette package cannot compete with the forces that promote cigarette smoking."
Now, doesn't that sort of disagree with or isn't it contrary to your conclusion where you say despite cigarette advertising, there was a high level of public awareness?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't it sort of the opposite of what you're concluding?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I think it's actually quite consistent, which is that, A, the warnings on cigarettes were revised a number of times, and
that, B, beside warnings on cigarettes, there was a massive public education campaign, both to adults and to children, which is what they're saying is needed. It seems to follow quite consistently.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So you think that the FTC report is consistent with your conclusions?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think this statement that we just read actually is pretty consistent with what I found; that there were continual efforts to go -- you know, that the warning did not stand alone; that it was used in schools; as I said, that there was educational material; that there were public service announcements, and, in fact, again, just looking at that one paragraph, that what the FTC was saying actually was carried out; that there were many ways in which people -again, consistent with what I found, multiple sources of messages from multiple entities, some government, some nongovernmental organizations, some public schools, some by individual members of the medical community or the scientific community, some in print media, some in visual media.
Q. And doesn't this conclude that -- like you said, taking everything into account, that the warning statement has proved to be ineffective -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. -- because few people pay attention to it.
Isn't that a conclusion there?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. That's not the conclusion -- it doesn't say the warning statement on the package alone has proved to be ineffective mainly because few people seemed to pay attention to it.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: And again, I'd say, just reading the next paragraph -- and it actually says it has had an effect and that it can have more of an effect if we do the various things that we did.
So this is what the FTC says, and it seems rather consistent with what I found.
Q. And doesn't this say in the last paragraph that "The label cannot compete with the forces that
238
promote cigarette smoking"?
A. Yes.
Q. And isn't that the opposite of what you've concluded?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I never said that the label competed with cigarette advertising.
What I said was look at many sources of public information available, that cigarette advertising did not stop the public from receiving the message from many sources. The label was one, and so were many other things.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let's go to the next page, page 8.
So this is 1967. Okay. And we've got the paragraph that says "Because".
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. "Because once started, the cigarette smoking habit is so difficult to break, the commission believes that people should be educated as to the health hazards before they reach the age when they are
"Since most cigarette smokers start smoking during the middle and late teenage years, educational programs should be heavily emphasized and
239
substantially increased in the schools.
"Now, due in part to the cumulative effect of cigarette advertising, over the years, advertising that shows cigarette smoking to be an enjoyable and pleasurable activity and ignores the suffering and early death that it causes.
"Many youngsters consider cigarette smoking to be an acceptable and socially-desirable activity.
They tend to view cigarette smoking as a viable mark of maturity, a passport to adulthood.
"Because the health dangers of cigarette smoking are not brought home to them in an effective and meaningful way, many teenagers take up the smoking habit."
Now, doesn't that suggest that in 1967, looking back on the few years that this document is looking back on, that teenagers had not been warned of the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
stating what has long been understood, that smoking -- that is to say, going back well before this document, that teenagers like to smoke because their peers did or because they thought it was a sign of maternity.
240
I mean, these were things that were discussed in the 1920s or before and that education is an important part of the process.
And, in fact, before this, right after the Surgeon General's reports, there were both national and local efforts to increase public school materials and educational programs. I believe, in fact, right in Mr. Hiott's own town of Waycross, there was a move to increase or do exactly this.
So I think this is -- this is an interesting statement.
But it's very consistent with what people had said for really many, many years about warning teenagers and young people about the dangers of smoking through educational activity.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And doesn't this say that there's a cumulative effect of cigarette advertising that causes
teenagers to think that it's a desirable and pleasurable activity?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That may be, but -- that is what it says.
But again, I think what we -- we're not talking about cigarette advertising; we're talking
241
about the health warnings that were given to teenagers and others.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And isn't this putting all of that in context and saying that if you balance it out, because -because the dangers of cigarette smoking are not -are not conveyed in these advertisements, which are very persuasive to teenagers, teenagers don't really understand at this point in time the seriousness of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't that what this is saying?
A. Well, again, to the extent that it's talking about advertising and different theories about what advertising might or might not do, it's not really something that I have an expertise to talk about.
What I can talk about was that, in fact, teenagers were given lots of warnings, very much, indeed, along the lines suggested here, both before this report and continuing afterwards, so I think it is consistent with what I found.
(Off the record.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. We're back in the FTC report to Congress,
242
Exhibit 21. Let's look at the bottom of page 14.
It says: "Current advertising and promotional themes." It says: "In its trade regulation rule and accompanying statement published on June 22nd, 1964, the commission reviewed themes and appeals appearing in then current advertising. It found such advertising to contain two principal elements: a portrayal of the desirability of cigarette smoking and assurances of the relative safety of smoking."
A. Okay. Hang on. I missed something here.
Okay.
Q. Desirability was portrayed in terms of the satisfactions engendered by smoking and by associating smoking with attractive people and enjoyable events
and experiences. Thus, cigarette smoking was depicted as being satisfying in itself, associated with desirable persons and pleasurable activities and carrying relatively little risk."
So doesn't the FTC conclude that in -- around this time of 1967 and the few years back that it's looking at, that cigarette advertising portrays -carries the message that cigarette smoking carries relatively little risk?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
243
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't that what they conclude here?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm just trying to see something a bit more about their conclusions. Let me find it.
Okay. Right. So again, just looking at this, as I understand it, that's -- they looked at advertising. I looked at advertising. They talk about satisfaction. Okay. That's fine. I don't think that in any way changes what I found.
And they claim that it carries little risk.
I have to say I don't see that in the ads that I saw, but that's their opinion.
But all that said, that even if that were to be the case, which my own research might suggest a little bit differently, in the ads that I saw, I don't think that the ads I saw and I don't think the way in which the ads fit into the whole body of information, whatever people might think they were saying, I don't think that stopped people from getting the message from all of the other sources about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, isn't the FTC the agency that's charged
244
with reviewing advertising and making sure that it's accurate and fair in the United States?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It has a role in -- it has a role in advertising and other aspects of company behavior, I believe, yes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. If you look in the next paragraph, this is -again, this is 1967, the last sentence there -- you're free to read the whole paragraph, but the last sentence says: "Advertising continues to depict smoking as an enjoyable activity while ignoring
A. Um-hum.
Q. And my question to you is: Given that statement in the FTC report to Congress, isn't this something that you should have taken into account when making your conclusions that the public knew the dangers of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, again, I did take into account advertising.
As I say, it ignores health hazards, but I never that there were --1 never said there were advertisements that showed health hazards. I think
245
that's consistent with what I found.
What I'm saying is the fact that there were advertisements does not change the fact that people had lots of sources of information, and I don't think they got their health information from advertising.
All this says is that there was -- there were no advertisements with health -- health warnings.
I think that probably means besides the warning that appears on the package and then would later be in the advertising.
So again, I don't really see that as related to what I'm talking about.
This is talking about advertising. That's fine. But advertising is not where people get their -- their health information about cigarettes. They get them from sources -- the other sources that I mentioned.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you think people ignore the advertising and only focus on public health authorities?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, they -- they may look at advertising, but I don't -- as I said, I don't think that they got their public health information
246
from advertising of cigarettes.
And as it says, the cigarettes themselves don't really say anything about health.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Actually it says that -- on page 14 to 15, it says that "The commission feels that current advertising at this time, in this middle '60s era, portrays desirability of smoking and assurances of the relative safety of smoking."
A. Okay. So safety.
Q. So isn't that a statement by the federal government that it feels that advertising is portraying assurances of the safety of smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I mean, again, you know, it's all advertising. I saw lots of advertising. You know, they conclude it's relatively safe, or they believe that what it shows is safety. You know, perhaps so.
But from what I saw, whatever was in the advertising, it didn't stop people from seeing the far stronger and more dire warnings and messages about the dangers of smoking.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let's look at the next document.
247
And here's where I'm thinking that -- I'm going to give you the whole thing, but I'm thinking that in terms of an exhibit, we may be able to just pull out certain pages so we don't have to stick this whole thing in there.
MR. HARRISON: Okay.
MS. POLLACK: Let's see how it goes.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs
Exhibit 22 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this is the FTC, Federal Trade Commission, staff report on the cigarette advertising investigation, and it says "Public Version."
Have you seen this before?
A. I don't believe I have, no.
Q. So I believe that I have the whole thing here, but hopefully we'll be able to not put the whole thing in when we get done with it.
If you look at page 8 of the document, it says, starting from the top of the page: "This report discusses in detail the results of the staffs investigation. As part of its investigation, staff has conducted an extensive review of the medical literature, including the Surgeon General's reports on smoking and The Tobacco Institute's response. It has
248
sought out and examined the literature which discusses the views and findings of those who disagree with the Surgeon General's conclusions and has consulted with many of the foremost medical experts in the field.
"To evaluate the consumers' knowledge of the health risks of smoking, staff conducted an exhaustive
review of the available survey data and sponsored two additional nationally projectable surveys. The staffs evaluation of the current warning is based on the results of several additional studies, the analysis of the consumer knowledge data, and the advice of communications and advising experts, including a New York advertising agency. Similarly, to evaluate the remedial options, the staff conducted several studies and worked closely with both distinguished advertising experts in the same New York advertising agency."
So reading this part of the introduction of this document, would you agree that this report is a study of consumers' knowledge regarding the health risks of smoking at about this time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, it's -- again, not having any information on the actual content of the document, all I can say is what you read to me,
249
that it states that it has something to do with consumers' knowledge of the health risk of smoking and other issues.
BY MS. POLLACK:
A. There's parts of it that are; there are parts of it that are not.
Q. But certainly there could be overlap there?
A. To some extent there could be, you know --Q. Okay.
A. -- could be.
I mean, I would have to say, not really knowing what the content is, it's a little hard for me to make that firm a statement.
Q. Well, the middle sentence there that I read you, "To evaluate the extent of consumers' knowledge of the health risks of smoking," I would say that's pretty consistent with what you did to evaluate the extent of consumers' knowledge of the health risks of smoking.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't quite know what they mean by that. I mean, I --
250
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. All right. Sorry.
sources of public information. I'm not sure exactly what they meant -- mean by "the extent of consumers' knowledge."
I can just tell you what I did and that is looked at public information, publicly available information, sources of public information on the health risks of smoking. So not -- not seeing the inside, it's hard for me to be certain.
Q. Okay. I'm sure at some point, you'll take a look at this.
But in any event, going to page -- if you look at the bottom of page 8, it says "Summary of Findings"?
A. Yes.
Q. And then that spills over on to page 9, and we're going to talk about one of the paragraphs here.
It starts out "Nonetheless." Okay?
A. Oh. Is that on the next page?
Q. Yes. On page 9.
"Nonetheless" -- do you see it? Are you with
me?
A. I do.
251
Q. -- "the problems which prompted the commission to act in the past still exist. While most
Americans are generally aware that smoking is hazardous, some consumers, especially smokers, do not know this basic fact.
"However, even if it is assumed that every underlying consumer is aware that smoking is hazardous, the evidence indicates that many consumers do not have enough information about the health risks of smoking in order to know how dangerous smoking is; i.e., what is the nature and extent of the health risks of smoking.
"Many consumers also do not know whether the general health risks of smoking have any personal relevance to themselves or whether they are among those groups of people who may be uniquely vulnerable to these health hazards.
"Finally, without more specific concrete information, consumers have a more difficult time remembering and are less likely to consider health information it all in making their smoking decision."
Does that sort of conflict with your opinion in this case?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think not read in context of
the whole thing, it says that knowledge of the dangers of smoking is consistently getting stronger. It says that most Americans are aware, and I think -- of the hazards of smoking.
And there are other documents that I looked at that are on my reliance list that are similar, if these are done by --1 don't know if this is an opinion poll or something like that, but again, that's consistent with evidence that I found and that -- that there was an ongoing effort on the part of the government and private agencies and others to continue to educate people.
So I think they're simply saying, let's continue what we're doing. I don't see that as inconsistent. I think there were continual efforts made over time to reinforce the message, and I think that's what this document is telling us -- it seems to me that's what they're saying should be done. And I think it's a recommendation to keep doing that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Besides looking to the future about what should be done, isn't it a conclusion about the state of things at that time, in 1981, and maybe the few years going back, which this document includes and
looks back on?
THE WITNESS: Yeah. So, I mean, if you look at it as a work that one might use to understand the past, I would say this is a secondary source.
I looked at primary sources. I looked at what people actually said at the time. I looked at what was available. And while they have their opinion about what the record of history shows,
I've actually done the primary research.
So I wouldn't disagree with them that knowledge grows over time, that reinforcing the message is very effective, that opinion polls show growing knowledge, that not necessarily everybody acts in the same way or chooses to believe it.
But I would say in terms of a historical study, you know, it's better to go to the actual sources at the time.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let's look at page 10. There's a paragraph that begins "The data." Are you with me? A. Yes.
Q. First full paragraph -A. Got it.
numbers of consumers seriously misunderstand and underestimate the increased risk of suffering these health problems as the result of smoking."
Is that something that you think would be relevant to your opinion?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I think I would go back to what I just said, and, you know, divide between what people know, which is the warnings about smoking, and maybe specifics that they know about particular medical knowledge.
I think, again, it's -- the general point I make is that people were aware that smoking was dangerous and was bad for them, you know, and that they were educated and should continue to be educated -- pretty much the same as what I said in my last answer.
But I think that's consistent, from what I can see in this limited reading.
But again, that as a historical work, I would go back to the primary documents, and, you know, that's what I would rely on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
255
A. Uh-oh.
MR. HARRISON: If you keep flipping, you'll get there.
THE WITNESS: I see. I got you. I think I found it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Maybe you can help your lawyer.
A. Can't help it, you know, if you can't read your numbers.
Q. Okay. Then it says: "The amount of cigarette advertising in the United States."
It says: "Cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in America. It has been estimated that the six major cigarette companies spent 1 billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product. This figure is several hundred times greater than the amount government spends on public service announcements on smoking hazards.
"The National Commission on Smoking and Public Policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the then National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, the government's primary agency working in
this area spent in one year."
Now, are these facts that would figure into
256
your analysis?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: If you don't mind me reading it again.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure.
A. No, I don't think they are, actually.
Q. So these facts just are not relevant at all?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think the dollar amount spent is something that really affects the questions that I'm addressing. I don't think the dollar figures really are relevant to what I'm looking at.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Is it relevant to you that the cigarette industry spends several hundred times greater than the amount the government spends on public service announcements on smoking hazards?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Again, I looked at the advertising; I looked at the public health warnings. Most, in fact, of the warnings are not things that are paid for, but
257
appear free in the newspapers and media as news articles, which I think carry a lot more weight than paid advertising.
So the fact that the cigarette companies spend a lot of money on advertising, the vast majority of which, I think, doesn't address the issues of health even in a tangential way, I think when you add all of that up together, the fact they're spending lots of money isn't really relevant to the question of whether people are informed or not.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. So let's look at 2-8, "Recent Trends in Cigarette Advertising."
"The Commission's statement of basis and purpose for the 1964 cigarette rule noted that two themes predominated in then current cigarette advertising: Portrayals of the desirability of smoking and assurances about the safety of cigarettes or the relative safety of particular brands.
"In the ensuing 16 years, there has been little change in the character of cigarette advertising. Cigarette ads have continued to attempt to allay anxieties about the hazards of smoking and to associate smoking with good health, youthful vigor,
258
social and professional success, and other attractive ideas, individuals and activities that are both worthy of emulation and distant from concerns relating to health. Most cigarette advertisements express at least one of these themes."
Again, does this enter into your consideration at all of what the public understood or believed about the dangers of smoking around this time?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: So again, I saw advertisements; I saw advertisements that to some extent would fit some of these descriptions.
I don't think that that changes the fact that there was plenty of information available. Whether people saw a young person smoking in an ad I don't think speaks directly to the question of whether the Surgeon General reports smoking will kill you
on the front page of the newspaper. Two different types of information.
"In addition to that, I think, again, in this case of Mr. Hiott, we have evidence that he was getting messages and was seeing messages that had nothing to do with cigarette advertising that very clearly stated the dangers of smoking.
259
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let's look at page 3-10, "Based Upon an Analysis." Are you with me?
A. No.
Q. 3-10?
MR. HARRISON: You're at 2-10.
THE WITNESS: Sorry.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sorry we're jumping all over the place. I'm trying just to be very, you know, efficient and get this done.
A. Okay.
Q. 3-10: "Based upon an analysis of all the data reviewed in its entirety, staff has concluded that there appeared to be such significant gaps in consumer knowledge, that a substantial portion of the population does not know how dangerous smoking is or
whether the dangers of smoking apply to them and, therefore, does not have an understanding of the health hazards of smoking."
Do you think that contradicts your opinion at
all?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't think it does.
260
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Why not?
A. I think, again, I think that how -- you know, what they're making as a very general and broad statement, I think if you look at the case of someone like Mr. Hiott, I don't think it necessarily applies to him.
I think it seems clear the message was getting across. So I just don't see how it would change my opinion in this case.
MS. POLLACK: Okay. What shall we do about the exhibit? We can simply put in the pages, or we can put in the whole exhibit. I don't know what you think we should do.
problem either way.
MS. POLLACK: What do you think about this plan? What about if we put in the cover, okay, and then the pages that we discussed, and if for some reason I need to change that, which I don't think so, then we can add the whole exhibit at the end after we leave here today.
MR. HARRISON: I'm fine with that.
MS. POLLACK: I really would rather not. It really becomes a huge burden.
261
MR. HARRISON: Understood, with the one caveat that we're doing it solely for convenience purposes; that we're attaching just the pages we discussed, but the whole exhibit was introduced.
MS. POLLACK: Yes.
MR. HARRISON: With that explanation, I'm fine with doing the select pages. I have no problem with that.
MS. POLLACK: Can we do that, Mr. Reporter?
THE COURT REPORTER: Is this the exhibit that you were reading out of?
MS. POLLACK: Yes.
THE COURT REPORTER: Are they marked in there, or how would I know which page you're --
MS. POLLACK: I referred to the pages every time, but technically we introduced the whole thing.
MR. HARRISON: Go ahead.
MS. POLLACK: So for ease of making this a little bit shorter, we're going to -- technically we introduced the entire exhibit, the entire document that is Exhibit 22, which is the entirety of the public version of the Federal Trade Commission Staff Report on the Cigarette Advertising Investigation. And we are only going
262
to attach -- sorry -- dated May 1981. We are only going to attach the cover sheet and the pages that we discussed.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Are you familiar with the trade group that was at one time known as TIRC?
A. I think so.
Q. Do you know what it stands for?
A. I think Tobacco Industry Research something. Q. Research Council?
A. Yes. That sounds right. I couldn't remember the last letters.
Q. And is it your understanding that at some point, it may have changed names a few times?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah, I believe so. I know there were other names that sort of seemed to be similar, and I wasn't exactly sure if it was -- if they were was successor organizations, but that seems reasonable.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. For example, Tobacco Institute?
A. Right.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I've heard that name.
263
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. TI?
A. I've heard that.
Q. CTR?
A. I've heard that.
Q. Okay. So were these all tobacco trade groups?
A. I know that they had something to do with the tobacco industry. Trade groups? You know, depending how you define it.
companies?
A. I don't have a lot of specific knowledge of how they were funded. You know, that's sort of a fairly technical issue that's pretty far removed from the things that I'm studying. I saw them appear in the public documents. Exactly what their history and story is wasn't my concern.
Q. Well, didn't they issue public statements during the time at issue that you were studying?
A. I think I said that, yes.
Q. And didn't they issue public statements on behalf of the tobacco companies?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I mean, again, I'd have
264
to look more specifically.
They issued public statements that dealt with tobacco and public health. I don't know exactly what the relationship was. And that's -- again, that's not really something that I was concerned about. What I was looking at is, okay, what did they say.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, if, for example, TIRC issued a press
release out into the world that said something to the effect of, There's no link between cancer and smoking and if the tobacco companies paid for that to happen and paid for the TIRC to exist, isn't that something that's information that's put out into the world that would be relevant to your analysis?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What would be relevant to me is that if a statement appeared under the name of TIRC, where did it appear or what did it say and what would the public have thought. Whether people -- the public or a member of the public or Mr. Hiott saw such statements, read such statements, or understood anything about what this organization was, I think is very unclear.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs
265
Exhibit 23 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Have you ever seen this before?
A. I don't think I've seen this document. If it was something that was published, it -- it says it's for release, so if the statements appeared in a newspaper or other public forum, then I would have seen the contents. But I don't think I've seen the
actual document, which is perhaps not what the public saw.
Q. So this says from Hill & Knowlton. Do you know who Hill+Knowlton is?
A. I believe it's a public relations firm.
Q. Were they hired by the tobacco industry?
A. The industry. I believe they worked with some tobacco firms. I don't know exactly what their relationship was to the TIRC or to individual firms.
Q. So this says "for Tobacco Industry Research Committee."
Is that TIRC that we've been referring to,
TIRC?
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. Okay. So basically this is from the PR agency, Hill & Knowlton, correct?
A. Yes.
266
Q. And it's issued for or in the name of TIRC, right?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know exactly what that
means. All I know is it says "from" and "for."
Q. Okay. So "for" means it's for these people.
A. I can't really draw any conclusions.
Q. Okay. So then it says: "For release in a.m.s of Tuesday, March 6th, 1962."
So is this a press release of some sort?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: It doesn't say it is. It could
be.
As I said, if it was a press release that appeared in the press, then I would have seen it.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay.
A. So that's all I can tell you.
Q. So this says: "Significant developments in cancer research reviewed in annual report by Dr. C.C. Little."
Do you know who Dr. C.C. Little is?
A. Yes. He was a doctor. And I believe at one time, he worked for -- well, in fact, I think it even
267
says he's a scientific director. So that's consistent with what I remember. He had some position in the TIRC for a time.
Q. Okay. So this says: "The scientific director of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee
today cited several significant developments in his 1961 annual report on research progress."
Are you familiar with the annual reports put out by the TIRC?
A. I did not read TIRC annual reports as such.
I read things that they issued or said in the press or other public forums.
Q. Now, would it be relevant to you in your research what was put out in an annual report by the Tobacco Industry Research Committee?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I think what would be relevant would be anything that the Tobacco Industry Research Committee might have said on issues of public health, cigarettes, smoking, and cancer that were communicated to the public at large.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And isn't that what the annual report is?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
268
THE WITNESS: Not necessarily. I don't know who got the annual report, who received the annual report, who read the annual report, who it was
meant for. An annual report is not necessarily a public document in that sense.
I would say Mr. Hiott probably never read or even knew of the existence of an annual report by this organization, so it's a much more limited form of communication.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, this appears to be a press release by the public relations group to talk about the 1961 annual report, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I would have to say at this point that I can't really make any statement about the significance of this, because unless I saw it in the form it actually appeared to the public -- it could have had a different title; it could have been --1 just don't know what this is. It could have been a draft. It could have been something that was never issued.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Sure.
A. So it's interesting, but it's not really
269
related to what I was researching.
"Dr. Clarence Cook Little recognized authority on cancer research, reviewed scientific findings of the past year and discussed these developments."
And then if you look at No. 3, it says: "Continuing tests of tobacco smoke indicate that "The smoke is much too feeble to play a role in the etiology of lung cancer as a direct contact carcinogen."
Is this at all relevant to you in terms of your opinion?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form, and I'd just ask you to read all of paragraph 3, since the witness doesn't recall seeing this document.
MS. POLLACK: Sure. He can read it.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I will.
So again, the most important thing for me is I would have to see how this actually appeared to the public. That's probably 90 percent of the question here.
Then it says one doctor claimed in one statement that the public may or may not have seen and that Mr. Hiott may or may not have seen that he believes that, quote, the smoke is too feeble to
play a role in lung cancer, but then goes on to say: "We have to study this further. It doesn't mean that it doesn't."
So it's a pretty --1 would say a pretty weak statement that may or may not have appeared in the public. If it did, it's not inconsistent with other things I saw under the banner of TIRC, part of the information available to the public, but again, I think far, far in the minority of things that the public saw.
But I don't even know if they saw this, so, you know, I can't really comment further than that. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. As you sit here today, do you know if R.J. Reynolds was a member of the TIRC?
A. I can't say for certain that I know that. It could have been.
But as I said, questions about the specifics and the internal operations of the TIRC are not something that are related to my study of the public awareness and public knowledge.
Q. We're done with that now.
A. Sorry.
Q. Has R.J. Reynolds ever issued any public statements stating that smoking cigarettes is
addictive?
THE WITNESS: I really can't recall about R.J. Reynolds and their statements. Yeah. I just can't recall at this point.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, I think you did say that part of what you're going to be testifying about in connection with what's stated on your expert disclosure is that there was widespread public awareness of addiction.
A. True.
Q. And that could be in various different forms? A. Right.
Q. It could have appeared as -- in --1 think you said it's habit-forming; it's hard to quit, or it's addictive, or something of that nature.
A. Yes.
Q. And I'm just wondering, has R.J. Reynolds issued public statements to that effect?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Like I said, I can't --1 mean, you know, any period of time, ever, today? I mean, it's such a broad statement when -- do you mean ever or?
Q. You can certainly answer ever.
A. Okay. Ever? I don't know. It may have.
In the period that I did most of my research in, I don't recall statements from R.J. Reynolds on the issue of addiction. I can't say for certain whether they said anything or not, specifically. It's just a little bit too much for me to recall at this point.
Q. All right. If you look back at Exhibit 16, which is the Web site.
A. Right.
Q. If you look at the second page of that exhibit -A. Second page.
Q. -- which says "Guiding Principles and Beliefs?
A. Right.
Q. And let's see. The one, two, three, fourth bullet down, it says: "Nicotine and tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant treat to health. It's the smoke inhaled from burning tobacco which poses the most significant risk of serious diseases."
In your view, is that a public statement by
273
R.J. Reynolds that cigarettes are addictive?
MR. HARRISON: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: It appears on their Web site today. It uses the word "addictive." That's all I can say. It's not something I've researched. It's a contemporary issue.
I did historical research. It's not something that I really would do research on, because it's not about the past, which is what I do research on.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And my question is going to be: Have you seen this language by R.J. Reynolds in your research about the past?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: And again, I can't recall specifically what things -- of all the statements of all of the different parties that I've seen and all of the different documents, I cannot recall specifically statements, one way or the other, by R.J. Reynolds. I mean, otherwise, I'd just sort of be taking a guess.
Q. Well, do you have any specific recollection, anything in mind, that comes to your mind right off
274
the top of your head where R.J. Reynolds said,
Nicotine and tobacco products is addictive?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, in any period? I mean,
I can't think of anything off the top of my head.
But again, I would have to just try and rely on memory, and I would have to go back and look at different statements to see what R.J. Reynolds said at different times.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Was this part of your research, to determine whether there was statements in the public domain that nicotine in tobacco products is addictive?
A. There certainly were statements in the public domain at different times about nicotine and addiction. That was certainly part of what I saw when I read about the issue of habit-forming and addiction.
The specific medical issues connected with nicotine, I'm not really concerned about the chemistry or the -- from the medical side of it.
But, yes, I certainly did see references and
discussions of the habit-fomiing nature and addictive nature of cigarettes, and at different times, medical authorities talked about the role that nicotine played in that.
275
Q. Now, if we look at the whole sentence there, "Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health," what do you think that conveys to the public -MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah-BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Let me just finish.
THE WITNESS: Absolutely.
MS. POLLACK: What do you think that conveys to the public about dangers of nicotine?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You know, again, this is not stuff I do research on, which are statements today.
I think it says what it says. Nicotine is addictive.
I believe to the extent -- again, you're kind of getting into medical issues that are a little further.
historically, going back in time, is that nicotine is a poison but that the nicotine in cigarettes poison us, though it is, it's not the major cause of cancer and other diseases.
But you're really getting into medical issues
276
that are kind of beyond my area of expertise.
What I looked at was were there statements that cigarettes were dangerous; that smoking was dangerous; that it caused diseases; that it could be addictive. The particular technology of that is more of a medical question.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, I'm not really asking about the technology. You're telling me that there were statements in the public domain that nicotine was addictive or habit-forming or whatever else and that that warned people about the dangers of smoking.
A. Again, they were warnings about the addictive nature of tobacco.
The question of nicotine in particular and how that worked, that probably was in there, but to me, the most relevant thing and the thing that I think people reading this would take away is that cigarettes
are addictive; cigarettes are habit-forming; cigarettes are hard to quit.
The question of nicotine, perhaps; perhaps
not.
But the main thing is, however, whatever people thought, they thought it was hard to quit.
They thought it was habit-forming. They thought if
277
you started smoking, you could have a difficult time stopping.
Q. So if you saw this bullet, what it says here: "Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health," supposing you saw that in something in the '60s? Would you think that that conveys the dangers of addiction?
MR. HARRISON: Object.
THE WITNESS: You know, I really don't know. I don't recall seeing anything like that in the 1960s.
What I recall seeing is that cigarettes are addictive, habit-forming, and hard to quit.
Nicotine is one of the components. There's some discussion of the role that looked at it at a more medical level, the role nicotine plays. That's all I can tell you.
Q. Well, wasn't it your goal in this -- in your retention by R.J. Reynolds to look at the information that was out there in the world, in the United States, and decide what people knew as a result of that information?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry. Can you say that
278
just one more time?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Sure. Wasn't it your goal -- wasn't it your focus for this retention to look at what information was available, to analyze that information and determine what people knew as a result of a particular piece of information or the entirety of the information?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, what I said I would do is I would look at public information about smoking over a long period of time; I would determine what the nature of that information was, the level of that information, the various sources of that information, what was said about the dangers of
cigarette smoking, tobacco, public health, and then I would try to issue an opinion about what I believe the historic records showed about publicly available information, about the spread of the message, about the knowledge of the message, all of the things I said before about the dangers of smoking and, to the extent possible, evidence of what people heard and to some extent even believed, but mostly about what they heard. So I think that's what you're saying. I'm not sure if we're
279
saying the same thing anymore.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Right. No, I think we are.
And my question, then, is, if you saw this sentence in a document issued by R.J. Reynolds in 1965, say, and you saw this and you had to think about what it meant to the public, what information it conveyed to the public and what the public knowledge would be as a result on the dangers of smoking and, in particular, addiction, what would you think of this sentence: "Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health"?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
Q. You have it in front of you.
A. No. You said the '65 document.
Q. I'm asking you a hypothetical question, which I think is a fair question.
It's asking you to apply your expertise, and instead of being in a 2011 document, assume that this very same thing is in a 1965 document.
My question to you is, what would that mean to you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
280
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't think as historian, I can answer a hypothetical. I would have to actually see it. Because you said "in a document." I would have to actually see it in a document in the context of both the document and other documents; otherwise, it would be a very speculative answer. It could be one thing or it could mean another. Without seeing --1 mean, that's basic to the historical method. You see documents and you read them in their context.
BY MS. POLLACK:
transformed magically into 1965.
A. I don't think you can really do that. There was no Web site in 1965.
I mean, you see -- the problem is, in other words, that you don't just sort of say, Take this and put in it the past. You actually look at what existed and what the world looked like in the past. You can't imagine a Web site at a time before there were Web sites.
Q. Okay.
A. That's my problem.
If it were one line in a newspaper or an article that talked about all sorts of other things,
281
that could mean one thing. If it were a major headline in a newspaper, that could mean another thing.
There's just no way to do that hypothetically that I can see that's valid historically.
Q. Okay. And I guess my question, then, would be, let's look at it as of today.
A. Okay.
Q. Here it is. It's on the Web site. It's under "Guiding Principles and Beliefs," and you've got all of the other things that it says right under
"Tobacco Use and Health."
And I'm wondering what you think it means to tell the public nicotine in tobacco product is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health and keeping in mind that this is available to millions of people.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What I would say first is that I'm a historian, and as a historian, I really don't deal with 2012. I deal with -BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. I'm asking you, though, to just deal with 2012 for a minute.
A. Okay.
282
Q. I'm interested in your opinion on what this means.
A. My personal opinion, seeing this for the first time and just reading it as it is, is that what you want?
Q. Sure.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Giving you my unexpert personal opinion about contemporary matters --
Q. It's not so unexpert.
A. It is. It's not history and it's not based on historical research.
Anyone could go out and look at this Web site. There's no real research behind it. I could go out and click on a Web site. That doesn't make me an expert. The fact that I have a historical background doesn't mean that I can click on a Web site and offer an expert opinion on it.
So I can give you a personal unexpert opinion. That is all I can do in this case.
Q. Well, just as an aside, if this were 10 years ago and I showed it to you, you would say, Okay. It's 10 years ago, so I can go ahead and give my expert opinion because I'm a historian.
283
The fact that I got this a week ago I don't think changes the fact that you can render an opinion on it, since what I'm asking you to do is exactly what you did in this case.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I see it as much different.
The whole point about history is time matters, and if you go back 10 years and look at a
document, that's one thing. If you look at something right now, it's another thing. I mean, that's the point of history, is to be able to go back in time and look at things in their context.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So where do you cut it off? Do you cut it off at a year? Do you cut it off at six months? Do you cut it off at two years?
A. That's a very philosophical question.
Some historians would say 1980. Some would say later. Some would say it kind of depends on what you're studying.
I think whatever year it is, it can't be the present, because that's not historical.
Q. Okay. So you still didn't give me your opinion.
A. You want my personal opinion.
284
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think, just me personally, it seems to say what it says. It says that tobacco products are addictive.
Nicotine itself is not a serious threat.
When I read it in the context of all of the other
statements there, it seems to be saying, you know, nicotine can cause addiction, but you really should -- it's really the smoke that's inhaled, not the nicotine, that causes the diseases. That's what it says.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay.
A. It seems clear to me.
MS. POLLACK: Mark this.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 24 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. This comes from your reliance materials.
This was sort of a -A. Is this two things?
Q. No. This is sort of a -- actually, you know what? Let me see. I think I did one of the things on the back here. These are all of your reliance materials, for the most part, but --
285
A. Yeah. It is all kind of bundled together.
Q. Now, does this end with a page that starts "The City and the entire urban area" ?
A. It does.
together by you on your reliance materials in a single kind of PDF-looking thing?
A. Oh, okay. That's the way they copied it.
Okay.
Q. Okay. So I just kind of -A. Physical form that are separate.
Q. Yeah. I want to make sure I understand. These are sort of separate documents, each of them?
A. Yes. From different sources.
Q. And there're only snippets of documents; that none of them is a whole document, correct?
A. I believe so. I'd have to look at each one.
Q. For example, if you start off on the first page, it says: "History of Ware County, Georgia" -A. Right.
Q. -- "by Laura Singleton Walker."
But then you go to the next page, that says "Copyright 1934"?
A. I don't see that. Oh, hang on. Of this --
286
of this first page?
Q. Yeah. You go to the next page after that, and then the next page after there, where it says
"Copyright." And the next page says "page 93."
A. Right. So I copied the cover, the copyright, and then the parts that I wanted to copy.
Q. Okay. So you did not provide to us the entire -- the entirety of this thing called "History of Ware County, Georgia"?
A. No. I copied the parts that were relevant to the work I was doing.
Q. All right.
A. It's a book. I don't think I could have stolen it from the University of Georgia Library and got away with it.
Q. I was definitely not advocating any kind of stealing, just sort of trying to confirm with you that for the purpose of history of Ware County, Georgia, that book, you did not give us the whole book; you just gave us the pages that you thought were relevant.
A. I gave you the pages that I used for my research.
Q. Okay. Now, did you read the whole book?
A. No. Most of it wasn't relevant.
Q. So you just kind of picked whatever pages you
287
thought were relevant?
THE WITNESS: No. I did what historians always do. They look at sources. And when they find information that they need, that's what they use, and they don't necessarily use the whole thing.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. There's also something in here a few pages later called "Waycross Ware County Population Economy, Waycross Ware County Planning Commission."
A. Hold on.
Q. It's just a couple of pages after that.
A. I'm getting there. Yes. Okay.
Q. And you've got the table of contents?
A. Right.
Q. And then Chapter 3.
A. Right.
Q. So then it goes from pages 12 to 17, and then it skips to 25, right?
A. Okay. That seems right.
Q. Okay. And then there's another break, and then you've got something that's a blank page.
A. Where are you now?
Q. I'm going to be in the thing that says "Ware
County Farm Statistics."
A. Okay.
Q. Are you with me on the farm statistics?
A. I am.
Q. Okay. Now, where did that come from?
A. I believe it's from the same document.
Q. From the same book?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
A. I believe so. I would have to go back and look at my originals, you know, but I believe it's one and the same --
Q. All right.
A. -- unless something didn't get copied. I'd have to go being what and look at my own originals.
These public -- these aren't organized the same way I had them when they were copied as PDFs, so I'd have to go back and look at my --
Q. This is how it was produced to us, so I'm just wondering where that came from.
A. Yeah. I'd have to go back and look. I'm not certain now.
Q. Okay. And then after that document, there's another blank page, and then it says "Waycross,
Georgia, Future Land Use Plan."
A. Um-hum.
Q. Okay. And there's some pages there.
Where did you obtain these various documents that are in here?
A. From the University of Georgia Library at Athens, Georgia.
Q. And did you go there and do research?
A. I did.
Q. You did that yourself?
A. I did --1 believe I did most of this myself, but I also was accompanied by research assistants.
Q. And so you just made some copies of whatever you needed?
A. Right. I looked for information in the library. I came across things that I thought were useful to me and copied the parts that I wanted to bring back.
Q. Okay. Now, this is in 1934, this book, right, this history of Ware County, Georgia?
A. It's.
Q. It says "Copyright 1934."
A. Yes.
Q. And what is the purpose of your including this -- this document?
A. Largely to understand the history of
Waycross, sort of background on the town, how it was founded, where it came from, information about its place in the region, just to inform myself as much as I could about the place that Mr. Hiott grew up in.
Q. You're not suggesting that Mr. Hiott would have read this book, right?
A. No, not at all.
Q. Okay. Now, right after that, yes, there's a page break.
Then there's something that says "Ware's Noble History," which, I'll be frank with you, I really couldn't read.
A. It didn't come out very well.
Q. If you're planning on using this document, a better one would be very helpful, because I really couldn't read it.
A. I can, but I'm used to stuff like this as a historian.
Q. So I'm not going to ask you questions on that because I can't read it.
A. Okay.
Q. The next one says: "Know Your County." "Ware was named for a senator."
Q. Then at the bottom, almost in the last
291
sentence, it says: "Main crops were com and tobacco."
A. Yes.
Q. So does the fact that tobacco was a main crop of this region have any pertinence to your opinions in this case?
A. A couple of things.
I think, for example, we know that Mr. Hiott's first wife worked, at least in the summers, on a tobacco fami, picking tobacco. I think it's, again, just part of the context of understanding where Waycross is and Ware County is.
Beyond that and also just a little bit more about the history -- you know, if you're going to research somebody and their life and their place, if you don't know anything about the place, it's harder to do the research. Where is Ware County? Why is Waycross here?
As you gather infomiation, the fact that it was near a tobacco-growing region is -- it's important to note that. In fact, it was a railroad center.
These are all facts that helped locate better the nature of the place, you know.
If you ask me more questions, I could tell you more, so I don't want to just keep going on and
292
on.
Q. No. And I understand why you researched it.
What I'm trying to understand more specifically is, do you feel that -- the fact that tobacco was a major crop for the people in Ware County and even in Waycross, do you feel that that affected their feelings or their knowledge about the dangers of tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it could have had a couple of effects. They were just more aware of tobacco and therefore more attuned to articles about tobacco.
I think it's also interesting to me, at least, that it was a tobacco-growing region. It was also a very strong Baptist region, and again, Southern Baptists, members of the Southern Baptist church, did not smoke and were antismoking, such as Linda Beverly.
So it just helps to understand a little bit more about perhaps their awareness or their ability
or their -- what's the word I'm trying to think of as the day gets long? -- being attuned to the tobacco issues. I think if you grew up in a place far from tobacco, tobacco might be a little bit
293
more remote. If you grew up in a place close to tobacco, you might pay a bit more attention.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't it possible that people who were making their living from tobacco and were dependent on the revenues of tobacco would be more favorably disposed towards tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Mr. Hiott didn't make his living in connection with tobacco.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I understand that. But I think you just made a reference to his wife.
A. Yes.
Q. Making her living, in part, from tobacco.
A. And she did not smoke and was very vehemently not a smoker. So the answer seems to be actually -may not. Maybe not.
Q. Well, of course, as a historian, you're not here to talk about one person or another person.
You're here to talk about the history and the general themes. And I'm just thinking in my mind, if I'm someone who knows that major revenues are derived from the sale of tobacco, I would --1 would be willing to think the better of tobacco so that that can keep
294
happening.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's one speculation, but I didn't see any evidence of that in the material that I read.
So I was aware of the possibility that being in a tobacco area could have some effects. I therefore had that knowledge going in, which I think is important to have that context, of what the locality was like.
I did not find evidence that people said, Oh, don't believe anything about smoking and the hazards of smoking because we grow tobacco. So I think the answer is no, and I think that's interesting.
And as I said, there probably was more reporting on tobacco issues because it was a tobacco-growing region than perhaps someone growing
up in a county where there's no tobacco.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. I didn't see anything in here that -- in this particular document that discussed the dangers of tobacco smoking.
A. No. That's not what this material is about.
That comes from reading the Waycross newspaper, for
295
example.
Q. But these various articles from the Atlanta Constitution and all about the fact that there were tobacco crops grown, there was nothing in these documents that said, but everybody -- everybody, of course, knows that tobacco is terrible for you, right? That wasn't in here?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: And I'm not claiming that that's what these documents show.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So this was just the fact that this -- this just references the fact that it was in a tobacco belt, correct?
A. Well, no. It's actually a lot more than that. It's about --Q. I don't mean that's the only thing. I
misstated.
A. All right. Okay. Okay. But there is -there is -- among the things that are in my research on the history of Waycross and Ware County, where Mr. Hiott grew up, is some information about the role that the tobacco played in the economy, yes.
Q. And in this case, because it was in the tobacco belt, it would have played a fairly large role
296
in the economy, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, we'd have to look and see what the statistics show.
But it plays some role in the economy, and I think we've already discussed, you know, why I wanted to be aware of that as I did my research.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Well, if you look at that article that says "Farm Statistics" -- it might be kind of hard to find, but it says "Ware County Farm Statistics, 1900 to 1960."
A. Yes.
Q. It says in the second paragraph, about halfway down: "Tobacco is the leading cash crop in
A. Um-hum.
Q. Wouldn't that suggest that the people of this region were heavily dependent on tobacco revenues and tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm trying to find what -where it -- oh, you're reading in the text above?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Yeah, in "Farm Statistics," in the text
297
about -- in the second paragraph, halfway down, and it says: "Tobacco is the leading cash crop in the county."
A. Right. Well, it says a lot about farming.
It talks about, you know, 80 percent of the harvested cropland was planted in com and talks about yields.
I mean, there's a lot more going on there than just tobacco.
Q. I'm not focusing on that. I'm focusing on the sentence that says -A. Well, you should.
Q. -- "tobacco is the leading cash crop in the county," and that's what -- I'm saying to you: When something is the leading cash crop of a particular
county, aren't those people hugely dependent on tobacco?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I think the only people that would be dependent on tobacco perhaps are the ones growing it. It says "leading cash crop."
But it also talks about all sorts of other things that are going on.
So again, I'm not disagreeing with you.
Tobacco was a part of the economy, even an important part of the economy, at least through
298
1960. I think it declined over time.
But the more important point, I think, we're making here is, you can't draw any conclusions based on those facts. They merely provide you an opportunity to look at the actual evidence with an awareness that without doing this research, you might not have.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 25 for identification.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, this also comes from your reliance materials.
A. It does.
Q. And what does this represent?
A. This is one of a series of photographs that we took of places in Mr. Hiott's life as a child, young man, young adult, in Waycross. I believe there's a number of photographs of this school, which is the high school that he went to and graduated from in 1969,1 think. I'm sorry if I've got the date wrong.
So, yes, it's just -- this is a contemporary picture. I'm not saying that this was there then. It was just kind of interesting to note that -- that his school is now a tobacco-free zone.
299
Q. Okay. Now, you're not suggesting this sign was there when he was there, correct?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. And you're not suggesting that anything like this sign was there when he was there, are you?
A. No. I'm not suggesting a sign.
But I am -- but I do have material on what his high school was like when he went to high school.
The building is the same, so I also wanted to get the building -- the building in and its location, and then I do have materials about his experience as a
student.
Q. Well, if you were trying to get the building, you didn't do a very good job.
A. Well, as I said, there are other photographs.
Q. When Mr. Hiott was at Waycross High School, was it a tobacco-free school?
A. The term "tobacco-free" wouldn't have been used. I'm trying to recall.
I don't believe there was smoking allowed in the high schools at that time; that is to say, students were not allowed to smoke on the grounds or property, but I can't quite recall perfectly at this point.
Q. All right. If you wouldn't mind looking at
300
the transcript of Linda Beverly for a moment that I believe you said you read?
A. I did read it.
Q. If you would pull that out.
A. All right.
MR. HARRISON: What page is it on?
MS. POLLACK: 202.
THE WITNESS: Maybe not. Yes. Yes, it is.
Just a minute.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Have you got it?
A. I do.
"Question. Okay. Let's talk about Waycross High School. Did Waycross High School allow students to smoke back when Kenny was at Waycross High?
"Answer: They did in a designated area.
"Question: And where was the designated area?
"Answer: I" -- "I really don't know, but I've heard them talk. It was a big old pine tree they would go by or stand by and smoke.
"Question: So it was outside.
301
"Answer: It was outside. Never" -- "I don't think they allowed it inside there.
"Question: And when were students allowed to smoke at Waycross High?
"Answer: We would have like a recess or whatever, a break, whatever, or at lunch.
"Question: And you say 'we had.' Now, you never went to Waycross High.
"Answer: Oh, no. They" -- "they" -- "Kenny,
I think they" -- "that he said they would go out by the tree maybe at lunch and then if they had a break or whatever.
"Question: Did you ever see Kenny smoke at Waycross High?
"Answer: No.
Question: Did Kenny ever tell you that he smoked at Waycross High?
"Answer: Yes."
So does that refresh your recollection as to whether there's testimony that Kenny smoked while at Waycross High potentially in a designated area? A. This refreshes my memory that it's unclear whether you could smoke at Waycross High; that is to say, she says that she thinks. She wasn't there. She thinks he said he did. But then she talks about a
302
designated area, but it's outside.
So, I mean, usually when there are designated areas in schools, they're inside, so I don't -- I'd have to, again, kind of go back and look at all of the material I collected on Waycross High to look at exactly what years when he was there.
But from this testimony, it actually sounds like --1 mean, I'm a little bit --1 have to speculate a little bit until I go back and look at the documentation more precisely.
It sounds like what she's saying is that he and his friends would sneak off to the big pine tree and smoke, not that the school said there was a designated area. Because what I've seen, designated areas are like a students' smoking lounge.
But again, I would have to go and -- I'd have to go and look. I know there were certainly antismoking materials in Waycross High School while he was -- there was -- there were antismoking materials that the students had at Waycross High School, health classes against smoking.
Some schools in America did have designated smoking areas, mostly in the earlier pre-'60s period, so I don't think this actually is definitive about whether there was a designated smoking area. I'd
303
actually have to go back and check it again more systematically, knowing this is a little ambiguous, which is kind of where my memory is right now.
Q. Let's look also at the deposition of Elaine Rowell, Kenny Hiott's sister.
THE WITNESS: I do.
What page are you on?
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Page 78.
"Question: Did Waycross High School allow smoking on the campus?
"Answer: I honestly don't remember.
"Question: Do you remember if the school had like a designated area where people could smoke?
"Answer: I want to think that they did, because smoking was really common when we went to school."
A. The same kind of answer: "Doesn't quite remember."
So, I mean, again, I think I'd have to do a bit more historical research --1 think I -- to try and trace that out. That's probably why I don't remember it from the -- from the depositions, because the answers are vague and uncertain.
304
Q. But you have two witnesses referencing a designated smoking area, so there's at least a possibility that there was a designated smoking area
or what people perceived to be as a designated smoking area at Waycross High, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object -- object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. There's a big difference between a perceived designed smoking area and an actual designed smoking area.
Again, high school students, I'm sure, smoked at the time Mr. Hiott was in high school.
To me, the more interesting and important question is the designated smoking area. And again, I think this testimony is pretty vague and ambiguous.
I'm recalling from other research I did that actually suggests they didn't have a true designated smoking area. But I'd really have to go back and look, so I can't give you any better answer than that.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. As you sit here today, you don't have any evidence that there wasn't a designated smoking area?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. Right now, the evidence
305
is there may have been and there may not have been, you know. That's all I can say, sitting here right
now.
MS. POLLACK: Okay. Do you want to take a quick break?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
(Off the record.)
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. Let me just go back one minute to something you said a little while ago.
You referenced the fact that he was a Baptist?
A. His wife was a Baptist.
Q. His wife was a Baptist.
Was he a Baptist?
A. He did attend the Baptist Church with his wife when they married.
Q. Did he consider himself to be a Baptist?
A. All I know is that he went to the Baptist church with her when they got married.
Q. So you don't know if he was a practicing Baptist?
A. I know he had been raised in -- I'm sorry -another church and that he went to the Baptist church with his wife. That's all I'm saying.
Q. You're talking about his first wife?
A. Sorry. Yes, his first wife.
Q. Did he go to church with his second wife?
A. I don't --1 don't believe so. I don't recall references to them having much of a religious life after they married.
Q. Now, I think you said something about the Baptists believed -- they didn't believe in smoking, right?
A. Right.
Q. And did that have anything to do with health reasons?
A. Well, I don't know.
All I'm saying is that his mother was antismoking; his wife was antismoking, so he -- you know, whether they talked about health reasons, they didn't say in any of the materials, so I can't say. I can't say for certain.
Q. But the question I'm asking you is whether Baptists believe that you shouldn't smoke because it's bad for your health or is there other reasons?
A. I believe there are a variety of reasons they thought you shouldn't smoke. I'm not an expert on Baptist theology.
Q. Are you going to testify at trial regarding
the fact that he was a Baptist or that he went to the Baptist church and that Baptists don't believe in smoking?
A. Well, I think the part that's important here is that he was raised in a household with a very strict mother, who was a Sunday school teacher, who told him not to smoke; that he shouldn't start smoking, that was -- that as all of his siblings said, would have been extremely upset if they saw him smoking and that he was married to a woman who came from a religion that did not believe in smoking and that she herself did not smoke. So I think that's part of the context of understanding his environment on issues of smoking.
Q. Well, isn't your focus the dangers of cigarette smoking?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's my main focus. But I think like all the other things we talked about, you also have to understand when you're talking about a person, what is the environment in which they are getting -- what messages are they getting; what other messages are they getting, what might shape how they understand messages. So it's just part of that.
Q. And isn't part of that the advertising that was bombarding Mr. Hiott when he was a child?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I certainly looked at advertising and took it into account but decided that it did not bear on the issue of public knowledge and awareness of the dangers of smoking. BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. All right.
A. Can I correct one thing?
Q. Yes.
A. Just going back to the high school, just to be clear, I think we sort of -- you may have said one thing and I may have said something else.
What I was trying to say was that I --1 believe that it's possible there's evidence they did not have a designated smoking area. I just don't want to let that be a surprise or something like that.
Q. Are you going to testify at trial that there was or there was not a designated smoking area?
A. I can't say yet. All I'm saying is that it's possible that I actually do have evidence that there was not a designated smoking area, because that's sort
309
recall it firmly to give you a definite answer at this point.
Q. And when we talk about "designated smoking area," that could be inside or outside.
A. I suppose it could be, yes. Just -- all I can say is the term "designated smoking area."
Q. Would that include a place where the kids generally went to smoke on the grounds?
A. No. It would include an area that was officially a designated smoking area, that -- in which it would have said: "Seniors can go here to smoke."
Q. But you can't point me to anything in your particular reliance materials that evidences that there was no designated smoking area?
A. Again, that's what I can't answer at this time, right; that is, whether I actually do have something that says, you know, There's no smoking on -- blah, blah, blah.
I mean, that's what I'm getting at. I just can't pull up all of the particulars I have on his high school experience, especially in the years in which he was there.
whether the kids congregated on the grounds of the high school to smoke?
310
A. I don't know that. I don't think so, but --
Q. Other than the things that we just read where two people recalled that people smoked on the grounds.
A. Yeah. I mean, I think in the general sense, do I have evidence one way or the other that kids smoked or smoked around or on the grounds of the high school? That, I'm not --1 don't think I have a lot on. I was talking more about the designated smoking area.
For example, did the high school say, You may not smoke in high school; you may not smoke on high school grounds, or did they say, You may not smoke except in this area. But I just can't quite finish that thought.
Q. But you plan to talk about that at trial?
A. It could be done. It could be in there.
Yeah, it could be something that comes up.
Q. But you don't have the answer right now?
A. But I don't have the answer right now.
Q. Now, in your expert disclosure, that's Exhibit 3.
A. Okay.
Q. Right above "Fees and Prior Testimony," a couple of sentences up.
A. Hold on.
311
MR. HARRISON: Page 54.
THE WITNESS: 54. Okay. Yes.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. You've got something in here that says "Publications of Various Religious Faiths and Denominations."
A. Where's that? Oh, sorry. I was looking at fees. Okay.
Q. And what is that going to be?
A. Let me think. Now I really am -- now I really am -- I'm starting to lose it.
Q. We're almost done.
A. I understand.
Q. I promise.
A. I'm trying to go through that whole reliance list and figure out what I have in this case.
Q. Is that going to relate to this Baptist issue?
A. I think we've talked about that. I don't think there's any other material. It's mostly about
the context of his life and his marriage as far Baptists are concerned and -- and that he grew up in a religious household with a mother who was antismoking.
Q. But his father smoked?
A. Yes, his father did smoke.
312
Q. Did he smoke in front of his parents?
A. I think eventually, he did. He didn't start smoking until his father died. His mother was still very antismoking.
At some point, he must have, because he grew up, but I can't remember -- because he was 16. I can't recall right now. I would have to see what the depositions say.
Q. And his siblings, some of them smoked?
A. Some of them did. He had older siblings who had left the house. He had younger siblings that he -- his brother Mike, I think, did not smoke or at least did not smoke very long. I don't think his sister Evelyn did. I can't remember any of the others.
Q. I'm not testing your memory.
A. Sorry. Yeah. I'm just --
going to say at trial -A. Sure.
Q. -- about this Baptist issue and whether you're going to claim that the Baptists generally made known to people in the Baptist community that smoking caused cancer.
A. I don't recall anything in my reliance
313
material on Baptists and causing cancer. No, I don't.
I think, for example, there is some material in my reliance list that deals with some of the earlier history of antismoking drives that involved religious organizations that were part of that in the early 20th century. I'm just -- I'm sorry. I'm really trying to recall everything on the list, and I think I've told you everything about Baptists that I have to say specifically.
MS. POLLACK: Okay. Let's mark this here, which is sort of a conglomeration of your notes and things in your folder that you brought with you today that is responsive to our Schedule A.
(The document was marked as Plaintiffs Exhibit 26 for identification.)
THE WITNESS: All right.
Q. What exhibit is this?
A. 26.
Q. Okay. Let me just state for the record that you brought with you -- and we've gone through it -the pile of deposition transcripts that you say you've read.
A. That I've read, correct.
Q. And many of those, if not most of them, have
314
some little -- literally markings -- not words, but markings on them, correct?
A. That is true.
Q. And those are things that you thought were of interest to you, correct?
A. That is true.
Q. Okay. You also had a bunch of interrogatories and amended complaints in addition, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And there may have been some markings on these, although they don't look like they have much.
A. Take sounds right.
Q. Okay. Exhibit 26 is -- what I pulled out of your folder that you brought, that is not duplicative
of things we've already marked -A. Okay.
Q. -- for example, in your folder was also, I think, your reliance materials -MR. HARRISON: Excerpts from the disclosure, correspondence that we received and the deposition notice.
MS. POLLACK: Right. And we did not bother to mark those, because they were already marked. But we'll just reflect that they were in there.
315
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, the front page here of Exhibit 26, it says: "Charters, Growing Up Healthily, 1955. Leader, Junior Health Horizons, 1960. See below."
And then it says: "Please note that Leader is the primary author of Junior Health Horizons, 1960; O'Keefe is a secondary author of the textbook. Meredith, Health and Fitness, 1962. Nicoll, Your Health Today and Tomorrow, 1963. Irwin, Patterns for Living, 1965."
What are those things?
A. These are health textbooks that were used in Georgia schools.
at least -- there's a date afterwards. What does that signify?
A. That's the publication date.
Q. Did you go and get these textbooks?
A. These were textbooks that I was able to identify from the materials found in the University of Georgia, among other places, that listed the acceptable textbooks in health during the time period of Mr. Hiott's youth and schooling days. And then with the help of research assistants, I was able the track down these.
316
Actually, this is a very partial list. I included it simply because I was told, you know, to bring everything and not to throw anything away.
I think this book came with -- which, by the way, are in my reliance materials. It came with a stack of textbooks, as -- as listed here.
I've subsequently gotten other textbooks from the same sources, but they all reflect the research on the textbooks used in Georgia public schools and our attempts -- my attempts, my research assistants' attempts, to gather those so that I have them as part of my reliance material.
Q. Okay. And so you're familiar with those textbooks?
A. I am familiar with them.
Q. Did those textbooks state that cigarettes are addictive?
A. Of course, different textbooks said different things, but most of the textbooks -- all of the textbooks talked about the dangers of smoking.
It depends what time period you're talking about, of course. If you're talking about earlier ones, they talked about what was known at that time. If you're talking about later ones, they add what was known at that time.
317
But, yes, they all talk about the health dangers, how difficult it is to quit. Different ones say it in different ways. Some have more; some have less.
But they talk about -- as I said, health dangers of smoking; smoking is hard to quit; people get hooked on smoking, they might say, things of that sort.
Q. Now, when you get up on the witness stand at trial, are you going to put in front of the jury textbooks from Georgia schools that say specifically
cigarette smoking is addictive; it's hard to quit; you shouldn't smoke because you'll get addicted, and that could lead to cancer -MR. HARRISON: Object.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. -- are you going to put things in that say something like that?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't know exactly what I'm going to say.
But part of my basis for my opinion is based on the availability of the information to children and high school students through health classes, using textbooks, using these -- these and other
318
textbooks.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Now, do you have evidence that Kenneth saw these textbooks?
A. I have evidence that he took a class in health, and I have, from the State of Georgia, the possible textbooks that could have been used to teach that course.
THE WITNESS: I don't know if it was a day or a week or a whole year. All I know is that there was a health course that he took, and we have the textbooks that were used for those health courses.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And you don't know if the class actually went over that chapter, do you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I don't know exactly which textbook he read or used.
All I can tell you is that he had a health class, and here is what was in the textbook.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So you don't have one of the teachers stepping forward from when Kenny was -- when Kenny was
319
a student there, saying, We went over this chapter?
A. Yeah. I can't imagine anyone ever having such information. I don't have a teacher, no.
Q. So it's possible that it was a chapter in the textbook and they never got to it, isn't it?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. I can't say for certain that he read this chapter on this day, no.
Q. Now, the second page of this exhibit, you've got some handwriting here, and the third thing down on your slashes says -- what does that say, "Bring ED records"?
A. Yeah. I was making a list of all of the things based on your notice that I needed to bring, and I'd asked some of the lawyers about, you know, well, what things does this include. And that's educational records and employment records. But as I understood it, that since that's kind of part of my reliance list, it's only if actually I made any markings on them, and since I hadn't made any markings, I didn't bring an additional copy.
Q. Okay. His educational records that you reviewed and his employment record are in your reliance materials?
320
A. Yes, that's right.
Q. And then you have something here that says "call history works, more textbooks?"
A. That's my research assistant, and they have more textbooks. I think that was just a note to myself saying, we're continually -- they're
continually sending textbooks. And I'm not sure at what point I made this note, but part of it was to make sure that I was up-to-date on all the textbooks that they had been able to get and copy.
Q. Okay. The next page here. So the next page says "Hiott biography"; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you've got all kinds of notes. I think -- maybe you can just read through them so we know what they say.
A. Do you want me to read them aloud?
Q. Yes. Just read them out loud, just so we know.
A. Okay. So this page says: "Hiott biography. Family. Mother did not smoke. Wife did not smoke. Religion. Some siblings smoked. Some didn't. Some quit." The message got through, I think.
Q. I think it said: "Did the message get through" ?
321
A. "Did the mes-"--sorry. Thank you. You're better at reading than I am.
"Did the message get through?" There's no question mark, but it's a question. "Evidence that it did go through. No evidence that industry/advertising
got through. His awareness is consistent with opinion polls. The message not to smoke was common, his mother, the mocking of advertisements."
Q. "The mocking of the advertisements"?
A. Right.
Q. What does that mean?
A. He mocked the Viceroy advertisement "The Thinking Man's Cigarette." He mocked the Winston advertisement, "Winston tastes good as a cigarette should." He and his friends used to joke about the advertisements on the floor of the post office. And that's from the depositions.
Q. So when you say: "No evidence that industry/advertising got through," didn't you just contradict that by saying he joked about it? So that means it got through.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: By "get through," I meant their message didn't get through. If they were trying to sell him cigarettes, the evidence actually is that
322
he was laughing at them, so if that's getting through, that's...
Q. But wasn't he buying the cigarettes? Isn't that evidence that it got through?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, it's not. It's not. You can't make that assumption.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But you can't make an assumption that it didn't?
MR. HARRISON: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Right. But I do have direct evidence that he was -- he was mocking the advertisements, which at least it suggests that he was not -- he was not persuaded, taken in, and he didn't take them seriously. I can just tell you that's what it says. I mean, that's the evidence I have.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Well, are you an expert in advertising and its effects on people?
A. I'm looking at Mr. Hiott. I'm looking at the whole context of information. So to the extent you ask me questions, what effects did ads have on him,
323
the evidence I have from his life is that he seemed to be mocking advertisements.
Q. And I'm trying to just understand what qualifies you to render an expert opinion on that.
A. Well, it's not an expert opinion. It's in -it's in -- it's in the depositions.
Q. So you're not rendering an expert opinion on that, are you?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think I'm doing exactly what I did for everything else I said. I'm reading the information, including the depositions, and I'm coming to some conclusions.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. So it's your interpretation that he was mocking the ads and that therefore, they didn't affect him in his purchasing habits, correct?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I didn't say any of that.
All I said was that he mocked the advertisements.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. And then you said you concluded from that that he wasn't affected by them.
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I'm not sure I said that, but what I said was that to the extent that advertisements came up in Mr. Hiott's life -- and I think this is pretty much one of the --1 think it's pretty much the only. There may be something else, but this is what I think is the only real evidence about any connection he had to advertising. He was mocking them.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Wasn't there some testimony that he thought it was pretty cool that somebody thought he looked like the Marlboro Man?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't recall that. He didn't smoke Marlboros, so I'm not sure what that meant.
Anyway, all can I say is when it came to discussions of advertisements in his life, this is what I found.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And you feel comfortable rendering an opinion on the fact that because somebody jokes around about an ad, that it didn't affect them?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, again, I think it says what it says. It says that he -- he -- it says
that he didn't take these advertisements very seriously. He made fun of them.
I think when you add that to all of the other things I've said about the message in relation to the advertisements, I think this just reinforces my point; that the advertisements alone or the advertisements in the context of all of the other material do not stop the message about the dangers of smoking from getting to people.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't it true that really all you can say about Mr. Hiott and the advertising is the fact that he was aware of the slogans that are referenced? Isn't that really all you can say about it?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, no. Again -- again, I think just read the deposition, and it says they're making fun of them.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Isn't that your interpretation of what that evidence says, and isn't that really not your province?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it's the same thing I base everything else on. I read the depositions
and I draw my conclusion.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. But is that your province as a historian, to decide what Mr. Hiott was -- what he thought was funny or what he took seriously? Is that your province as a historian?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't see it's any different than me reading anything else and drawing a conclusion.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Do we need a historian to read a deposition and say what Mr. Hiott thought of a particular ad?
MR. HARRISON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not --1 am not here to talk about what he thought about a particular ad.
I'm simply putting it in the context of information I have about how the messages about smoking affected the public at large and, to the extent possible, Mr. Hiott. And that's a piece of evidence that I think is useful for that conclusion.
BY MS. POLLACK:
A. "No Frank Statement in Waycross newspaper, but in Atlanta paper and Savannah paper."
I read the Waycross newspaper.
One of the things that often appears when one's doing research on the history of public information about advertising is the Frank Statement.
I noted that it did not appear in the Waycross newspaper, though it did appear in the Atlanta and Savannah papers.
Q. And what does the next thing say?
A. "Booths on smoking and cigarettes" or "booths from smoking" -- "antismoking booths and cigarettes around Waycross at the fairs."
Q. No. I'm not asking you to interpret it -A. Oh, I'm sorry.
Q. -- I'm asking you to read it.
A. I'm sorry. You mean literally what I was going to say.
"Company statements analyzed" --
Q. No. Before that.
A. "Booths" -- no. "Booths on cigarettes" -I'm sorry. "Booths on cigarettes" -- "booths on smoking and cigarettes, not booths on advertising."
Q. Okay. And what does the next thing say?
A. "Company statements analyze how many.
328
Waycross. Did the majority of articles not have statements. Maybe get a percent. Access both frequency and context, credibility, interested parties, students thought to be skeptical of adverse, more aware of the issues in a tobacco-growing area."
More?
Q. Yeah. We'll go to the next page in one minute.
Now, the part that says "company statements, analyze how many," why were you interested in that?
A. Part of the whole question of context. We talked about company statements. I know I saw them.
I knew I saw them, but I also knew that there were places where there was discussions of the dangers of smoking with no company statements. There were cases where the company statements appeared in the middle of other statements. I was just trying to get a sense of how many company statements there were.
Q. And is that relevant to you, to your opinions?
things I've already said is that company statements appeared, but they were not pervasive. They were not -- they were not as common as statements about the dangers of smoking. It was all part of the context of
329
information.
Q. And when you said get a percentage, did you do that?
A. Let's see. I don't think I actually have a percentage, no. Something that might be worth doing, but I don't have it right now.
Q. And the next page?
A. "Ricks, take another look. Theda, second sister. Father's cancer 1950s. Awareness of cancer. Attuned to cancer issue. Message on cancer. Active in schools. Concerned about cancer. Lots of material on paper on cancer. Cancer in family. Jacksonville Journal circulates and St. Augustine he says he read. Question marks about the Atlanta Constitution and the Florida Times Union. Paper route. Helped" -- "first helped brother with route in 1950s, then had own route in the '60s. Boy Scouts. Antismoking."
Q. Are you going to testify about the Boy Scouts?
the question of whether he was a Boy Scout, because I seem to recall at some point, someone said something about it. I just made a note to myself on that issue.
Q. Okay. Let's go to the next page.
A. That's it. That's it -- this one?
330
Q. Yes.
A. Okay.
Q. There's some notes on Waycross media center?
A. These were notes I took when I was in Waycross trying to track down information. So these were different places that people had told me to look into.
I think I'm just basically writing down notes as I travel saying "Go to the" -- someone said, "Go to the Waycross media center, the high school" --"Waycross High School, also known as" -- sorry -"Ware County High School, also known as Waycross High School. Made into Ware County High School in 1993.
Last class, 1966. New high school opened. He graduates from" --1 think he graduates from new high school.
"Burt Reynolds and Pemell Roberts."
A. There were two people who were famous Waycrossians.
Q. Burt Reynolds -A. He was.
Q. -- was from Waycross, Georgia?
A. He was from Waycross, Georgia.
Q. Wow.
331
A. There was even an article about him in one of the newspapers.
Q. Was Burt Reynolds a smoker?
A. That's the next page. "Dangers of smoking?" There's a question mark. I'm just thinking, did --1 was trying to remember if there was a movie with him that had an antismoking message or if he was in the American Smokeout. It was a question to self.
Q. These are just -- look like phone numbers and various names of people, right?
A. Yes. It says we were trying to find like this media center, the high school, newspapers, someone who would give me the name of a retired English teacher, though he wasn't available. Someone mentioned he had written a book called "This Magic Wilderness," which we looked at in a high school. It didn't seem relevant.
Q. Did you actually speak to any of Kenny Hiott's teachers?
A. We didn't find any teachers who were there when he was in high school.
Q. Did you try?
A. We did ask. We did give the names -- give the years and see if there was anyone currently in the Ware County High School, but there was no one who went
332
back that far that we could find.
Q. Did you speak to anyone in Waycross who knew Kenny Hiott?
A. No, I didn't do any interviews with people.
I relied on the depositions for that.
Q. Okay. And we've got another two pages of handwriting.
A. "Public library. No school stuff," so we went to the public library. "No school stuff. Only one machine for newspapers. Check Web site for hours. Churches mentioned by sister. 1st Christian Church of Waycross, Disciples of Christ. His mother taught Sunday school." Then the address, "412 McDonald Street, Waycross, Georgia. Hebardville Baptist Church, 224 East Waring, attended after marriage to
Evelyn" -- "Linda Evelyn."
Q. You probably meant Linda Beverly.
A. What did I put, "Linda Evelyn"?
Q. You put "Evelyn." But he wasn't married to Evelyn. At least I hope not.
A. No. That's weird.
And then Hiott was pretty religious growing up, lots of church stuff, Disciples of Christ.
Q. Where did you find all of that information, that he was pretty religious growing up?
333
A. That's --
Q. From the depositions?
A. They attended church every Sunday.
Q. And the next -- there's a bunch of typed-up notes, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And that's stuff you learned from the depositions?
A. This is -- yeah. I actually had my research assistant go through and give me a kind of quick biography. I think this is probably when I first started reading the deposition so I could kind of keep the dates and things straight.
Waycross, Georgia.
A. And I believe these are all in my reliance material.
Q. Did you take all of these photos?
A. Yes. We took -- again, I was accompanied by a research assistant. I had a camera. She took some; I took some.
Q. Okay. Are these the e-mails between you and your counsel?
A. These are the e-mails between myself and, yes, Jones Day people.
334
MR. HARRISON: Anything missing from the originals, we'll deal with it after. Keep going.
BY MS. POLLACK:
Q. Okay. And then there's an invoice or two here, February 6th, February 7th.
A. Sorry about that. I think I made a mistake on the February. I think one is supposed to be February 7th, and one is supposed to be March 6th.
Q. Okay.
A. But they didn't call me on that.
Q. So one of them is for the work from February 1 through 29, and the second one is for January 1
through 31, right?
A. Right.
Q. Okay. And then your CV is the last thing, correct?
A. Right.
Q. And that one is dated April 2, 2012.
A. So I just printed that off and brought it, most recent.
Q. That's the most recent?
A. That's -- that's the most recent as of April 2nd.
Q. Okay. Great.
MS. POLLACK: I don't think I have any more
335
questions.
Is there anything else we need to do on the
record?
MR. HARRISON: Doctor, I have one question.
CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR. HARRISON:
Q. You saw a bunch of documents today that you haven't seen before.
Do any of those documents change your opinions in this case?
MR. HARRISON: I have nothing else to say on the record.
MS. POLLACK: Okay. Good. So we'll just go off the record for a minute.
(Off the record.)
(The deposition was concluded at 5:30 p.m.)
336
CERTIFICATE STATE OF FLORIDA COUNTY OF BROWARD
I, WESLEY THOMAS HUGHES, RPR, RMR, RDR, FPR-006, certify that I was authorized to and did stenographically report the foregoing proceedings on the 4th day of April, 2012, at 19 West Flagler Street, Suite 1020, Miami, Miami-Dade County, Florida; and that the transcript is a true record of my stenographic notes.
I further certify that I am not a relative, employee, attorney, or counsel of any of the parties, nor am I a relative or employee of any of the parties' attorney or counsel connected with the action, nor am I financially interested in the action.
Dated this 19th day of April, 2012.
W. THOMAS HUGHES, RPR, RMR, RDR, CRR, FPR Registered Professional Reporter Registered Merit Reporter Registered Diplomate Reporter Certified Realtime Reporter Florida Professional Reporter
337
CERTIFICATE OF OATH
THE STATE OF FLORIDA COUNTY OF BROWARD
I, the undersigned authority, certify that KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D., personally appeared before me and was di sworn.
W. THOMAS HUGHES, RPR, RMR, RDR, CRR, FPF Registered Professional Reporter Registered Merit Reporter Registered Diplomate Reporter Certified Realtime Reporter Florida Professional Reporter
338
CERTIFICATE OF DEPONENT
I have read the foregoing transcript of my deposition and except for any corrections or changes noted on the errata sheet, I hereby subscribe to the transcript as an accurate record
of the statements made by me.
KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D.
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN before and to me this__day of______, 20__.
NOTARY PUBLIC My Commission expires:
339
ERRATA SHEET IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES - HIOTT DATE: APRIL 4, 2012
PAGE LINE	CORRECTION AND REASON
(DATE)	KENNETH LIPARTITO, PH.D.