Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Original Image of 1987 WL 1371239 (PDF)
1987 WL 1371239 (D.N.J.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, D. New Jersey.
Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the Estate of Rose D. Cipollone, Plaintiff,
v.
LIGGETT GROUP INC., a Delaware corporation; Philip Morris Incorporated, a
Virginia corporation; and Loews Theatres, Inc., a New York corporation, Defendants.
No. 83-2864SA.
October 15, 1987.
(Deposition of Fred Carstensen.)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Jurisdiction: D.N.J.
Name of Expert: Fred Carstensen
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances:
Messrs. Budd Larner & Gross
Attorneys for plaintiff
150 JFK Parkway
Short Hills, New Jersey 07078
By: Marc Edell, Esq., Of Counsel.
Messrs. Webster & Sheffield
Attorneys for defendant Liggett Group Inc.
237 Park Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10017
By: Trevor O'neill, Esq., Of Counsel.
Messrs. Brown & Connery
Attorneys for defendant Philip Morris Incorporated
360 Haddon Avenue
P.O. Box 539
Westmont, New Jersey 08108
By: John J. Mulderig, Esq., Of Counsel -and- Messrs. Shook, Hardy & Bacon
Twentieth Floor
Mercantile Bank Tower
1101 Walnut
Kansas City, Missouri 64106
By: Steven C. Parrish, Esq., Allen R. Purvis, Esq., Of Counsel -and- Messrs. Arnold & Porter
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
1200 New Hampshire Avenue, N. W.
Washington, D.C. 20036
By: Peter K. Bleakley, Esq., Janet L. Johnson, Esq., Of Counsel.
Also Prsent: Messrs. Struker, Tams and Dill
Attorneys for Lorillard, Inc.
33 Washington Street
Newark, New Jersey 07102
By: Douglas Moore, Esq., Of Counsel.
Hon. H. Lee Sarokin.
Deposition of FRED CARSTENSEN, a witness, taken by plaintiff pursuant to subpoena at the offices of Messrs. Webster
& Sheffield, 237 Park Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10017, on October 15, 1987, at 11:15 a.m., before Lawrence Greenberg, a
Shorthand Reporter and Notary Public of the State of New York.
FRED CARSTENSEN, called as a witness by plaintiff, being first duly sworn by the Notary Public (Lawrence Greenberg),
testified as follows:
MR. PARRISH: Before we begin the questioning, let me make a brief statement on the record.
As you know, some of the documents included in the documents we produced from Dr. Carstensen are documents post-1966.
I just want to make it clear that it is our position that the advertising, promotion and marketing of series 1966 is out of the case.
So, please don't take the fact that documents after 1966 are included in the ones that Dr. Carstensen produced responsive to the
subpoena is in any way a waiver of our position, that that is not part of the case.
MR. EDELL: I will certainly not do that.
MR. PARRISH: Thank you.
MR. EDELL: Do you have any other statements with regard to the subpoena and what has been produced and what hasn't
been produced?
MR. PARRISH: It is my understanding that everything responsive to the subpoena has been produced. There were no documents
withheld. There was no correspondence between Dr. Carstensen and lawyers. So that was not withheld.
MR. EDELL: Okay.
Professor?
THE WITNESS: That's fine.
MR. EDELL: My name is Marc Edell. I am an attorney. I represent the plaintiff in this case.
I am going to ask you some questions here today concerning your background, education, your experience, your review of
materials pertinent to this case and your opinions and the factual basis for those opinions as expressed in certain summaries
prepared by counsel for the defendants and provided to me.
If any of my questions are unclear, they don't make any sense, please tell me, and I will try to rephrase those questions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
If you don't know a particular fact or you don't recall a particular fact, tell me, because we are going to presume, once you
answer a question, you understood it and you accurately responded to it. Okay?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. EDELL: At any point in time you want to take a break, you want to talk to Mr. Parrish or anybody else, consult with him,
let me know. You are free to do so. Okay?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. EDELL: Have you ever had your deposition taken before?
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. EDELL: Have you ever testified in court before?
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. EDELL: Have you spoken with Mr. Parrish or anyone else concerning the nature of the deposition? THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. EDELL: Just so we are clear on it, you understand that you are under oath?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. EDELL: You understand that everything that you and I or anybody else in this room will say during the course of the
proceeding will be taken down by the gentleman to the right that is a certified shorthand reporter. You understand later under
certain circumstances that testimony can be used at the time of trial?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. EDELL: Although we are in an informal atmosphere as opposed to a courtroom, you are drinking a Coke, I am having
coffee, you should still treat this as if you are testifying in court. Okay?
THE WITNESS: Yes.
EXAMINATION BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What did you do between the time period 1969 to 1972?
A. In 1969, I was still full-time in the graduate program at Yale University.
Beginning in the fall of 1970, through spring of '71, I was a part-time instructor in the social science collegiate division of the
college of the University of Chicago and also a part-time instructor in the M.B.A. program at the Illinois Institute of Technology,
both in Chicago, Illinois.
Q. Is there a reason why that is not listed in your curriculum vitae?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Just that it's -- they weren't full-time appointments. I held a variety of teaching assistantship positions at Yale and taught in
some summer programs. But it's typical in a professional vita only to include the full-time regular academic appointments.
And then '71 to '72, I held a doctoral dissertation fellowship and was in Helsinki, London and Paris for about a period of 15
months.
Q. What did you teach at the social science collegiate division, the college, University of Chicago?
A. Well, the primary teaching responsibility I had was as a staff member of what was called Social Science I, which was a
Robert Hutchins great books course, for three quarters.
In addition, I was on the staff of the course that taught Russian civilization. I taught my own course in -- I forget the title of
it, but it dealt with economic history. It was a specialized course.
Then I also would give guest lectures or guest seminars in some of the established seminars or courses at Chicago.
Q. What is Social Science I? What is the nature of the course? What are the materials? What do you teach?
A. I started with Plato's Republic and Aristotle's politics and worked our way through in three quarters a large variety of material
on the political economy, economics, particularly American history, Federalist, the Constitution, de Tocqueville, Lincoln.
Ultimately at the time we ended up with, I think, some of the work by Milton Friedman on capitalism.
Q. You were teaching assistant, or did you actually teach the course?
A. No, I taught the course. The course is faculty-level appointment but not tenure track.
Q. You also said you taught economic history, is that correct?
A. I taught a specialized two-quarter course of my own design that dealt with the variety of issues in institutional economic
history.
Q. What do you mean by institutional economic history?
A. One of the areas professionally that I have long had an interest in has been the role of institutions, how institutions are
constructed, designed, evolve. And so the course had what both historians and economic historians would readily recognize
as an institutional emphasis.
Q. What is an institution?
A. It can be anything from the structure of the firms through the political organization of the state through legal structures. -
Q. What course material did you use?
A. That is a very long time ago. It was 17 years ago or so that I taught that course.
I know I used John R. Commons' “The Legal Foundation of Capitalism.” I used readings from Hobbes' “Leviathan,” and I think
Locke's, I think I may have included some work by McPherson, M-c-P-h-e-r-s-o-n -- I may be wrong on the spelling; it was a
Canadian political economist, and a variety of -- I think I probably also used work by Willard Hurst.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
I am confused because I use a lot of Hurst material now. I think I may have used a book that he had written called “Along the
Conditions of Freedom in Nineteenth Century America.” Then I used a variety of articles.
It's very hard for me to reconstruct the exact material that I used in that course.
Q. What is political economic history? You used that phrase.
A. If I did, I misspoke myself. There is political economy, and economic history.
Q. Let's go back to your master's. What did you get your master's in? a
A. I got a master's in economics in 1969.
Q. You got your Ph.D. in economics also?
A. No, in history.
Q. What was your thesis?
A. My doctoral thesis had a title of “American Enterprise in Foreign Markets.”
Q. Had you ever done any work with regard to the cigarette industry prior to your participation in this case?
A. What do you mean by “work”?
Q. Papers, research.
A. I hadn't done any direct research on the cigarette industry, no.
Q. Any papers?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever done a content analysis?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what a content analysis is?
A. I have heard the term.
Q. What is your understanding of the term?
A. I don't think I'm prepared to try to define it.
Q. What is your understanding of the term? You said you heard of it. What is your understanding, regardless whether it's right,
wrong or otherwise?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I am very uncomfortable doing that. I don't have any strong notions about what it is.
Q. So, in other words, you have heard the phrase before, but you never -- you really don't know what it means; is that right?
You have no idea as to what it means?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. Obviously I have some idea about it because I have heard of the term.
The reason I am reluctant to use it as a historian, or to try to define it is that content analysis is not a tool that is common
within the historical profession.
In fact, I don't recall ever at a professional meeting or in a historical monograph, I don't recall ever seeing the use of something
that anybody referred to as content analysis.
I know that it's something that is done by people in other fields. I am uncomfortable trying to give any kind of statement as to
how those other fields go about doing content analysis.
Q. What fields are you referring to?
A. Well, offhand, I know that, for instance, there is this popular book “Megatrends.” I think this author may have been Naismith.
And I recall that he said that he was basing his comments on content analysis.
So, I'm not quite sure what category of -- I am not sure one would call Naismith a scholar. I have the impression that he might
have -- I don't know whether -- I guess I associated him with business schools or something. I imagine that perhaps people
in that area may use that approach.
But as I say, it's not one -- it's not an approach that I am at all familiar with within my scholarly disciplines.
Q. When you say your scholarly disciplines, what are you referring to?
A. I am a historian, and I do business in economic history, especially within that. I don't know whether one wants to call that
a single discipline or disciplines.
But within the range of the literature that I typically and regularly read as part of my professional responsibilities and professional
interests, I do not come across articles that refer to or make reference to content analysis.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, had you ever attempted to ascertain what information the public had concerning any particular
subject?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate the question?
Q. Sure. In this case you have expressed opinions through counsel that the American public knew certain information, knew of
certain information concerning cigarette smoking and health, is that correct?
A. No, I don't believe it is.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. You are not going to testify that the American public was aware at different points in time of reports that cigarette smoking
might be harmful to one's health, is that correct?
A. No.
I in fact have expressed the opinion through counsel that the American public was aware of the claims about the health
consequences of smoking. But by “aware,” I mean specifically that the public had exposure to the variety of messages that
contain those claims.
I am not making any statement as to what the public knew.
Q. Had you prior to your participation in this case ever attempted to ascertain what the public was aware of concerning any
other claims?
A. Yes.
Q. What claims were those?
A. Well, as part of the studies that I had done for the monograph that I published, one of the relevant issues in writing that
kind business institutional economic history, touching on those subdisciplines was determining how the particular products that
the two companies I was studying were perceived -- not perceived, but the process by which they went about exposing their
customers, potential customers, to the product.
Q. Which monograph are you referring to?
A. The foreign enterprise -- I mean “American Enterprise in Foreign Markets” that was published by North Carolina Press in
1984, I think.
Q. Studies of Singer and International Harvester in imperial Russia?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. When you say you discussed the process by which the company went about exposing their product to prospective customers,
how did you do that?
A. Well, as you may appreciate, I was -- the purpose of the book, the study, was to write a history of the emergence of a couple of
the most important American multinational enterprises in the latter part of the nineteenth and first part of the twentieth centuries.
As part of that, part of my scholarly responsibility, I would say was to talk about and describe and assess the marketing
approaches that the companies used to establish and develop markets for their products.
I assessed that both in terms of their domestic American experience and then their experience in international markets and then
specifically focused on the experience in imperial Russia.
Q. What you're saying is that you studied the way that Singer and International Harvester marketed their products, correct?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. That is what you contend to be a study of what awareness the public had of claims made by Singer and International Harvester
about their product, correct?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: If you could rephrase the question for me, please.
Q. We got off on this series of questions by my asking you whether or not prior to this case you had ever attempted to determine
what the public was aware of concerning any other claims. Do you remember?
A. Right, yes.
Q. You told me that you made such a study in regard to your book, the American enterprise in foreign markets studies of Singer,
International Harvester in imperial Russia, right?
A. Yes.
Q. You told us that you did that by studying the marketing of Singer and International Harvester, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Other than studying the marketing by Singer and International Harvester, had you ever made any other attempt to ascertain
what the public was aware of concerning any other claims?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. Are you saying other than in that book?
Q. Yes, other than in that book.
A. I did spend several years on what is an unfinished project on an enterprise biography of what was International Harvester,
what is now Navistar International, which involved as part of the broad spectrum of questions that I was addressing issues
that related, more detailed and at the same time over a broader chronological period, to the marketing history of the range of
products that International Harvester had manufactured and sold.
Q. When you say “the marketing,” the marketing plans, marketing plans, marketing of certain products by International
Harvester and Singer, did you make this analysis through internal documents of the companies or did you go out and review
articles or both?
A. For the particular objectives I had for those studies, I did both.
Q. Tell me how you went about obtaining articles about the marketing of products by Singer and International Harvester.
A. Well, International Harvester is relatively straightforward, because the agricultural press in virtually every country is quite
extensive historically. As well as there being specialized trade journals, for instance, there is a Farm Implement News that has
been published continuously since roughly 1880.
So one of the projects, one of the research projects that I undertook as part of working on the corporate history, was to go through
every issue of Farm Implement News from the time it was published until I think I finished the survey down to maybe 1925.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
So I have done about a 45-year run, and then wherever I can find other farm implement specialized journals. There were some
that were very difficult to get ahold of.
And then insofar as I could get access to other specialized - articles in the agricultural press that discussed farm implements, I
reviewed the publications of the Department of Agriculture, which had played a major role in making farmers aware, that is,
providing them exposure to information about agricultural technologies that were available to them.
So that in the farm implement area, it was -- in one sense it was easy and straightforward, though it was a massive research
undertaking.
The sewing machine was more difficult. Singer's relative dominance of the market meant there was not a trade journal that was
easily accessible. There was one. So it was more indirect, and I didn't find satisfactory evidence in public descriptions, that is
to say in print media, though I did use -- I had knowledge about the kinds of advertising and other devices that Singer used
to make itself -- to present itself to the public.
In that case, one of the useful sources or indicators of the kind of awareness or exposures that the public was getting was
looking at literature.
You may recall “Fiddler on the Roof.” The acquisition of a sewing machine was a very important part of the life of the village
for the tailor. That was a useful indicator of the kind of role.
There is also -- in fact, in the case of Russia, as I recall, Lenin, I think I used it in my study there, Lenin -- no, it's not Lenin, but
it was one of the early Russian radicals, I think in the 1870s, who sets one of her descriptions of the conditions of the working
class in a sewing shop. It happened they didn't use sewing machines.
So that also gave me a measure of when Russian society became acknowledged, and an awareness -- because I had public
articles chronologically clear to when that literary piece was published that showed there was clear transformation in the
acknowledgement of the exposures or the awareness of the impact that the sewing machine had on the association of work and
life and availability of manufactured or machine-sewn clothing.
Q. The trade journals that you looked at to determine what claims the public was aware of, being made by International
Harvester, how did you organize them?
A. In the case of International Harvester, I was interested in the trade journals because they told me what the farm implement
dealers, who are an important obvious intermediary between the manufacturers and the farmers, were seeing.
I didn't organize them in any, I think, meaningful sense; I simply reviewed every part of that literature to which I could get access.
Q. How did you summarize them?
A. As a historian, I'm only occasionally interested in making summary statements. I am as a historian rather interested in
recreating what the experiences were or what the set of the line of decisions were, or the pattern of policy development,
depending on what the topic is.
So, what I am interested in is trying to -- if I can use the analogy -- of painting a clear picture of what the processes were, and
in this case, of using the farm journals of what the dealers were seeing at particular points in time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
So that I don't think in the several hundred pages that I have written on the manuscript of the history of International Harvester
that I ever made a summary about the trade journals. They were just part of the raw information that as a historian I would use
to paint my picture or recreate this sequence of the flow of information and patterns of activity or trends.
Q. I assume you used internal documents from International Harvester in doing this historical analysis?
A. Yes.
Q. Why did you use those?
A. Well, in these historical studies that I have referred to, I was interested in the whole variety of questions of recreating the
history of the enterprise.
I would like to call them enterprise biography in the sense that they are analogous to the biography of an individual in which
one tries to cover all facets of an individual.
So I took as my canvas all the facets of the operation of the company, so that I was interested in manufacturing technology and
industrial relations, in the structure of wages, in any welfare policies that the companies introduce.
Q. Let's get back to the marketing claims. That has nothing to do with welfare policies.
All I want to to do is find out why you are interested in reviewing the internal marketing plans.
A. AS a historian, my instinct and the reason for my answer following the form that it did was that for the particular broad
question in which I was interested at the time for those studies, the marketing existed only as part of a very broad context of
historical investigation. The marketing was clearly part of that story. I was particularly interested in reconstructing, because
I was writing enterprise biography, the development of those marketing plans and relating it to the whole internal operation
of the enterprise.
Q. With regard to International Harvester, the original question dealt with your prior experience in determining what the public
was aware of regarding certain claims. You told us that you looked at the trade journals and you looked at the marketing plans,
right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. With regard to that particular issue. Forget about the rest of the history of International Harvester.
A. I'm sorry. I got confused by the interplay. If you could restate the question.
Q. The question that precipitated this line of answers, at least as far as I am concerned, was my question to you as to whether
or not prior to this litigation you had ever attempted to ascertain what the public was aware of regarding any other claims.
You told us that you had, with regard to Singer and International Harvester, You told us that in doing that you looked specifically
with regard to International Harvester at trade journals and marketing plans; is that right?
A. Among other things.
Q. Let's find out what else.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I mentioned the agricultural press and literature where it was germane.
Q. What literature?
A. Literature literature. Isaac Singer's stories of Poland. Where I came across -- if there were stories, fiction that purported
to describe life at a particular time, autobiographical or biographical accounts if they provided some kind of information that
was germane to that.
Q. With regard to your work in this case, what marketing plans did you look at?
A. I haven't looked at any marketing plans.
Q. With regard to your work in this case, what literature did you look at?
A. In the form that I just talked about in terms of poetry and fiction?
Q. Literature literature, as you described it.
A. Well, I reviewed what I could of the popular literature that existed from -- popular in the sense of widely read in America
-- in the thirties and forties and fifties.
And I consulted an English professor whose last name completely slips my mind. I think his first name is Richard. I am not
a -- well, I consulted him about where in literature he had found references that were germane to the question on which I had
undertaken research.
Q. Who is this person, other than being an English professor? How did you meet this person?
A. I asked, I think, Allen Purvis. I said I am not an English professor, and I would like to talk to a fellow scholar who comes
from that discipline, because that is one of the areas of information that is germane to the historical study. And I would go and
find one on my own if need be. But I asked whether they knew of anybody that had worked on this question.
I was given the name of this individual who at the time was visiting, I think, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and I think he
holds a regular position in the University of Kansas.
I'm sorry, I can't remember his last name. His father is a famous basketball coach. It's Richard. It will come to me later. I
consulted him.
Q. Who is Mr. Purvis?
A. Allen Purvis.
Q. Who is he?
A. Him. He is a lawyer.
Q. Representing who?
A. I never got quite straight who represented whom. I knew he was counsel for one or more of the tobacco companies.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. What information did you receive from this English professor?
A. He had in fact undertaken a survey of literature and had some specific references to give me. As I recall, everything that he
gave me was in the set of material that I provided to you.
Q. I want to know what he provided to you specifically.
A. As I say, he provided me references. I think he sent me several pages that had excerpts from various novels with the title of
the novel and the page reference so that I could go and verify the accuracy of the quote for myself.
Q. What was the nature of the subject that these quotes dealt with?
A. Cigarette smoking.
Q. What was your understanding of the information that he gave you? Was it supposed to be a complete inventory of the
literature and what was contained in the literature concerning cigarette smoking?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate the question?
Q. Sure. What did he tell you he was giving you?
A. He told me that he was giving me what he had found in the surveys that he had done.
Q. Found with regard to cigarettes, is that what you're saying?
A. Yes.
Q. What surveys had he conducted?
A. Well, it's my understanding from him that he had looked at what the most popular books had been in terms, I think, of some
measure, possibly of sales and had looked at those books.
I don't know what his selection procedure was other than he told me that he looked at the popular ones, and they were indeed
authors that I recognized as being authors that had been popular historically in this time frame. These were the materials in that
literature that he had found that talked about cigarette smoking.
Q. Did you do anything to ascertain how representative this list was of the literature, the various time periods for which you
were furnished this?
A. Well, as I recall, I talked with him about that, because that is a question that any scholar, certainly a historian, wants to
be concerned about.
The problem from a research point of view is that there are no indexes available that would facilitate that kind of evaluation.
So that on the particular question of the representativeness of the particular selections, I don't have -- I can't claim that it's
representative. But I can't claim or I can't say that it's unrepresentative. We simply don't have any standard for making that
kind of determination.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. You don't know whether or not the list of citations given to you by this English professor whose last name you don't recall
was or was not representative of the literature existing during the time period for which you made this analysis, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate --
MR. EDELL: Read it back to the witness, please.
(Question read.)
A. No.
Q. What is incorrect about it, sir?
A. We specifically talked, as I recall, about the issue of representativeness, and the answer is that it is indeterminate.
Q. What do you mean by “indeterminate”?
A. There is no standard on which one could make in our joint opinions as scholars a statement as to its representativeness.
Q. What steps did either you or this nameless professor take to insure that it was as representative as you could possibly make it?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. It's important when one undertakes research to assess what the context is, as I have indicated, and the issue of
representativeness is an issue of context.
It's not uncommon in historical studies to be sometimes difficult to make an assessment of representativeness, because, as I
have already indicated, there is no available standard.
And let me flip that over and give you a contra-example why I say it's indeterminate in this case. There is no index available, as I
have indicated, for the topics and content of the massive literature that was published during those years. There is for the modern
period comprehensive quantification of all of the citations in all of the scholarly social science journals, so one can make specific
counts of how many citations the articles of the faculty members in a specific department have had in a specific period of time,
and can give that as a percentage of the total number of citations. Then you can really say something about whether they are
average or below average. You can identify whether a faculty member is representative of the productivity or the citation level.
There is simply no basis, as I have indicated, on which he in his professional judgment thought we could resolve that. There
is nothing in my professional experience or in my research that permitted -- gave me access to a basis on which to make a
judgment about its representativeness.
Q. So is it fair to say after that long response that you did nothing to determine whether or not it was representative?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. What did you do? You don't have to tell me there wasn't an index, there wasn't that, it was extremely difficult. All I want to
know is what either you or this English professor did in an attempt to insure that it was representative.
If you did nothing, tell me nothing. If you tell me it was impossible, it was impossible. All I know is what you did.
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate that question?
Q. If you don't understand it, I will ask you another question.
If you don't understand it, tell me.
A. I thought I had answered your question.
Q. You told me it was difficult. You told me that it was because there weren't these indices, and therefore you couldn't do what
you can presently do in order to insure that it was representative.
And I appreciate all of that. All I want to know is what you did affirmatively, given what existed, to insure that the literature
was representative. That's all. Very simple question.
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. What do you mean by -- could you tell me what you mean by “act affirmatively”?
Q. I said what you did, what you did to insure that it was representative. Not act affirmatively, not act negatively, just what you
did to determine whether or not it was representative. It's a simple question.
A. On the basis of Richard's, and I can't remember his last name, his professional judgment and experience and my impression,
my assumption is that he double-checked, even though he is very knowledgeable about the field. There was no way to deal
with that issue directly or indirectly.
We certainly looked and we used our combined professional scholarly research experience and knowledge of the kinds of things
that were available to try to resolve that issue, and we found that there was no way in which that issue could be resolved in
a way that was satisfactory to us as scholars.
Q. Tell me about this scholar's background that you relied upon, Richard whatever his name is. What is his background? What
is his education? What is his experience?
A. I know he is a professor, as I said, at Kansas, and I don't know a lot about his background.
Q. What do you --
MR. PARRISH: Let him finish his answer.
MR. EDELL: I would just like a straight answer.
MR. PARRISH: Then let him give a straight answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Just what do you know about it.
MR. PARRISH: All right. Don't interrupt him.
A. He is a professor of English.
Q. What else? How long has he been teaching?
A. He is roughly -- my impression is roughly the same age as I am, and he has been teaching for roughly 20 years. But I am
not quite sure.
Q. What does he teach? A He teaches American literature.
Q. What papers has he written?
A. I don't know what his scholarly record is.
Q. Has he done any scholarly work that you are aware of?
A. I think we talked a little bit about some of the things that he has done and he has worked on, but I can't recall any specifics
at this point.
Q. Do you know where he received his training?
A. I think he told me, but I can't recall right now.
Q. Do you know what specific efforts he made to review the literature to determine what was in the literature concerning
cigarette smoking?
A. I think I have already indicated that that was one of the things that we talked about. My relationship with him was no different
than it would be with any other scholar in an English department to whom I wanted to address a specific question.
He told me what he had done in broad terms. As I indicated, looking at the literature that was the most popular. The indication
that he gave me about the authors that he had reviewed was consistent with my knowledge about the literature that was being
read by the American public during those years. Then we proceeded to a discussion of the specific references.
Q. Let me see if I understand.
He told you that he had reviewed some of the more popular literature, and he made that determination based upon sales, is that
correct, sales of the book, the story or whatever it was; is that right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Would you give it to me again, because it distracts me and it confuses me a little bit.
Q. It's my understanding that you told me that this professor whose name who you cannot recall told you that he made the
literature selection based upon the sales of a particular book, is that correct?
A. Yes, he was -- that was, I know, one of the criteria that he used.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Fine. What was the other criteria?
A. As I recall, he also at some point -- at some point he looked specifically at some of the authors that Rose Cipollone had
indicated that were authors that she read or were in her household.
Q. Any other criterias?
A. There may well have been other criteria. I talked with him quite a long time ago, and I don't recall any right now.
Q. When did you speak with him?
A. It's hard to recall specifically, but I would say it was at least a year ago.
Q. Did he tell you what information he extracted from these books with regard to cigarettes, positive aspects of cigarette
smoking, negative aspects? What was it that he extracted from the literature?
A. He gave me the citations. He gave the direct quotes. He didn't give me an interpretative essay on --
Q. When you say the direct quotes, any quote in any of the books regarding cigarettes, is that your understanding?
A. I don't know how -- I simply don't know whether he included every reference in every book.
Q. What was your understanding as to what criteria he used in order to give you these citations?
A. It's my impression that he was interested in collecting a variety of statements, though -- it's very hard for me to recall the
specifics at this point.
Q. What would be included in this variety of statements?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. I am very reluctant to summarize them, I guess, especially since you have been given access to all of that material. I presume,
therefore, you know what the material is that he gave me. I haven't looked at that full set of material for a long time. I don't
think there is any way I can reconstruct from -- I don't have a full memory of it right now.
Q. What makes you believe that I was given information as to what he provided to you?
A. Because everything that he gave to me was in the set of materials that I understand was provided to you in preparation for
this deposition.
Q. How was it identified in that information as to what was provided to you by this professor whose name you can't recall?
A. I don't know that there is any specific identifying mark on it. It is the direct quotes with the appropriate citation.
Q. So any direct quotes with citations to literature would be from this professor whose name you cannot recall?
A. All of his were typewritten. There are some other materials that I collected myself, various things out of literature that would
have been photocopied.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Who else did you consult with during the course of your work on this case other than this professor whose name you can't
recall?
A. At the time I talked with Professor Richard Means of Auburn and --
Q. In regard to what?
A. He is a scholar who has done a lot of work on the history of health education. I was interested in what his research knowledge
was and his scholarly judgment on the -- the degree to which the claims with respect to the health consequences of cigarette
smoking had been incorporated into the health textbook literature.
MR. PARRISH; Excuse me for interrupting. We have been going for over an hour. Maybe at some point we can take a short
break.
Q. How do you define scholar? You keep using that word “scholar.” How do you define that word? Is everything in the academic
world a scholar, anybody who has a Ph.D. is a scholar? Is that how you define it? I noticed you keep using the word, your
scholarly work, his scholarly work, that scholarly work, he is a scholar, we scholars.
MR. PARRISH: Is there a question?
MR. EDELL: Yes.
Q. What does “scholar” mean to you?
A. That is a difficult question to give a short answer to.
Certainly one of the common criteria in the modern world for being a scholar is having a doctorate, though that is not a necessary
condition, though I would say that it's a frequent characteristic.
What it really refers to, though, is the method by which one goes about approaching the research questions. It's really the
methodology that defines a scholar.
Q. You are familiar with -- is it Dr. Means' methodology, is that correct?
A. Certainly, I talked with him as -- Richard Harp, that is the English professor. Generically, I would say that any time I talk
with a fellow scholar, one of the topics that is kind of standard is, “Well, how did you go about this?” Certainly with Richard
Harp and with Richard Means, one of the things I was interested in was chatting with them about how they went about it for
their particular research, so that I would have some sensibility about their procedures.
Q. Are there scholars in health education?
A. Excuse me?
Q. Are there scholars in the field of health education?
A. I would turn that around, and I would say there are scholars who have studied health education from a variety of perspectives.
Q. But you would not say there are scholars in the area of health education, is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. You are a scholar, correct, by your own definition?
A. Yes, I believe so.
Q. If you studied health education, then you would be a scholar in health education?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. Is that right?
A. I am uncomfortable with the way in which you phrase the language, because I don't think that that is in my -- if I can revert
to my role as a college teacher, the sentence doesn't parse very well.
Q. I tried to use the phrase as you had used it before. You said you spoke to Professor Means whom you understand is a scholar
on health education. I have written that down. I could be incorrect.
A. Oh. You changed the language. I wouldn't say he is a scholar in something. He may be a scholar on, which means that it is
simply a scholar who has made some focused and specialized research effort on the particular topic.
Q. Are you a scholar on health education?
A. It's not a field that I have studied in general, no.
Q. Are you a scholar on communications?
A. No.
Q. Are you a scholar on the history of the press?
A. It's hard to give, when you mention something like the press, because there are a number of different means that one can
say that I am a scholar on the press.
There are aspects of the history of the press with which I'm quite familiar and-aspects of it which I have studied or have read
about quite extensively.
So that it would depend on the particular research question that you had in mind on whether I would say as a scholar I have
studied that area and am in a position to make some historical judgments about it.
Q. Are you a scholar on health issues?
A. I think I have to simply repeat the same answer, that, as is clear from the, I think, the nature of the question that I was asked
to undertake research for, there are aspects of health questions on which I have looked quite closely, so that I am certainly in a
position to have a scholarly conversation with other people who have studied health issues.
Q. What health issues are you a scholar on?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I certainly feel that I am equipped to talk about what the general public level of awareness, that is, exposure to claims about
the health consequences of cigarette smoking.
Q. You became a scholar on that in your work in this case, correct?
A. Again, I am uncomfortable with your language. One doesn't become a scholar on. In my view, one is a scholar because of
the methodologies and research techniques and approaches that one brings to whatever research questions.
Q. Now we are back to scholar in, as opposed to scholar on. I am trying to use your phraseology, Professor.
MR. PARRISH: Is there a question pending?
MR. EDELL: Yes.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, were you a scholar in or a scholar on the health issues of cigarette smoking?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. As I have indicated, I am uncomfortable with the way the term gets used and so I would simply say that I had not done
specialized scholarly research on the health issues related to cigarette smoking prior to undertaking research in conjunction
for the attorneys in this case.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, had you done any scholarly work on any health issue or in any health issue?
A. Some of my earlier research had touched on health issues, yes.
Q. What was your earlier research that touched on health issues?
A. Well, as I indicated before, when I was working on the enterprise biography, I studied all aspects of the corporation, which
included working conditions and welfare programs, and as part of that, one of the things that comes to the fore is the relatively
early, historically speaking, efforts of International Harvester to address the health of their workers.
Q. Had you ever done any prior scholarly work in or on what the public was aware of concerning any health claims?
A. I don't recall doing any specialized research on that specific topic, no.
MR. EDELL: Let's take a short break.
(Short recess.)
Q. Are you a professor in economics or in history?
A. My current position is in the economics department.
Q. What do you teach?
A. I teach economic history at both the undergraduate and the graduate level, and then I teach what we refer to as the service
courses.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. I don't know what they are. Can you tell me, please?
A. As in, I think, probably all disciplines, there are introductory courses to a particular discipline, which I think people normally
refer to as the service courses, whether it's introductory sociology or introductory history course, or in the case of an economics
department, introductory economics survey courses.
Q. Is there a history department at the University of Connecticut?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you teach any courses through the history department?
A. Not at this time.
Q. Are you attempting to teach history courses in addition to this history of economics that you are doing?
A. It's not the history of economics. That is a separate field. I do economic history.
Q. What is the difference?
A. History of economics is the history of the discipline of economics. It is the intellectual history of the particular discipline.
Economic history is the history of the economy. So it's a very different kind of course, uses entirely different reading material
and so on.
On the question of the history department, I have been talking -- I have been asked by a colleague in the history department
about teaching a course with him in the history department whenever we can find the time.
Q. Had you ever taught in your economic history courses anything with regard to cigarette, cigarette industry, the use of
cigarettes?
A. Well, the -- yes.
Q. When was the first time you did that?
A. I think there was probably some material in the courses I taught at the University of Virginia beginning in 1975 that related
to the history of tobacco.
Q. Have you ever published any papers with regard to the history of the cigarette industry?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever done any research with regard to the cigarette industry before you worked on this case?
A. In this case, understanding “research” to mean work in primary sources with respect to the history of tobacco manufacturing,
no.
Q. It may have come up, though, in terms of reading materials that you have used or reviewed over the years, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Yes.
Q. But it wasn't a primary focus of any particular aspect of a course that you taught or took?
A. Could you tell me what you mean by “primary focus”?
Q. I assume that when you teach your classes now you use Singer and International Harvester as examples, do you not?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you use other examples?
A. Yes.
Q. What other examples?
A. Dun & Bradstreet, Pennsylvania Railroad, U.S. Steel, Marshall Field's.
Q. Did you ever use cigarettes, the cigarette industry?
A. James Buchanan Duke is a common topic in the textbooks that I have used.
Q. Do you use it as an example, though, when you teach this course?
A. It's hard to specify off the top of my head, but I have -- I know I have a part of at least one lecture that focuses specifically
on Duke.
Q. Are there any scholars who you are aware of who have written on the cigarette industry?
A. Yes.
Q. Who are they?
A. Well, I think that the recognized primary scholarly study is by Richard Tennant.
Q. Any other scholars in the area or in the field of cigarettes, the cigarette industry, the history of the cigarette industry?
A. Robert Sobel, who is a historian of Hofstra, has written a book about it. There is a book by Wagner.
Q. Are these scholars in the field?
A. Some of them --
Q. Tell me who the scholars are.
A. Sobel is certainly a member of the academy, if you will. Tennant is.
Alfred Chandler has included material on James Buchanan Duke in his studies of business enterprise.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Certainly Tilly's “Corporate History,” I think, is recognized. I am not sure what her specific background is, but I think that is
perceived by historians as being a good piece of scholarship.
One, Wagner, I think had a scholarly background. I am not altogether sure about that particular author.
There are probably other ones that I have come across, but no names come to mind right at the moment.
Q. Are there any scholars with regard to the use of cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
MR. EDELL: You are probably right, Mr. Parrish.
Q. Are there any scholars with regard to the use of cigarettes throughout, let's say, the last 50 years in America?
MR. PARRISH: Can I have that read back? I'm sorry.
(Question read.)
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I guess I would like you to expand the question a little bit. I am not sure quite what you're asking about.
Q. What don't you understand? Do you understand the last 50 years?
A. Are there scholars who have written about --
Q. Yes. Scholars in the area, scholars on the area regarding the subject, not just written, scholars.
A. Sobel has certainly written about the history of cigarette use in the last 50 years.
There is a book by Schudson that I think has a chapter that talks about the history. There may be some others. I don't recall
offhand.
Q. Your work in this case, did you review the literature regarding the history of cigarette use in America?
A. Did I review what?
Q. The literature.
A. Sure.
Q. Those are the only scholars that you can recall at this point in time; is that right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I guess I would respond by saying my approach to this research question, as to any question which I am trying to do research,
is to look at primary materials. I have seen a larger or reasonably large amount of material relating to the historical trends on
tobacco consumption.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
I wasn't necessarily concerned about who the particular authors were on those primary documents.
Q. Are you finished?
A. Yes.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, were you a scholar on or in trends in the use of cigarettes in the United States?
A. I had not done specialized research on primary documents relating to the historical trends on cigarette use.
Q. So your answer is no, you were not a scholar prior to your work in this case on or in the trends in tobacco or cigarette use
in the United States?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. As I have made clear, I am uncomfortable with the way in which you use “scholar.” As I have repeatedly rephrased it, I had
not done specialized resear?? I think that I have very good scholarly credentials in historical research.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, had you done any historical research regarding trends on cigarette use in the United States?
A. No.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, what research did you do regarding trends in the use of any products in the United States?
A. Well, if I can give just a representative list.
Q. We can go through your curriculum vitae and just identify the papers that you have written.
A. I would start long before that. I would start with my senior honors thesis at the University of Wisconsin in history, which
dealt with the evolution of the transportation structure, and as part of that, the trends in demand for and use of transportation
services in ante-bellum Wisconsin.
My first year after graduate study I was an interne for the history research service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, for
which I did a study on historical trends on mechanization on American farms.
A lot of the research associated both in my monographic publication, “American Enterprise and Foreign Markets,” and the
edited collection I did, “Entrepreneurship,” dealt with trends in foreign investment, multinational enterprise trends in marketing
patterns and structure levels of mechanization in world agriculture, some demographic trends on mobility of technical expertise,
across international boundaries. And even some of the recent co-authored work that I have done with colleagues at the University
of Connecticut on the ranking of economics departments has to do with assessing trends.
Q. What is ranking of the economic department? What are you referring to there?
A. Within the universities, there has been a long tradition, that is to say a tradition that goes back to the 1920s, of ranking
the quality of departments or ranking departments by the number of aggregate citations or citations per faculty member or the
number of publications, ranking them by the number of publications in select journals. And with colleag??es at Connecticut, I
have participated in publishing three or maybe four small notes that looks at that literature and makes some observations about
the trends of changes in the rank order of departments and attempts to assess the accuracy of those rankings as determined by
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
some quantifiable variables, and to suggest -- I think one of the pieces addresses itself to a question about managerial strategy in
building a department, building in the sense of giving a department a higher ranking or a higher reputation within the discipline.
Q. Is that in your CV here?
A. Yes, I think it's under “notes, comments and extracts.”
Q. What are the top ten economic departments in the United States?
A. Chicago, MIT, Berkeley, Stanford --
Q. Are you giving me this in order or from one to ten approximately?
A. It depends on which rank order you want to use. There is some disagreement. I can give you the rough approximation of
what the top ten are, as measured by these various surveys.
Q. What are the top three, in order, if you can?
A. Without having the surveys in front of me, it's hard to do it, though, as I recall, Chicago was pretty much a consensus No. 1,
and then you variously get Harvard, MIT, Berkeley or Stanford in that group. I may have left one out. But those are certainly
considered by these various measures, that is to say, these surveys or citation indexes or whatever to be the best.
Q. Where does University of Connecticut stand on this ranking?
A. It varies a good deal.
Let me make clear, we weren't doing the ranking; we were simply looking at the, if you will, the legitimacy of the rankings,
whether they made sense in terms of data that that we could get ahold of.
I know of one recent survey where, I can't remember quite the rank ordering, but we were in a group roughly with Carnegie-
Mellon and North Carolina and Georgia and some other ones. Depending on what criteria you used, out of the, I think, 103
doctoral programs in the country, we were ranked roughly in the middle, in the fifties, I think, depending on how one measures
that, if it went down to the forties or low sixties. But I don't remember precisely what it was, though I remember a little bit,
by the cohort of schools with which we were grouped.
Q. Prior to your work in this case, have you ever done any scholarly work with regard to what the public was aware of concerning
health claims as they appeared in the popular press?
A. I had not done any specialized research on that issue.
Q. Have you done any research on that issue?
A. I guess I need to know what you mean by “research.”
Q. I am not a scholar. You are a scholar, and you do research for a living, and I don't. How do you in the academic world
define “research”?
A. Well, I would simply point out that --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. You gave me the definition. Give it to me very slowly.
A. If I can make a prefatory comment, the reason I have talked about specialized research in primary sources is that when you
want to go out as a scholar, as a historian for the kinds of research that I have done, I think of the research function in a very
restricted sense of going and looking at the primary documents and trying to do a systematic survey of what other people have
written about the topic and so on.
If one uses “research” in a more generic sense, clearly one acquires a lot of knowledge from a variety of sources, and scholars
use that information that they have, accessible to them. So that if it constitutes research, I wrote a book review some years ago
for History Book Review on a book which discussed something about the content of -- it discussed in part the content of the
journal. And as I recall, there was some discussion of the kinds of articles that related to health.
Clearly, I thereby picked up information that was germane to the question of discussion of health that existed in the press.
Q. No, I think what I am talking about -- I think what maybe you're talking about may be the same thing -- I don't mean for you
to consider research what you might read in The New York Times today which may be germane to your work as a historian
or as an economist.
What we are talking about is actual research, where you conducted research affirmatively in order to look into a particular
issue or subject. Okay?
A. All right.
Q. Have you ever done any research with regard to health claims that appeared in the popular press?
A. I think I answered that by saying what I would say again, is, I have done no specialized research in primary sources with
respect to that prior to this research project.
Q. When you say “this research project,” you are talking about acting as an expert witness in this case?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
Q. You understand the purpose of your reviewing all of this material is not as a research project but to act as an expert witness
in this case; is that right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. No, that is not correct.
Q. So it's your understanding when counsel for one of the defendants or more than one defendant came to you that you were
doing a research project that had nothing to do with a piece of litigation, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. No.
Q. You do have an understanding that you might be acting as an expert witness?
A. I was aware that the research questions which I was asked to address might ultimately evolve into being an expert witness.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
But certainly my attitude and my initial discussions with the attorneys was as a historian undertaking a research question.
Q. Tell us about those circumstances under which you got involved in this litigation.
A. As I recall, I was first contacted roughly in August of 1985, and I was asked whether -- I was asked to consider whether I
would be willing to undertake some research with respect to the history of tobacco consumption and with respect to the public
awareness, exposures to claims about the health consequences of cigarette smoking.
I said I was interested in the research question, and I then came to a meeting where I described, as I recall, how I would undertake
such research.
Q. Did you have any understanding how you would receive compensation for your research project?
A. At some point I was told what I was -- roughly what I would be offered.
Q. What was that?
A. $500 a day.
Q. Were there any restrictions as to the time that you were to put in on this case?
A. No.
Q. Did you advise anyone that because of this case you would have to dedicate a substantial amount of time in conducting
this research project?
A. I think I told the attorneys, and I certainly filed a standard consulting report with my university, saying that I was undertaking
consulting and would conform to the university regulations that applied during the academic year, that is to say, from September
to roughly the middle of May.
Q. How many days have you put in on this case?
A. What do you mean by --
Q. Aggregate.
A. This case?
Q. Yes, this matter, research project.
A. Oh, on the research project?
Q. Yes.
A. In the two years plus since August or September of 1985, when I began active research, I would say it's probably about
130 days at this point.
Q. How many of those days were spent in 1985?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. That was the early phases, and I suppose that I probably had put in something on the order of 15 to 20 days during the
calendar year in '85.
Q. Let's get back to the meeting where you outlined what you would envision doing in this research project.
What did you tell the people in attendance at this meeting what you envisioned this research project would include?
A. Well, as best as I can recall, I laid out how a historian goes about working on a research question generically, and with
particular respect to the research questions that had been posed to me.
Q. I understand. What did you tell them?
MR. PARRISH: Excuse me, Dr. Carstensen.
Marc, can you tell me how this is different than the conversations between you and Dr. Harris and others that you instructed
Dr. Harris not to answer, based on the work product privilege?
MR. EDELL: There have been conversations that I have instructed the witness not to answer, as you have with your other expert
witnesses, and there are some conversations which I have not.
If you have a direction to make to this witness, make the direction. It's your decision, Mr. Parrish, as to whether it would be
appropriate or inappropriate to make that direction, not mine.
MR. PARRISH: I am going to instruct the witness not to answer questions which would reveal the content of the discussions
he had with the lawyers.
Q. Did you do everything that you thought was necessary in order to conduct research regarding the issues which were the
subject of this research project concerning this case?
A. Yes.
Q. What did that include?
A. Broadly speaking, I was asked to undertake research on two questions. One of them was the historic patterns of tobacco
consumption. And that question involved consulting what was available on the history of the use of tobacco and looking at
what primary sources I could find that provided information germane to that question.
Q. Did you ask the defendants to give you any information in that regard?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate the question, please?
Q. You don't understand my question?
A. Whenever there is this byplay, I am not quite sure that I have heard the question quite correctly. It's easier for me if I hear
the question again.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Simple question: Did you ask any of the attorneys to provide you with any information regarding the historical consumption
of tobacco in the United States?
A. Certainly asked the attorneys if they had any sets of primary documents that would facilitate my research.
Q. Did you receive any primary sources from the attorneys?
A. Yes.
Q. What did you receive?
A. I received a variety of things -- I received a clipping file of newspaper and magazine clippings. And I received another
batch of clippings, I think, just ten days ago. And I received some -- for instance, the compilation on -- relating to laws on the
restriction of sales of cigarettes to minors, which I think you have been given a copy yourself. And things of that nature.
Q. Any internal documents, nonpublic documents?
A. I don't think I received any internal documents in response to that request to the attorneys.
Q. Were you advised that there were no internal documents that would help you as primary sources in your research project
concerning the first issue that you set out for us?
A. No.
Q. Were you advised that there were primary documents available that were internal documents?
A. No.
Q. Did you ask?
A. It was my judgment that I didn't need internal documents on the history of tobacco consumption. By “internal documents”
you are talking about corporate?
Q. Nonpublic documents.
A. Nonpublic documents.
As a historian, my judgment was that the best place to find the kind of information I needed in order to make a judgment about
what the historic trends were were available to me in public depositories.
Q. Did you make that same judgment with regard to your analysis of International Harvester?
A. I had a very different objective with International Harvester. So there I was specifically trying to recreate a set of internal
situations. When I wanted to look at the historic trends on mechanization, for those things I didn't use internal documents. My
professional experience is that by and large that is not where you find the particularly useful information.
Q. What was your other research issue?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. The second research broad issue was the historical pattern of public awareness, that is to say, exposures to the claims that
cigarette smoking was dangerous to people's health and was habit forming. I think I lost -- historical patterns, basically during
this century, say 1900 down to 1966.
Q. How did you go about conducting that research?
A. I wanted to find all of the sources of the information that would tell me what the nature of those claims were and their
presence in, I guess I would call the public, degree to which they were presented to the general public.
I set about to do that in what I think is the way any historian would go about it, looking at indexes and checking catalogs for
relevant titles and digging for anything that appeared to relate to that question.
Q. Did you have any assistance from anyone in that regard?
A. Assistance in what sense?
Q. Conducting the research on this second issue.
A. Yes.
Q. Other than from Professor -- what is his name now, Richard?
A. Harp.
Q. Harp?
A. Yes.
Q. From whom did you receive assistance?
A. As I indicated, I talked to Richard Harp, Richard Means, and I was put in contact with a graduate student who was in
Washington, D.C., who collected materials from the Library of Congress that I have identified as wanting copies of.
Q. Who put you in contact with this graduate student?
A. George Smith.
Q. Who is George Smith?
A. He is an independent historian who is resident in New York.
Q. What do you mean by “independent historian”?
A. Well, George, who earned his doctorate at Harvard and I think taught there for a while, he does not now have an academic
affiliation. So he is independent, and he does contract corporate history, that kind of thing.
Q. How is it that you came to contact George Smith?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. George Smith had been the one who had originally contacted me about undertaking the research. I called him simply because
I knew that George had a lot of contacts from the kind of research that he had done, and I needed someone in Washington,
D.C., who could photocopy materials for me that I had identified, because that was often the place that they were most easily
accessible.
Q. How did you identify for this graduate student -- is it a graduate student?
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. -- what materials you wanted?
A. Just as an example --
Q. I want to know specifically how you did it.
A. I typed lists of things I wanted, specific articles in specific magazines or specific newspapers, and I sent them to him and
said photocopy this stuff and send it back to me.
Q. DO you maintain copies of the lists?
A. I am not sure I have copies of all of the lists, but I know that there are several of the lists, and they were included in the
material that was provided to you prior to the deposition.
Q. What is the name of the graduate student?
A. I don't remember. I think I only talked to him directly once by phone. Everything else was simply by mail, and he worked for
me during the first year that I was doing this. I simply do not recall his name. He did the job I asked him to do and that was it.
Q Did you receive any assistance from anyone else?
A. Yes.
Q. Who?
A. I had three other people who have done, and indeed are continuing to do, the similar kind of material: Mary Curry, who is
in New York City, who when I wanted things that I knew were located or I had reason to believe that were available, say, at
the New York Public Library or Columbia University or some of the other specialized collections that are available in the New
York metropolitan area, I would ask her to get those specific things for me.
I had two graduate students at the University of Connecticut who have done similar kinds of things, one of them Steve Antoinetti,
and Matt Pasternak. And, as with this person in Washington, I would give these individuals specific things that I wanted them
to go and collect for me, because of either they had easier access in the case of Mary Curry or the person in Washington, or I
guess it was an identifiable project, it was simply efficient.
There is also one more generic source of help that I had, which is simply the staff of the library loan office, who had gotten for
me it must be over 100 different publications from all over the country.
Q. Did anyone do any research for you, other than the people you described to me, in my mind, from your testimony, were
simply who took a citation that you provided to them, went to the library and xeroxed it; is that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Basically, yes.
Q. When you say “basically,” what else did they do?
A. In the case of Steve Antoinetti, for instance, he worked for me very early on. I was trying to educate myself to a whole
variety of issues, and I wanted him to go through governments, statistical abstracts and collect information for me. And as to
that I didn't get a photocopy there; I got the summarized data with the list of sources from which he copied it.
In the sense that did any of these people process the materials and render a judgment about their meaning to me, no. None
of these people did research for me. They collected information that I had specified that I wanted, and they transmitted that
information to me in a pure sense.
I think the only exception that I can think of, I asked Mary Curry to review a couple of the trade publications which were in very
poor condition and could not be photocopied and simply give me some sense of the frequency of discussion of health issues.
So, there might be one or two reports from Mary in those materials I provided to you which says they weren't very frequent or
they were frequent or whatever, but it's a very minimal judgment, and normally she would give me chapter and verse without
attempting to make any judgment about it.
Q. How do you define “frequently”?
A. It depends on the context.
Q. “Appearing frequently in the trade journal,” what did you mean?
A. If I was in a circumstance where I wanted to rely on someone who is working for me who said it was frequent, I would go
the next step, and I would say, “Okay, give me the context.”
Are you talking every issue? Are you talking -- if I was going to rely on - let me back up.
I would not rely on their vocabulary in making my own judgment. I would insist on taking it back to the primary data base,
and then I would make the judgment about what term to use.
Q. Did you define “frequently” for Ms. Curry so that she had some idea as to what you understood or what you wanted from her?
A. No.
Q. Did you give her any guidelines for determining what was or what was not frequent in terms of the appearances of various
statements in these journals?
A. No.
Q. Did you make any independent judgment in that regard?
A. Did I make an independent judgment with regard to what?
Q. The frequency of statements in trade journals.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. As I think I already indicated, I do not rely on Mary Curry's judgments about the meaning of that term. All I said was that
term may appear, and I don't recall clearly in some of the things that are in the massive material that I have assembled.
As a scholar and historian, I would not rely on her characterization or anybody's characterization, without a knowledge of the
underlying primary documentary basis. Then I would make -- myself -- the judgment whether I felt comfortable with that term.
Q. Did you receive any assistance from any attorneys or their agents in this research project?
A. What do you mean by “agents”?
Q. Somebody that they hired, like George Smith. I understood that George Smith was coming up to see you on behalf of these
or spoke to you on behalf of the tobacco companies, right?
A. Yes.
Q. It wasn't because he was trying to find out whether you would be interested in doing some independent research?
A. No. Yes, there were some other people that -- I was aware that they had hired some other scholars to work on these.
Q. Tell me about these other scholars.
A. Well, the only ones that I have direct knowledge about, my impression is that -- and it's only an impression, I have no direct
knowledge, because I don't know what the relationship --
MR. PARRISH: So I am clear -- would you repeat Mr. Edell's last question?
MR. EDELL: You're going to let him finish his response, Mr. Parrish? Why don't you let him finish the response and have
the question read back.
MR. PARRISH: I am not sure I understand the question, and I don't want anybody to think that I am doing anything.
Can I have the courtesy of having the question read back?
(Question read.)
Q. I am not asking you for a legal conclusion, Professor, of what an agent is or isn't.
A. Okay.
MR. PARRISH: I wanted to be clear it's agents from whom he got assistance. I understand, okay.
A. As I was saying, I don't know what Richard Means' relationship was, except that I had the impression that he had done a
lot of work on the history of health education, prior to any involvement he may have with the attorneys. I think he had some
relationship to them.
The attorneys did provide me his name, and I did call him, as I indicated, and I talked to him, and I think he provided me one
or two summaries of work he had done. And also I think -- well, again, I have the impression, I should say, that Richard Harp
had undertaken work based on things that he had already -- he is a scholar in American literature, and so I don't know what
the dividing lines were.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
I have the impression that those people did provide some material or did some research for the attorneys. I talked to them as
fellow scholars and asked them what they had found out. In both of those cases they transmitted material to me that I was
interested in seeing directly.
Q. Anyone else who provided you with assistance?
A. Well, if I interpret that question broadly, who else did I talk with among fellow scholars, I think the only other scholar that
I talked with was Robert Sobel.
Q. What is the substance of that conversation or conversations?
A. As I indicated, he had written a book on the history of cigarettes in America. And so, as is customary with scholars, you talk
to the people who have already written on the topic and -- so we talked just generally about the history.
We met -- I only met him once. We had a long conversation in the conference room at the library at the University of Connecticut,
Stamford campus in Fairfield County. We talked about his book and -- we talked about a lot of other things, because he has
done a lot of work in business and economic history, and I know a lot of it.
So we had I think a wide-ranging -- I think I met him probably, oh, it must have been late, early spring of 1986. It's much more
than a year ago. So I can't reconstruct the details of the conversation.
Q. Was this just a happenstance meeting, or did you set it up specifically or somebody else set it up?
A. No, I set it up. I called him because I wanted to talk to him about what I was doing and get his reactions. The kind of
conversations scholars have with each other all the time, in terms of how we go about our work.
Q. Do you know whether he was paid for this time or was this just a professional courtesy?
A. I have no idea whether he was paid. It would be completely consistent with the commonly accepted standards of professional
courtesy that we would have met irrespective of any payment.
Q. But you don't know whether or not he was compensated for his time?
A. I have no idea.
MR. EDELL: This is a good time for S lunch.
(Whereupon, at 1:30 p.m., a luncheon recess was taken.)
AFTERNOON SESSION
2:40 p.m.
FRED CARSTENSEN resumed the stand and testified further as follows: EXAMINATION (cont'd) BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Professor, did you receive any documents from any other sources other than the sources you have already told us, regarding
the second issue, that is, the historical patterns of public awareness regarding claims that cigarette smoking is dangerous and
habit forming?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I think I indicated all of the sources, but I can't be sure unless we go back and review it. I collected primary materials, people
collected primary materials for me, I reviewed literature.
Q. Did any of the lawyers provide you with documentation?
A. Only insofar as I asked them for any primary documents that they might have in their possession that would facilitate my
research efforts.
Q. What primary documents were those?
A. AS I think I indicated, they gave me a file of clippings and, in fact, have continued to provide me clippings and xerox copies
of other primary materials that they had in their possession or that they had access to.
Q. Did you review any nonpublic documents?
A. Yes.
Q. what were they?
A. I think the only nonpublic documents that I have seen that come to mind are ones that were attached to a deposition by, I
think someone by the name of Cohen.
Q. Whose deposition was it, Joel Cohen's deposition?
A. Joel Cohen, yes.
Q. When did you see that?
A. I think it's about three weeks ago.
Q. Subsequent to your formulation of your opinions in this case, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Prior to your formulation of your opinions in this case, did you review any nonpublic documents?
A. Just so I understand what we mean by “nonpublic,” is something that would not be accessible to any researcher through
libraries or other publicly accessible sources --
Q. Nonpublic documents.
A. No, I don't recall.
Q. Did you ask for any nonpublic documents?
A. No.
Q. Did you ask for any marketing plans?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. No.
Q. Did you ask for any marketing documents whatsoever?
A. I think I once asked whether there was a list of brand names that had been introduced into the marketplace early on. I asked
whether such a list had ever been compiled.
I got some kind of a list. I don't know what its provenance was, and I think it's in the collection of materials that I sent on. But
since, of course, I wasn't studying the history of marketing, I didn't pursue documents relating to the history of marketing.
Q. It wasn't relevant to your inquiry, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. The research questions that I was asked to address did not deal with the issue of marketing in a general sense.
Q. can you answer the question, sir?
A. I am not sure I remember --
Q. Was it relevant or wasn't it relevant?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. You got me confused.
Q. Were the nonpublic documents of the defendants, of the cigarette companies, relevant to your inquiry into the second issue,
that being the historical patterns of public awareness regarding claims that cigarette smoking was dangerous and habit forming?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Would you read that back to me, please, the question?
(Question read.)
A. Since of course I was interested in simply ascertaining the awareness, the exposures to these claims in the public arena,
it was and is my professional judgment that nonpublic, what I would refer to as internal corporate documents, would not be
relevant to a scholarly judgment on that question.
Q. So you didn't think it was necessary to review any of the advertising, is that correct?
A. Well --
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. If I am not mistaken, advertising is publicly available material.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Okay. Did you review any of the marketing plans insofar as motivational surveys are concerned or focus groups on
advertising?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. Let's back up so we will make it very simple. Every time I have a question that has an objection, obviously it poses some
concern to you. I will usually repeat it, start out very simply.
Is part of marketing advertising?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know how companies go about advertising their products?
A. In a generic sense, yes.
Q. Are you aware of motivational surveys?
A. I am aware that that is something that is used by some companies in some circumstances, yes.
Q. Are you aware of focus groups?
A. I have heard and read about the term.
Q. Did you ask to see any motivational surveys or focus group studies prepared by or at the request of any of the defendants
in this case?
A. NO.
Q. You didn't think that was relevant to your inquiry?
A. I didn't think that that kind of internal nonpublic material was relevant to determining what the public awareness was of the
claims made about the health consequences of cigarette smoking, no.
Q. Did you review any opinion surveys or attitude surveys?
A. Could I ask you what you mean by “review”?
Q. Look at, read.
A. Some surveys appeared in the public view. There are articles about them from time to time, and that certainly was part of
the information that was provided to the public.
I think that the --
Q. Maybe you didn't understand my question.
The question was: Did you review any surveys, not reports in the newspapers concerning surveys, but did you review any
surveys regarding attitude or opinions?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I didn't review any primary documents about the conduct of surveys, no.
Q. Not the conduct of surveys, but the surveys themselves. Did you review the surveys?
A. I'm not quite understanding what you --
Q. You don't know what a survey is?
MR. PARRISH: Let him finish his answer.
A. I understand what a survey is, and I have seen naturally the information about such surveys. But I am not sure what it is
you're asking me about the survey documents.
Q. Let me see if I can clarify it.
If you go to a ball game, you have seen the ball game; is that right?
A. Right.
Q. If you read about the ball game in tomorrow's newspaper, that doesn't mean that you went to the ball game.
A. Right.
Q. If you read a survey, you have read the survey. If you read about it in the newspaper, that doesn't necessarily mean you
have read the survey, correct?
A. Correct.
Q I want to find out whether or not you read any surveys regarding public opinions or attitudes regarding cigarette smoking
and health, yes or no?
A. If I do understand your baseball analogy correctly, no, I didn't read any of what, again, I would classify as a primary survey
document.
Q. You didn't think it was necessary in coming to your conclusions in this matter to review such surveys, is that correct, sir?
A. I didn't think that -- I want to be very clear in my answer, that I think it is my opinion as a scholar when addressing a question
of what the public level of awareness was of exposures to messages, that nonpublic internal documents, including primary
survey documents, are not relevant to forming an opinion on that specific question.
Q. The specific question being what, sir?
A. Public level of awareness of, say, exposures to the claims about the health consequences of smoking.
Q. If these surveys were available in a public library, then you would consider them to be relevant to your inquiry, is that correct?
A. They might be germane.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. When did the public first become aware of claims that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
A. The first reference that I can recall offhand, which was what I would characterize as an isolated reference, was roughly
the early 1940s.
Q. When was it that the public became aware of claims regarding the relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
A. Well, in a very general sense, if one simply takes that term of heart disease in a broad sense of when were people -- when
was it first laid before the public, that at the time -- I have to ask, what was the phrase of the question again?
MR. EDELL: Could you repeat it, please.
THE WITNESS: Read back the question.
(Question read.)
A. On the specific issue of the relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease, there are certainly widespread -- a
multitude of sources that talk about the link between smoking and heart disease, certainly by the turn of the century, by 1900,
that is.
Q. So it's your testimony that the public became aware of claims regarding cigarette smoking and heart disease by the early
1900s, right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
MR. EDELL: Now you will have it read back.
MR. PARRISH: I object to that comment.
MR. EDELL: It seems to be the pattern here, Mr. Parrish.
MR. PARRISH: Objection to that speech.
MR. EDELL: It's not a speech. It's a statement. We will count it up, we will do an analysis of the transcript afterwards.
THE WITNESS: Can you read back that question, please?
(Question read.)
A. Certainly it's my opinion as a historian that there was widespread awareness of exposure to the claims that linked cigarette
smoking with heart disease by 1900.
Q. When was it, sir, that the cigarette companies started conducting research regarding cigarette smoking and heart disease?
A. I don't know.
Q. When was it that the cigarette companies first advised their consumers or the public in general of claims that their product
might result, the use of their product might result in heart disease?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Can you explain to me what you mean by “advised”?
Q. Informed, convey information to.
A. That is an interesting question. I want to -- on the specific issue of heart disease, I can't identify any particular period without
going back and reviewing the literature specifically with regard to that question.
Q. When did the cigarette companies inform their consumers or the public in general of the claims regarding the use of their
product and lung cancer?
A. Again, I would have to go back and review the literature specifically with relationship to that, the narrow specific question,
before I would venture an opinion.
Q. As we sit here today you don't know, is that correct, sir?
A. As we sit here -- I cannot give you a date at which the tobacco companies themselves conveyed to the public specific
information about claims about the possible links between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, that is correct.
Q. Can you give us a year they did that, sir?
A. A year?
Q. Yes. You said you can't give us a date. Maybe it's too much to ask you to sit here and tell us precisely on what date cigarette
manufacturers informed their consumers that there had been claims with regard to the use of their product in the development
of heart disease and lung cancer. So in order to avoid that burden, why don't I ask you what year that occurred.
A. That doesn't really help, because --
Q. Let's try a decade. Tell us what decade it occurred for the first time.
A. I repeat myself: I am not prepared at this point without reviewing the materials specifically with relation to those two
particular diseases and the particular record of company behavior to indicate when or if they undertook to communicate to
their consumers.
Q. When did cigarette manufacturers first become aware of claims that their product, the use of their product, resulted in the
development lung cancer or heart disease?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Objection to the form of the question.
MR. EDELL: Do you want it read back?
THE WITNESS: When did the -- yes, please.
(Question read.)
A. On the specific issues of the potential link between cigarette smoking and questions of health on the heart, my opinion is
that the cigarette companies were aware, as I said, by 1900, as the public was aware of the claims that there was a link.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
On the specific issue of lung cancer, I would presume that, as with the heart disease, that the tobacco companies were certainly
aware of what the public was aware of, that they shared the same exposure, and that when lung -- the claim of the link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer was placed before the public, it was placed before the cigarette companies as well. And,
therefore, they shared the same awareness.
Q. As a scholar, do you have an opinion as to whether or not a manufacturer of a product would know about claims that its
product resulted in health hazards before the general public did?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. In my experience as an economic and business historian, I would say, or I do say that there is no reason to presume that a
manufacturer is in a position to know more about the health claims related to that manufacturer's product. There is no reason
they should know that before the general public.
Q. As a scholar, do you have an opinion as to whether or not an industry would be aware of the claims that its products resulted
in, the use of its products resulted in various health diseases before the general public?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Would you read it back, please.
(Question read.)
A. You have asked a generic question, and the broad answer as an experienced scholar that I give is the same that I gave before:
There is no presumption in my scholarly experience to suggest that a priori any given industry ought to have awareness about
health claims associated with the use of its products ahead of the general public.
Q. Do you have an opinion, sir, as to whether or not the cigarette industry knew of the claims that the use of cigarettes resulted
in potential health hazards prior to the public becoming aware of this?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. Yes.
Q. What is your opinion?
A. My opinion is that the general public was, essentially from the time the tobacco was introduced into the European civilization,
aware of health claims made about the use of tobacco products, and that, therefore, the tobacco manufacturers, who in historical
point in time come much later, could not have clearly preceded the public in their awareness of the health claims.
Q. Are you finished?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the cigarette industry in America was aware of claims that the use of cigarettes
resulted in lung cancer before the general public in America?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I want to make very clear that it was not my research project to study the internal corporate behavior of the tobacco
manufacturers.
I was asked to undertake research on the question of the level of, and the trends in public awareness, that is to say, exposures
to the entire category of claims that cigarette smoking was dangerous to health and habit forming. As such a research project, I
had no reason to assess the particular behavior of the tobacco companies and what the internal evidence was of their particular
awareness.
Q. Did you do any research to attempt to ascertain what information the cigarette manufacturers in America had concerning
claims that their product, the use of their product, resulted in lung cancer?
THE WITNESS: Wait a minute. My attention wavered. Could you repeat the question?
MR. EDELL: Sure.
Q. Did you do anything to ascertain what information cigarette manufacturers had at any point in time regarding claims that
their product caused lung cancer?
A. I made no effort to determine specifically what tobacco manufacturers, as a subgroup --
Q. It has not been your experience as a scholar that manufacturers of products conduct research with regard to the potential
hazards attendant to the use of their product, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Would you please read that back.
(Question read.)
A. That is not a research question that I addressed myself to.
Q. And you have no information in that regard, is that correct, sir?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. With regard?
Q. With regard to that question. I didn't ask you whether or not you conducted any research on that as we have already defined
it, whether or not you have an opinion about it, in your experience, your training and your reading.
A. Opinion about -- I need to refresh my recollection on what the specific issue is about which you asked.
Q. Sure. Do you have any knowledge regarding research by manufacturers regarding hazards attendant to the use of their
product?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. That is such an extraordinarily broad question that I interpret that as encompassing all of those things which I undertake to
do as a professional scholar in the areas of my interest.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Anyone, including myself, who is a regular reader of the business economic press in contemporary America and the world,
since I read non-American publications as well, of course is aware of and has seen articles about contemporary efforts on some
industries and some institutions to address themselves to that kind of question.
Q. Have you reviewed any materials or have you been exposed to any information with regard to research by manufacturers in
the 1930s regarding the potential hazards attendant to the use of their product?
A. I think I may have seen one article that may have addressed that question, at least in part, for a specific industry.
Q. What industry was that, sir?
A. It had to do with the use of the Draper loom and the banning of the suck shuttle in the American textile industry.
Q. Any another research?
A. You asked whether I had -- what I had seen in the the scholarly literature of things. As I pointed out, I have not undertaken
research in focus research and primary materials on my own. That is the only one that comes to mind.
Q. Are you aware of any information in your reading regarding manufacturers' research in the 1940s of hazards attendant to
the use of their product?
A. Again, I interpret your question as a generic question --
Q. Yes.
A. -- about the behavior in industry in general, or for all industries.
It occurs to me, there is literature that, both in terms of primary sources and scholarly sources, that is, for instance, associated
with pure food and drug movement in the late nineteenth century which the progressives were introduced to inspection laws,
which began in 1893, inspection of export meat, which was an inspection process initiated by the industry itself, and so that
there is a -- which I had not quite recalled before, which there is a tradition in the broad public health area that really begins
to emerge roughly in the 1870s and continues down to the present.
And within that context, there is probably some discussion, though, since I have never looked for what was generically going
on on that broad set of issues in the 1930s or the 1940s or the 1950s, I can't give any specifics, though I think there is probably
some literature available to assess that particular research question.
Q. Did you review any materials pertinent to research and development by cigarette manufacturers in the 1930s, forties and
fifties?
A. The only information that I would have come across was the information that was in the public arena, which is the research
question on which I had been asked to dig up the research.
There are occasional articles by occasional -- I mean, you might see one or two every couple of years, really occasional and
very small part of the total corpus of material, which might make reference to some specific developments.
Q. But you didn't make any specific research effort to determine what the tobacco companies, cigarette manufacturers, were
doing in research and development in the thirties, forties and fifties, is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. As I have said before, I was not doing a corporate biography or a history of the internal management decisions and policy
evolution or production technologies or anything inside of the tobacco manufacturing industry. I had been asked to focus on a
specific issue with respect to the level of public awareness of the health claims.
So, clearly that type of material that you just characterized falls outside the research question that I was attempting to address.
Q. If you were attempting to ascertain what research the cigarette manufacturers conducted concerning the health hazards of
their products in the 1930s, forties and fifties as a historian, what would you look at?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Read it back.
(Question read.)
A. If I understand you correctly, you're asking me a hypothetical question that if --
Q. You are a historian, right?
A. Yes.
Q. If you were going to look at that issue, what would you look at?
A. When you say “if,” that to me -- you're saying if someone like yourself approached me and asked me if I was to do this,
how would I go about it.
Q. Or if you were doing it for academic purposes.
A. Or if I was doing it because I decided it was an interesting question and I wanted to write a lecture on it or whatever?
Q. Paper.
MR. PARRISH: You're not asking him to prepare a report.
MR. EDELL: I am certainly not.
A. If I was to undertake research on what, as you phrased the question, is clearly an internal corporate set of the issues on what
in fact they were attempting to do, I would go about that in the same way that I have gone about this other research, that is to
say, that I would attempt to collect the appropriate primary materials.
Since in this case, as clearly distinct from the other issues on which I have done research, this is one which involves nonpublic
records, that is to say, corporate archives, historical materials, that would certainly in this case be germane to ascertain that, as
well as looking at anything that had emerged in the business press or in the trade journals or in any other source of information
about what kinds of concrete efforts were being made in that direction.
I would add the caveat that I think I would be unlikely to undertake such an investigation in a broad sense because to some
extent that calls for some special medical or biomedical or scientific background, if one wanted, not simply describe but to
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
make some other set of judgments. I am a historian, I am concerned with reconstructing the facts that are germane to a particular
historical circumstance or particular historical trend.
As I have said repeatedly, the way you go about that as a historian, you collect the relevant primary documents wherever
they may be, whether they are accessible through public depositories, which often in fact might include papers deposited by
individuals or companies as well as things that might be privately held whether by individuals or corporations.
Q. So you feel qualified to do that, to actually go through these materials, but you don't know whether you are qualified to draw
any conclusions if you were to perform such a study?
A. I put a caveat on the nature of the conclusions. I am clearly not qualified to judge whether, what they were doing was in any
area, whether it's -- you want to talk about generic question, if I was going to do a study of R&D, and I have done studies of
R&D in an industrial setting, I can describe the technology and I can make some assessment of what they are doing, say, in
metallurgy, vis-a-vis what appears to be the state of the art.
But I don't have any detailed scientific knowledge of metallurgy. So that there clearly would be areas which I might be able to
describe, but on which I could not render a historical judgment as to whether they were doing state-of-the-art research, because
I am not a scientist and I don't claim to be a scientist.
I want to emphasize, historians' skill, the scholarship of the historian resides in the ability to collect and assemble the relevant
descriptive facts to recreate situations or trends. And often we can make forms of analysis on what the sources of those trends
in recreating a line, say, in recreating a critical policy debate, what we historians do, we can look at the arguments and make
some assessment.
But the real skill of the historian is to lay out for the reader or the consumer of our research the facts for them, to say here
is what happened.
We may add to that our own assessment of the significance, and clearly we do. But I think as a profession, we try to be very
careful about it. What we claim that we do well, and what the nature of our scholarship is, where the bounds tend to go over
into other fields of scholarship, obviously I am sure you are well aware, there is a whole variety of subdisciplines.
And so, just as I consulted Richard Harp and Richard Means and talked with Bob Sobel, if I wanted to pursue that for whatever
reason, the particular issue of the history of R&D or the research efforts on a specific area, I would certainly seek out counsel of
the fellow scholars who could bring to bear some perspective with the appropriate kind of background in making an assessment
of those facts.
Q. Are there scholars who dedicated a substantial amount of their professional lives to the determination of what awareness
people have regarding certain issues or subjects?
A. I don't think so, and historians would put it in that language. But there are historians who have been very interested in
recreating family life and identifying constituted culture, and what broadly one might call systems belief were, not only in
American society but in other societies as well.
Certainly there are scholars out there who are interested broadly in the flow of culture, the flow of ideas, the environments
within which people live in different historical periods from Mesopatomia down to the present.
Q. Are you a scholar in that area?
A. I certainly feel myself to have the requisite scholarship, the skills to be able to recreate specific historical environments.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
I am not fluent in Sanskrit, and I would not presume to deal with the society in which the primary records were in Sanskrit.
I do read Russian, so I could do a study of the intersection of foreign enterprise, American enterprise and Russian society.
Obviously there are limits on what my skills are in terms of -- in terms of my skills as a historian. My skill is to be able to
recreate historical environments and recreate historical trends.
Q. Just so I understand, in other words, it's your feeling that as a historian, you can go back in time and look at any subject,
applying your skills, and recreate what was going on at a given point in time, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. Might as well read it back.
THE WITNESS: Read it back.
(Question read.) ,
A. It's my judgment that a historian, the nature of the training that one goes through to become a historian and to be a member
of that profession, is the acquisition of those skills in terms of how do I identify appropriate primary materials and how do I go
about collecting them and how to make an assessment about what they tell us.
Now, to be very clear about this, clearly one acquires within the broad plain of the huge landscape that constitutes the history
of human experience, one acquires specialized areas of work. Obviously no historian can do that for all places for all time
for all subjects.
Historians as a group do share a common set of skills and methodologies and approaches which we all share. Whether I am
studying mechanization of agricultural in 1900 or someone is studying material culture in 1830, we would understand each
other in terms of our approaches, and we would -- there would be a commonality in those approaches.
Obviously, we can't answer all questions, and we can't reconstruct all environments, because the materials may not be available
to us.
There are a whole host of research questions that I have been interested in, and I haven't been able to find adequate primary
sources that permitted me to make what I consider adequate scholarly judgment and, so, dropped it.
In fact, one of the things I do as a scholar as part of my business at the University of Connecticut is trying to enhance the
collection of primary sources. I am very much involved with the developments of the archives, on the holdings of American
historical manuscripts, and have worked to get those into the collection so that we would be able to reconstruct environments
and events and trends that previously we had not been able to reconstruct because of the absence of appropriate primary sources.
Q. If I understand you, then, there are various subspecialties within the area of history, correct, historian?
Let me phrase it this way: There are historians who specialize in different subject areas, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. There are economic historians?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Yes.
Q. There are culture historians?
A. Yes.
Q. Sociological historians?
A. We would call them social historians, as opposed to historian of sociology, which would be very different.
Q. What kind of historian are you? Are you a culture historian, historian of sociology or social culture or environments or
whatever, economic historian? what kind of historian are you?
A. Well --
Q. Or are you all?
A. I want to make clear, when we talk about subspeciality, people choose to focus on different subjects.
Q. It's like a lawyer. You can be a tax lawyer, real estate lawyer or draw wills or you can do litigation. We all have a license
to practice.
A. Or you could be a general lawyer and try to do a lot of different things.
Q. That's right. Are you a general historian?
A. Well, as a historian, I want to make clear, historians share some common skills and common methodology and common
language, and we use these to specialize in different kinds of areas.
Q. I understand --
MR. BLEAKLEY: Let him answer the question.
Q. I understand that.
A. My interests have been primarily in business history, economic history, agricultural history, and a range of things that are
associated with that.
As to that, for instance, I will -- I read and I am conversant with work that is done in labor history. I am conversant and read
work that is done in social history. There are professional organizations which cut across all the subspecialties and in which
we draw together people who come to a common topic with different questions, or who may have a common question but on
different historical epics.
It would be an imprecise understanding of the historical profession to see it as divided up discreetly in terms of these
subspecialties. In those terms, what do I do?
Q. That is what I asked.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I have already indicated that I work on things that I work on.
Q. That's all I wanted to know. Whatever the subject is, you do a lot of research, you are a scholar on it, as long as it has to
do with the area of your expertise, as a historian?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. I am uncomfortable with the characterization. There are certain methodologies that I would say characterize the work of a
historian, and that would be the litmus test whether it constitutes scholarship.
Q. In your research project in this case, did you look at cigarette advertising?
A. As I think I have already indicated, the advertising was certainly part of the information that was available to and laid before
the general public and as such, I certainly looked at what I came across.
Q. Did you make any research effort to ascertain what cigarette advertising had been during the 1920s, 1930s, 1940s, 1950s,
1960s?
MR. PARRISH; Objection to the form of the question.
A. Could you tell me what you mean by what cigarette advertising had been?
Q. You are a historian. If you wanted to see what cigarette advertising occurred in the 1920s, 1930s, 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, what
would you have done?
A. Responding very specifically to your statement, if I wanted to know what the advertising specifically was in each of those
periods, I would go to the medium through which advertising was carried out, and I would attempt to determine what in fact
was there.
Q. Did you do that in this case?
A. I didn't make any systematic effort to identify the history of advertising of the product, no.
Q. Why? It wasn't relevant?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. You're asking why didn't I attempt to reconstruct the history of advertising --
Q. Why didn't you make a systematic investigation as to what the advertising was in the 1920s, '30s, '40s, '50s and '60s?
A. I wasn't asked to undertake research on the history of the particular forms of advertising or marketing or broadly that the
tobacco industry undertook.
I was asked about what information with respect to the claims about health consequences of cigarette smoking existed during
this period.
Q. In that regard, did you look at the advertising?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. It was part of what the information was.
Q. You already said that. So I wanted to know what efforts you made to perform a systematic investigation of the advertising
to see what if any claims there were in the advertising regarding cigarette smoking and health?
A. It seems to me I heard a couple of different questions in there.
Q. Very simply, you told us that advertising was relevant to claims that the public was aware of concerning cigarette smoking
and health, correct?
A. I say it was part of the environment.
Q. So therefore it's relevant, is it not?
A. Sure.
Q. Given the fact that it was relevant, what effort did you make to ascertain what if any claims were made in advertisements
concerning cigarette smoking and health?
A. When I came across the ads, I think there were a variety of ads, as I assume you know, in the documents that I provided. I
included them in the corpus of material that forms the basis of my making a historical judgment.
Q. How did you go about systematically accumulating these advertisements?
A. You keep using the term “systematically.” I am not interested for the purposes of the research I was asked to undertake here,
to make a systematic study of the history of advertising.
I was asked to make a study, systematic study, if you want to use that term, of the information about the health claims related
to cigarette smoking that existed as part of that environment, as some cigarette ads came to my attention, and I incorporated
them within this larger corpus of information.
Q. All I am trying to find out is how you got these ads.
Did you just by happenstance pick up a magazine, there was an ad there, and you considered it or did you go out and take some
affirmative steps to gather together advertising, review the-advertising and see whether or not it had anything to do with the
public's awareness regarding the health claims of cigarette smoking?
A. It strikes me first you were asking a methodological question. I looked at the editorial content of, say, print media for
materials that related to the health issue.
Q. I understand that. That wasn't the question.
MR. PARRISH: He is trying to answer your question.
MR. EDELL: I don't want to waste time. We know he went through the various indices to see what was out there, the New
York times, Herald and other newspapers concerning smoking and claims about health hazards.
All I want to do is find out what he did to look at advertising to see whether or not there were any health claims in the advertising.
We don't have to go to the very beginning what he did in this litigation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: I think he is trying to make an effort to answer the question.
MR. EDELL: I don't think he is.
A. Well --
MR. EDELL: I'll withdraw the question. We will start out with an easier one.
Q. Did you make a systematic search of newspapers in the metropolitan area to see what was in the newspapers concerning
cigarette smoking and health?
A. I requested that such a survey be done. I did part of it but there was -- the lawyers hired a firm that did the survey looking
for editorial content at a news story and provided it to me.
Q. What firm is that?
A. I don't know the name of the firm. As a historian, I am only concerned about what the accuracy of the primary source --
there are photocopies of the original stories with date and page. I can go and did in fact verify the accuracy of them in terms
of the available microfilms.
Q. My question was very simple: What did you do to systematically investigate what was in the newspapers in the metropolitan
area concerning claims that cigarette smoking was habit-forming or was dangerous?
What did you do, Professor Carstensen, scholar and historian? What did you do?
A. I went through the relevant indexes of magazines.
You asked about newspapers. I went through The New York Times index, which was available. I identified a number of things.
I specifically asked, I think, Steve who I mentioned earlier to go and get off of the microfilms and given the enormous corpus
of material that involved a systematic survey, I communicated to the lawyers that it would be helpful for me to forge my
opinion, and in terms of expanding my available primary sources if I could have made available to me a systematic survey of
the metropolitan area papers, and was it possible for them to undertake that or could I undertake that.
It's not an easy kind of project to undertake, and the lawyers did in fact arrange to undertake that, and I was provided -- as I
have indicated before, they provided me primary materials, when I asked: Do you have this kind of primary material. This is
part of that material that I have already told you they provided me.
Q. The research firm that they used, what is
the name of that company?
A. I don't know.
Q. What criteria did the research firm use in selecting this material?
A. I think the criteria that they used was any news article or editorial, the editorial content of the paper that referred to cigarette
use or tobacco consumption more broadly.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. How do you know that? Did you have any communications with them?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what they physically did or didn't do?
A. I have no direct knowledge of how they went about it.
Q. Do you have any knowledge?
A. I have the physical knowledge of what they provided me.
Q. But you don't know what they didn't provide you, do you?
A. I have gone back myself and I have looked at various microfilms of those papers. I have not reviewed the thousands and
thousands and thousands of pages of newspapers, I certainly don't have that kind of time. In my professional judgment, that
was unnecessary.
Q. In 1940, what was the public's awareness concerning the claim that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
A. On the specific issue of the claim of the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, it's my judgment that there was
essentially no public awareness. There it was no public exposure in 1940.
Q. But there came a time in the 1940s when there was a public awareness there was a claim that cigarette smoking caused
lung cancer; is that right?
A. No.
Q. When did the public first become aware that cigarette smoking had been linked to lung cancer?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. There is nowhere in my opinion that I indicate what the public knew about causes. All I have said is that, my opinion is
related to is public awareness, exposures to claims about the health consequences of cigarette smoking.
Q. What was the public aware of concerning these claims in the 1940s?
A. The public was aware that those claims were there.
Q. But they didn't know how valid the claims were?
A. I have not made any attempt to assess the validity of the claims at any point in time.
Q. Did you make a determination as to whether or not the public was aware as to what these claims meant to them if they
used cigarettes?
MR. BLEAKLEY: I object to the form of the question.
A. I think I made it very clear --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. You haven't made it clear to me.
A. -- that I am not talking about what the public knew or what it meant to the public in general or any given individual.
I am talking about what was the level of public awareness, that is exposure to, what were they presented with.
And I have, I think, carefully and systematically evaluated what was presented to the public, what the public was in that specific
sense aware of during this entire historical period.
Q. As to what you did is, you took a look at these newspaper articles and the literature provided to you by Dr. Harp, is it?
A. Yes.
Q. And the information provided by Dr. Means, and you said there were claims in the 1940s that the public, if they read the
newspapers or read the literature or listened to the radio, might have been aware of, correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. No. It's not correct, no.
Q. What did you do then?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Objection to the form.
Q. If that is what you told us --
MR. BLEAKLEY: I object to the form of the question.
A. You changed the question that you are asking me, it seems. I am not clear what the question is that you are asking me at
this point.
Q. Okay. You're not going to testify as to whether the public was aware in the 1940s that the use of cigarettes could reduce
their life expectancy, is that correct?
MR. BLEAKLEY; Can we have that question read back, please?
(Question read.)
A. No.
Q. You will testify that in the 1940s the public was aware of information that would lead them to conclude that the use of
cigarettes might affect their life expectancy, is that correct?
THE WITNESS: Would you read that back, please?
(Question read.)
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Will you testify that there was information available to the public concerning the use of cigarettes and the effect of cigarettes
on the individual in the 1940s, insofar as the impact it might have on life expectancy?
A. Yes.
Q. What was the public aware of in the 1940s regarding the use of cigarettes and its impact on life expectancy?
THE WITNESS: Read that back to me, I need the precise language.
(Question read.)
A. For the 1940s, it's my opinion based on the research that I have conducted that the public was aware, let's say that they had
widespread exposure, a multitude of exposure to the claim that cigarette smoking was dangerous to health.
Within that, one of the -- certainly one of the categories of claims dealt specifically with the fact that cigarette smoking was
associated with the shortened life span.
Q. What I want to know is, what was the public aware of regarding that shortened life span in the 1940s? Was it one year, two
years, six years, ten years, twenty years? What was it?
A. The public was aware it had multitudiness to the claim that it would shorten life, period.
Q. I want to know whether it was one year or two years, or the public didn't know how many years?
A. NO.
Q. The public didn't know how many years?
A. I don't know, and I don't pretend to know, and I don't pretend to testify as to what the public knew.
The nature of the claims that were made with respect to the specific issue of cigarette smoking and longevity was that cigarette
smoking would shorten your life, period.
Q. But the public was not aware as to how much the use of cigarettes might shorten your life in the 1940s, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. This is one of those questions that as a historian I want to make clear that I was trying to assess, agree to which the public
was aware of the claim that it would shorten life.
There are within the literature and within the sources of information a variety of claims as to what the impact could potentially be.
But as a general historical proposition, what the general -- what the general awareness was was that it was claimed that cigarettes
would shorten your life, period.
MR. PARRISH: Can we take a break?
MR. EDELL: As soon as I get an answer to the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: That means we can take a break now, because you just got an answer.
MR. EDELL: I don't think I did.
MR. PARRISH: I do.
MR. BLEAKLEY: You are forbidding the witness to ask for a break?
MR. EDELL: Now that Mr. Parrish did, maybe he will ask for a break.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Is it my understanding that the witness has to ask for a break?
MR. EDELL: You asked me a question. You're saying I am refusing to let the witness take a break.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Let's take a break.
MR. EDELL; I guess they want to talk to you.
MR. PARRISH: I object to that comment.
MR. EDELL: Why don't you let me ask that question?
MR. PARRISH: I object to that comment on the record. I think that is totally improper to make that comment on the record,
and I ask you not to do that again. I am prepared to call a Magistrate if it happens again.
MR. EDELL: You can do that. But I think it's inappropriate for Mr. Bleakely to terminate these questions.
MR. PARRISH: I don't think Mr. Bleakley or anybody else is trying to terminate any questions.
MR. EDELL: That is what he said.
MR. BLEAKLEY: I said let's take a break.
MR. EDELL: I stated to Mr. Parrish before, after I finish this line of questions. It's only been less than an hour and a half
since we started.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Let's stop being silly.
MR. EDELL: That's right. Why don't I finish this question.
MR. BLEAKLEY: I hope you remember in the event there are any depositions at which you want to take a break in the future
I will decide when we take breaks.
MR. EDELL: Okay. Do we have a unified position by the defendants there?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Get on with it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Do you have an opinion whether the public was aware at any point in time as to how the use of cigarettes might affect
their life expectancy?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS; Could you clarify what you mean by “how”?
Q. To what degree it would affect their life expectancy?
A. If by that you mean was there a consensus in the public about some quantitative definition, I have made it clear, I think
repeatedly, that I have not attempted to determine what the public believed or what, therefore, a concensus of the public might
believe.
Q. I didn't ask that. I wanted to know whether or not you have an opinion as to whether the public was aware at any point in
time that the use of cigarettes would affect their life expectancy and to what degree.
A. I said that there are two questions in one.
Q. That's correct.
A. I said quite clearly that the public has clearly, in my professional opinion, based on my research, been aware, had
multitudiness exposure to the message, to the claim that the use of cigarettes would shorten life, and within that I have also
made it clear there is a host of a variety of claims as to how much it might shorten life, depending on the specific source of
the specific message.
So that the answer to the first question is quite clear. The public was aware throughout the period that you referred to, in this
case the 1940s, cigarette smoking was claimed to shorten life.
Were they exposed to some systematic claim as to the specific amount of shortening of life, clearly there is no systematic
message in that regard, because there are a whole variety of sources, as I have already indicated.
Q. What is the range?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Objection to the form of the question.
A. The simple-minded answer is all I can give to this, is that there are stories extant without saying whether any particular
member of the public saw any particular story of a man dying after smoking a large number of cigarettes and cigars in that 12-
hour period, therefore, it would instantly kill you, or kill you in a short period of time.
There are many stories about the fact that a cigarette contained enough nicotine to kill a dog and three cigarettes will contain
enough nicotine to kill a person, therefore, your life expectancy, if you smoked and absorbed all of the nicotine, would be a
matter of. minutes, to other stories about the association with Berger's disease and the loss of limbs.
So it might end your life completely, it might end your life somewhere down the pike. So you get the whole range existing
within this corpus of claims made about the relationship between cigarette smoking and life expectancy.
Q. That range existed in the 1940s?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. EDELL: Why don't we take a break.
(Recess taken.)
Q. Professor, the information that the public was aware of concerning the claims that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer in
the 1940s, can you describe that as ambiguous information?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I have trouble with the term, what you mean by “ambiguous information.” Ambiguous with respect to what?
Q. Whether or not cigarette smoke in fact caused lung cancer?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the question.
A. You just changed the question on me.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you this, then.
Was the information that the American public had in the 1930s ambiguous with regard to cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. PARRISH; Objection to the form of the question.
A. You are asking specifically about the information with respect to cigarette smoking and lung cancer in the 1930s?
Q. 1940s, I said.
A. 1940s.
I guess I am not sure what you mean by the term “ambiguous information.”
Q. Was the American public aware in the 1940s that it had been proven conclusively that cigarette smoke caused lung cancer?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I want to make clear, I am not a medical expert. I am not a scientist expert, so I don't assess what is proven or not.
Q. I understand that. I am not asking you to do that. You are assessing what the American public was aware of though, concerning
cigarette smoking and disease at different points in time, are you not, sir?
A. Yes.
Q. What I want to know is, are you aware in the 1940s that it had been proven conclusively that cigarette smoke caused lung
cancer?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. If I might be so bold, you keep changing the question, I made clear --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Why don't you answer this question.
MR. PARRISH: He is trying to.
A. If I may continue.
Q. Certainly, you may.
A. I have a professional scholarly opinion based on my research as to what the general level of public awareness was, that is
multitudinous claims that cigarette smoking was dangerous to health and habit-forming.
Now, you make reference to that and then you shift in your restatement of the question to the very much narrower issue of the
level of awareness with respect to the claims about the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and then you shift to
an even narrower issue of whether the public was aware of whether or not it was proven.
Q. I am not doing a historical analysis of what has gone on in this deposition. All I want to you to do is answer the question.
A. I am telling you that you're asking mutually contradictory questions. The answer to one is not the answer to all of them. If
you can make up your mind which question you would like to ask me, then I will attempt to answer it as fully as I can.
Q. I made up my mind as to what question I was asking. I think it was pretty clear. If you didn't understand the question, tell
me. Okay?
Was the public aware in the 1940s that it had been proven conclusively that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. Yes or no.
A. As I have already told you I am not a medical expert. I don't know what constitutes medical proof and that whole side of
the issue. I am only prepared to enter an expert opinion as to what the public was aware of with respect to the claims that were
made about the health consequences.
I have said nothing about proof, I don't claim to be saying anything about proof.
Q. Was the public aware there was a controversy regarding whether or not cigarette smoking caused lung cancer in the 1940s?
A. Certainly by the end of the 1940s, and then in the early 1950s, discussions of the claims about the links between cigarette
smoking and lung cancer had come to form a part of the information with respect to the broader claims linking cigarette smoking
with disease and longevity.
Q. What does that mean? Yes or no?
MR. PARRISH: I think he answered the question as best he can, Marc.
MR. EDELL: He is going to try a little harder.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: I am not sure he does. He is required to do the best he can, and if he thinks he can give you an answer with
a yes or no, he will. If he can't, he won't.
Q. You can't answer that yes or no, sir, as to whether or not the public was aware that there was a controversy regarding cigarette
smoking and lung cancer in the 1940s?
A. I am not prepared at this point to answer that particular narrow question, no.
Q. Can you tell us whether or not the public was aware that there was a controversy regarding the issue of cigarette smoking
and lung cancer in the 1950s?
A. As I have repeatedly indicated, my research has dealt with the broad issue of the level of public awareness of the claims that
cigarette smoking was dangerous to health, life-threatening and habit-forming.
You, in your question, are focusing on a very discreet subset of that broad question.
Certainly, in the 1950s, claims about the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer came to form a much more substantial
part of the body of information with respect to those claims about the health consequences of smoking, and I think that is
probably the best answer I can provide you on that specific subset.
Q. Was the American public aware in the 1940s that the cigarettes manufacturers questioned the relationship between cigarette
smoking and lung cancer?
A. With respect to the 1940s, as I have already indicated, with the exception of what I referred to as an isolated reference in
1940, too, the discussion of the claims of cigarettes smoking and lung cancer only appeared at the end of that period in terms
of the body of information with respect to health claims in general.
I would be unwilling at this time to enter an opinion on the specific response of the tobacco companies because, based on my
research, that is a very, very small part of the information about health claims in the 1940s.
Q. In your opinion was the American public aware in the 1950s that the cigarette industry questioned the relationship between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A. I view that question as very tangential to the basic line of the research that I was asked to undertake. And while I know that
there is some information in the mass of documentation on which I relied upon, that indicates something of what company,
what was publicly reported about company attitudes or responses, even within the issue as you phrase it, a controversy between
the link of cigarette smoking and lung cancer, the tobacco companies are only, in my judgment, a relatively small part of that
controversy.
And without going back and making an assessment, focus specifically on what I would consider to be a subquestion of a
subquestion at this point, I am unwilling at this point to enter an opinion on that particular narrow question.
Q. Was the American public aware in the 1960s that the cigarette manufacturers questioned the relationship between cigarette
smoking and lung cancer?
A. For the sake of saving time, ditto to my last answer.
Q. In the 1970s, was the American public aware that the cigarette manufacturers questioned the relationship between the
cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I think as Mr. Parrish made clear, the initial -- as I have made clear, my initial research was up to 1966. I have been undertaking
supplemental research that deals generally with the awareness issue, but I would not approach my research in the 1970s insofar
as I am asked to undertake it any differently for the earlier periods and, therefore, the same answer that I gave for the '50s and
the '60s applies to the '70s.
You're asking about a subquestion to a subquestion that I view as marginal to my basic research objectives.
Q. Was the American public aware in the 1930s that scientists questioned the relationship between cigarette smoking and heart
disease?
A. Again, you are asking about a particular subgroup and whether --
Q. I know what I am asking.
MR. EDELL: Mr. Parrish, if you want to get on the phone and request the Judge, I will be happy to do that. He doesn't have to
repeat that I am dealing with the subgroup. I know what the question is. All I want is a response, that's all.
MR. PARRISH: Are you withdrawing the question?
MR. EDELL: No.
MR. PARRISH: Okay, go ahead and answer the question, Doctor.
A. If you will bear with me, as a scholar, I feel it's very important in answering a question to specify what I believe the question
is asking.
And the question is asking not on the broad issues that I have indicated my research is focused on, but it's focusing on scientific
-- I can't even remember the phrasing of the question, and I would ask you to please read the question back.
Q. It's very simple question, Professor:
Was the American public aware in the 1930s that scientists questioned the relationship between cigarette smoking and heart
disease?
It's simple. If you can't answer it, tell me you can't answer it because you didn't consider it or whatever. But answer the question,
please.
A. My judgment is that that is a tangential question on which I have not focused specific research and, therefore, I am not
prepared at this point to enter an opinion.
Q. Fine. Would your answer be the same with respect to the 1940s?
A. Yes.
Q. Same with the 1950s?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Same with the 1960s?
A. I would refer back again to the answer that I gave with respect to a similar question about the role of the tobacco manufacturers
in the controversy over the links in the --
Q. I wasn't talking about the tobacco manufacturers.
A. 1950s. Now you're talking about the scientists.
Q. Yes.
A. Clearly in the 1950s and the 1960s and I would expect if I looked in the 1970s, I would find a greater presence of people
labeled as scientists being reported in the various information that I have assessed, as being more deeply involved in the
discussion in a variety of ways.
So clearly, over time there is a change particularly in regard to the role of people formally labeled as scientists by the information
media, in the public reporting of the discussion over the specific issue of the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
Q. Do you have an opinion, sir, as to whether or not at any point in time the American public was aware that scientists questioned
the relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
A. Just to make it very clear, as a scholar, I am obviously in a sense resisting this kind of, what I would consider a fragmentation
of the research project.
I have not attempted to assess the specific subgroups that went into making up the copious set of messages about the alleged
health consequences of tobacco usage and cigarette smoke over this period.
So for, again, this kind of a small fragmented question, I have not attempted to answer that question, nor do I, as a professional
historian, consider that question as central to the research question that I was asked to undertake and on which I have formed
an opinion.
Q. As a scholar, do you have an opinion as to when the American public became aware that scientists questioned the relationship
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
THE WITNESS: Would you simply repeat the question?
MR. EDELL: Read it back.
(Question read.)
A. No, I don't have an opinion about that particular discreet question.
Q. Getting back to the question I asked you previously with regard to advertising, did you perform a systematic search of
advertising in the 1930s, '40s, '50s, '60s or '70S to determine whether or not there were any claims regarding cigarette smoking
and health in any of those advertisements?
A. Would you tell me what you would consider to be a systematic search?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. I am not a scholar or a researcher, sir. You're the scholar, you're the one telling us about the scholarly research project you
have conducted and your systematic research that you have already described with regard to periodicals and similar items.
All I want to know is whether you performed a similarly scholarly search regarding advertising.
A. As I think I already said at least once and maybe twice, I looked at advertising that came within my purview. If you mean
by systematic search did I attempt to reconstruct every ad that was ever used by the cigarette manufacturers during that entire
period, the answer is simply no, I didn't.
Q. Did you perform a scholarly random sampling of the advertising, as opposed to looking at every single advertisement?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Objection to form of the question.
A. I guess I feel that I am --
Q. You want it read back?
A. No. I have this question in mind still.
Q. Okay.
A. It hasn't been dislodged.
MR. BLEAKLEY: You seem to be suggesting everytime we object to the form of the question without engaging in colloquy
that there is some prearrangement with us and the witness that he will ask for the question to be read back.
I am frankly getting tired of hearing that accusation. I recall during Cipollone's deposition there were several hundred objections
to the form. The instructions from the Magistrate are to place our objections on the record and engage in no colloquy. We are
going to continued to do it.
We are not going to accomplish anything by making these suggestions.
MR. EDELL: I am not making these suggestions.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Then don't make these extranious remarks.
MR. EDELL: The witness paused.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Why don't you wait to hear what he has to say?
A. I guess I am uncomfortable again as a scholar in my professional capacity. You seem to think that I undertook a study of
the history of cigarette advertising. I did not.
I undertook the study of the history of the claims that were laid before the general public about the health consequences of
tobacco use and cigarette smoking. I told you, I think, several times as part of that I looked at the advertisements that were
published in the journals that I looked at, and that it's my professional judgment that that was appropriate and suitable for the
purposes of the research that I had undertaken.
Q. How did you decide what advertisements to examine and what advertisements you didn't have to examine?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. It strikes me there is a presumption in that question that there are things in some sense I refused to look at. I didn't refuse to
look at anything. Anything that dealt with the issue of the health consequences and my judgment was that advertising was -- my
judgment was and is that advertising formed a small part of the information available relevant to the claims on cigarette smoking.
Q. I understand that. How did you decide what advertisements to look at? You said you have examined advertisements.
Did you go out and do a random sampling of Life or Look Magazine, or did you simply look at the periodicals you had on
your shelf?
Did you ask somebody to supply you with advertising? How did you go about it, Professor? That's all I am trying to find out.
A. I think it's probably all of the above. Among the materials, photocopy materials that the lawyers provided me in this ongoing
provision of primary sources that I had asked them specifically to undertake.
There were some advertisements. In looking through magazines and newspapers, when I was collecting the editorial copy, when
I saw ads that dealt with the cigarette industry, looked at them. In some cases I copied them.
I think I asked in one case Mr. Pasternack, one of the graduate students who worked for me, to do a quick survey of the ads
in some of the national circulation magazines.
Q. Did he do that?
A. Yes.
Q. What did he give you?
A. Well, in that case, I am trying to think whether -- I was interested in -- the thing that he has done so far, he is currently --
he has done a couple of things for me recently.
In that particular case I was certainly interested in getting some sense of what the frequency of advertising is.
Q. Not the content?
A. On that particular project, I did not asked him to photocopy the particular ads.
Q. On any particular project did you ask him to do a sampling to see what the content of the advertisements were, on a scientific
basis over a period of time?
A. No.
Q. What was the age of initiation of smoking in the 1930s?
A. That is not a topic to which I have given -- on which I have focused research.
Q. What was the age of initiation of smoking in the 1940s?
A. Ditto.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. I'm sorry?
A. Ditto.
Q. Does that mean your answer would be the same?
A. Same answer. That isn't an issue on which I have focused research.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to when the age of initiation of smoking was in the 1950s or 1960s or 1970s?
A. I haven't looked at that issue and, therefore, I do not at this point have a scholarly judgment as to what the age of initiation
might have been.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the the public's awareness of the claims that cigarette smoking caused heart
disease and lung cancer affected the cigarette market?
THE WITNESS: Read that back. I have got to get the first part of that question.
(Question read.)
A. Do you have some reference point?
Q. Any point in time, sir. You're the one who is testifying as a historian concerning trends and the use of cigarettes, consumption
of cigarettes.
A. There are a variety of causes that can impact short-term swings in cigarette consumption.
Q. I am not asking you hypothetically. I am asking you whether or not you have an opinion.
You just said that certain things can have an impact. I want to know whether or not in your opinion the public's awareness of
the claims that cigarette smoking caused heart disease and lung cancer had an effect on the cigarette market, and if so, when
did it occur?
A. Again, I have to repeat that you're asking a specific subset of the general research question that I have undertaken.
As such, I do not have an opinion at this time on the specific and narrow question of whether or how the public awareness, the
claims, specifically of the link on cancer and heart disease, may have impacted the market.
Q. Do you know Jeff Harris?
A. No.
Q. Do you know of Jeff Harris?
A. I have heard the name.
Q. Did you review any materials prepared by him?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Are there scholars in the field of consumer behavior?
A. I guess so. It's not a field that I would know very much.
MR. PARRISH: Don't guess. Mr.
Edell doesn't want you to guess.
Q. What was the response? It's not a field that you know much about?
A. You asked if there is such a field, I guess.
Q. No. I asked you whether there are scholars in the field of consumer behavior.
A. I assume that there are people who describe themselves as such.
Q. Are there scholars in the field of communications?
A. Well, there is now an academic field that goes under the title of communications sciences, and, therefore, there are people
who describe themselves as communications scientists or scholars in communications science.
Q. Did you review any of the reports prepared by any of the plaintiff's experts in this case?
A. Reports?
Q. Yes. Did you review any reports prepared by Richard Pollay?
A. I have seen some material apparently that was prepared by him.
Q. Did you review it?
A. I read it.
Q. You said you saw it. We can go back to the baseball game analogy. You can see it on the table or you can read it.
A. I read it.
MR. EDELL: I didn't hear it until I went back to the baseball game analogy.
Q. Did you find any inaccuracies in his report?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. I think I saw at least two different things that had been prepared by Professor Pollay. So --
Q. Did you read both of these things prepared by Professor Pollay?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Were there inaccuracies in-either of those two things prepared by Professor Pollay?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. What do you mean by “inaccuracies”?
Q. Things that were wrong, statements that were wrong, conclusions that were wrong. You can forget about typographical errors.
MR. PARRISH: Same objection.
A. As I recall the two documents, there was one which was an outline history of the advertising in the cigarette field.
Since I have not undertaken a systematic study of the history of marketing of cigarettes, I don't know whether everything in
there was accurate. I did not immediately pick up on major historical errors. But I'm not in a position to say at this point, absent
my own access to comparable primary sources, that would permit me to assess the accuracy of that essentially chronological
list of developments in cigarette marketing and the other report, which I believe he described as a content analysis of ads that
had appeared over a number of years.
I think, if I am not mistaken, I think we talked a little bit about content analysis before. I am not in a field where that is a
normal part of the literature, and I read it, and he did what he did, and at this time I don't have any opinion about the accuracy
or inaccuracy; I just know what he did.
Q. Did you find any inaccurate statements in Joel Cohen's deposition?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. Joel Cohen's deposition, as I am sure you can recall, is very long. I only read it a couple of weeks ago. I simply haven't had
time to read it with as close attention that would permit me to -- if I could enter an opinion. I mean there is a whole question about
whether I had access to the primary sources on which he based a statement or a claimed statement of fact and interpretation.
I don't -- again, as I said, I know what he did, and I don't have an opinion at this point about accuracy or inaccuracy. I know
what he said at the deposition, but it's the same thing, and at this time I don't have an opinion on whether I would consider
any of his statements accurate or inaccurate.
Q. What is your definition of the word “aware” insofar as your statement that the public was aware of the claim that cigarette
smoking caused heart disease and lung cancer?
How do you define “aware” in the context of that statement?
A. As I think I emphasized throughout the deposition today, when I used the term “aware” I am referring to exposure to the
claims that cigarette smoking had negative health consequences.
Q. So, when you use the word “aware” you use it in the context of simply meaning there was information available to the public
concerning the claim that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer or heart disease?
A. I prefer the word “exposures.”
Q. Exposures, okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Did you do any research to determine the frequency of exposure? One time a year in the '40s, or two times a year, three times,
20 times, 100 times, 1000 times?
A. My professional judgment is that that concept of frequency measure is not suitable or appropriate for the research question
that I was addressing.
Q. Why is it not appropriate?
A. Well, to give a simple kind of an example, the presence of a newspaper article that discusses the claims of the negative health
consequences of cigarette smoking can be read by one person or by 100 persons off of a single copy of the newspaper.
There is no way meaningfully to give any kind of quantification, and I view that as kind of a pretense of science when it's not
in fact a justifiable approach to talk in terms of that kind of discreet quantitative frequency.
Q. So it doesn't make a difference insofar as your opinions in this case are concerned as to whether or not the public was
exposed to ten articles in a year or 100 articles a year concerning the claims that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer or heart
disease, is that correct, sir?
MR. PARRISH; Objection to the form of the question.
A. Again, I resist the implication of the question that one can characterize my research in terms of merely counting ten articles
or 100 articles.
I have looked at an enormous array of documents and primary sources that relate to the question of whether the general public
had multitudinous exposure to awareness of the health claims.
It is clearly the function of a professional historian to make a judgment about at what point is it appropriate, as a professional
historian, to say that there is a sufficient or sufficiently widespread sources of the messages about the claims of cigarette smoking
and the claims about its health consequences to constitute the general public awareness.
Q. Can you give us any guidelines?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form.
A. When you talk about guidelines, I presume that you are talking about the research methodologies which I have already
discussed at some length on how a historian goes about attempting to recreate.
Q. No, I didn't mean that. What I mean is, can you provide us with any guidelines by which a scholar like yourself makes the
judgment as to when the message is frequent enough so as to characterize the public as having been aware of certain claims?
A. At one level, the guideline is that one looks at the accumulation of evidence of the awareness, the exposure, how widespread
the references are to the descriptions or the statements, the claims of the negative health consequences, and if that is sufficiently
widespread in terms of the avenues through which messages are presented to the public, that is one guideline.
There is a second guideline that I would suggest to anyone who is undertaking research broadly, generically on this kind of a
question, is to look at it in terms of the degree to which what I would call acknowledgements of those exposure come to be
woven into the cultural, social, artistic, literary, political fabric of society.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
There may be other guidelines. I haven't been asked to address that kind of a question before, so that the -- but those are the
two that I would start with.
Q. Did you say you have been or have not been asked to address that question before?
A. You asked me the previous question about what the guidelines -- this kind of research. I haven't been asked the question
in that particular form.
As I say, I would start with those two guidelines, but on additional reflection I might want to add some additional criteria to
help me make the judgment.
Q. Are there any books that are written that would give us some other guidelines to consider in determining when the frequency
of a message would be sufficient for us to conclude that the public was aware of certain claims?
A. There might be. I don't know of any offhand. I don't recall any offhand, I should say.
Q. As you were reviewing all of this material that you accumulated and were kind enough to furnish pursuant to the subpoena
served in this matter, did you prepare any notes?
A. I gave you everything or I sent through attorneys, whatever the mechanism, all of the materials that I had I think. I don't
know if I sent you two or three sets of material. It's an ongoing process of collecting materials so that, even since I think last
Friday, I got some additional materials which will be shown to you whenever the lawyers deem it appropriate. So I provided
everything that I have in my possession relevant to this research.
Q. Maybe my question wasn't clear, Professor.
Did you prepare any notes as you were going through this voluminous amount of information, yes or no?
You can't answer this one yes or no?
A. I don't know quite what you mean by notes.
Q. Notes, anything that summarizes or characterizes or describes in any way any information that you reviewed in this matter,
whether you recorded it by hand, whether you typed it, whether you dictated it, whether it's in the computer, whether that is on
a PC, any form whatsoever, whether you made notes regardless of whether they exist today or they don't exist.
A. I think from time to time I may have written down -- I think I wrote down some questions to myself.
Q. What did you do with those questions, after you wrote them down to yourself?
A. If they weren't provided to you, they were thrown out.
Q. Did there come a point in time when you had a discussion with any lawyers in which the lawyers conveyed to you the fact
that if you did prepare notes, those notes might be the subject of discovery in this case?
A. I think I was -- I certainly was made aware of the fact at some point whatever I developed, accumulated, would be subject
to the discovery, I guess the term is, yes.
Q. Did you conduct your research in this case the same as you would in any other research matter in terms of notekeeping?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Yes.
Q. So whenever you conduct research, you don't make it a practice of recording summaries or notes or whatever as you review
the materials, you simply keep it all in your head?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. Is that correct?
A. No.
Q. You keep notes?
A. As you very well know, I have absolutely copious, what I would refer to as research notes, tens of thousands of pages.
Q. Maybe my paralegal missed them. But I haven't seen them. I will have to check it out.
MR. PARRISH: Let him ask you a question. There is no question pending.
MR. EDELL: I will have to check with my paralegal whether she missed tens of thousands of notes.
MR. PARRISH: Dr. Carstensen, there is no question pending.
Q. It's your testimony you have tens of thousands of notes?
A. What I mean to be research notes are the research materials which I rely on in drawing my opinion.
Q. Do you have any notes? You have tens of thousands of pages of notes, actual notes that you prepared?
A. No.
Q. How many pages of notes do you have?
A. That I prepared in drawing summaries?
Q. Yes, that you have prepared.
A. Whatever there are in there. There are a few pages.
Q. How many pages?
A. I don't know.
Q. You don't know whether it's one or 100?
A. It's certainly not 100. I think there might be five or ten pages of the particular subset of one form of note. I do not use the
word “notes” in the way in which you use it. I want to make that very clear.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. How do I use it and how do you use it, you can tell me how I use it.
A. Historians when they talk about research notes, they are talking about all of the material which they have available to them.
So that, for instance, when I sat down to write the book that I wrote, or the manuscript that I wrote with respect to the history
of International Harvester, I sat down with the primary research materials and I wrote.
Q. You didn't write anything this case, did you? You didn't prepare a report, did you?
A. I am not writing a book in this case. If I were going to write a book, I would take the research materials, a historian typically
calls research notes to which you have been given full and complete access, and I would sit down and I would write a monograph,
if that was what I was interested in doing.
Q. Just so I understand, it's your practice to first accumulate all of this information, then go through it and write whatever paper
you're going to write as you go through the papers, without preparing any preliminary notes, is that correct?
A. If I was interested in a publication, yes, that is the procedure I have used in the past and continue to use in things that I
am writing for a publication now.
MR. EDELL: Would you mark this, please.
(Report marked Plaintiff's Exhibit for identification as of this date.)
Q. Have you seen that document before?
A. I don't know whether I have seen this particular piece of paper but I certainly have seen substantially the same document.
Q. What you mean you haven't seen that precise copy of the report prepared by the defendants in this matter but you may have
seen another copy; is that right?
A. That's correct.
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. When was the first time you saw it?
A. Boy, I can't -- I don't think I can give a specific date. I would say that I suppose it was late '86, early '87, maybe February.
I can't give a date.
Q. Did you see prior drafts of this?
A. I am not quite sure what you mean by “prior drafts.”
Q. Prior drafts. In other words, somebody sends you a document which preceded this in time that you reviewed and maybe
made some modifications of or called up with comments on.
A. When I read this document I think I may have made some suggestions about some minor editorial changes.
Q. Were the changes made?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Yes.
Q. So you saw prior drafts of this document, correct?
A. I think so. It's very hard for me to recall.
Q. Take a look at the second paragraph, first page. What do you mean by “historic trends”?
A. Historic trends refer to the long-term patterns of change or evolution.
Q. And in the use of cigarettes, in the context of this paragraph?
A. No, it says in the usage of tobacco products.
Q. So you did a broader analysis, not just cigarettes but other forms of tobacco, is that correct?
A. Yes, as I have indicated prior in this deposition.
Q. Were you aware that there had been studies linking other forms of tobacco use to cancers of various sites in human beings?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. It's very broad.
Q. You gave a broad analysis, historic trends in the usage of tobacco products.
Did the public ever become aware of claims that the use of tobacco other than cigarettes resulted in diseases in human beings?
A. I would like to point out this paragraph doesn't -- is talking about tobacco usage in trends and forms of consumption. You
are switching to a different topic altogether. I am not quite sure what it is you want me to talk about, whether you want me to
talk about what I did vis-a-vis trends usage or whether I did vis-a-vis study of the levels of the health claims.
Q. You don't understand the question?
A. I don't think you understand the question.
Q. I understand the question.
A. You're asking me two utterly contradictory and separate issues. You asked me about trends and usage, and then you switched
to a completely different topic that has nothing to do with the subject referred to in this sentence to which you just referred to.
Q. That is my prerogative, Professor, so just answer the question.
A. What is your question?
Q. Why don't you listen instead of pontificating.
MR. PARRISH: We don't need comments like that. Treat the witness with the respect that's due. Let's take a short recess.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
(Recess taken.)
MR. PARRISH: We are ready.
MR. EDELL: Read the question back to the witness.
(Question read.)
Q. Answer that question, Professor.
A. Was there a time at which the public became aware about the relationship between tobacco and allegations about health
consequences of using tobacco products?
Q. Again, other than cigarettes.
A. Yes.
Q. When was that?
A. Oh, roughly in the 17th century, beginning of the 17th century.
Q. Professor, do you distinguish so far as your opinions in this case are concerned with regard to the validity of the claims being
made concerning the health hazards of cigarette smoking?
A. I am making no claim, expressing no scholarly opinion about the validity of the claims.
Q. So, if someone who was untrained in medicine or science was fortunate enough to get his or her name in the press and said
that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and heart disease, you consider that to be part of the information which the public
was aware of in coming to your conclusion that they were aware that cigarette smoking -- the claims of cigarette smoking
caused diseases, is that correct?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: It was a long question. Will you read that back, please?
(Question read.)
A. Yes.
Q. So you made no judgment as to the validity of the source of the information to which the public was exposed; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. So you made no judgment as to the quality of the source or the reliability of the source or the believability of the source;
is that right?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. You conjoined a whole series.
Q. I thought I would save time.
A. I am not a scientist, I don't purport to be a scientist, I am not evaluating the scientific merit of the claims. I address myself
strictly to the question, as I have said repeatedly, of whether there was general public awareness of the claims that cigarette
smoking was linked to serious health problems and habit-forming.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to what effect that information had on the general public?
A. No.
Q. Why did you consider to be unimportant as to the source of these claims that cigarette smoking caused diseases such as
lung cancer and heart disease?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question. That is not what he said.
THE WITNESS: Would you read the question back to me.
(Question read.)
A. I don't recall using the term “unimportant.”
Q. You didn't consider it, did you, in coming to your conclusions in this matter?
A. I said I didn't judge the validity from a scientific point of view.
Q. Did you judge the validity from any point of view, of the source of the claim that cigarette smoking caused lung disease
or heart disease?
A. I judged the existence of the claim.
Q. Not the validity of the claim nor the reliability of the source, is that correct?
A. I think the only appropriate way to answer it is the way I answered it before: I am not a scientist, I do not purport to be a
scientist, I don't purport to judge the scientific validity of the claims. I set out to assess and to do scholarly research on general
public awareness of the claims.
Q. As a scholar, you are aware that the statements of different people or different organizations have different effects in terms
of their believability on the general public, correct?
A. That seems self-evident.
Q. I don't know. What does your answer mean? Yes or no? Self-evident could be self-evident yes or no. Self-evident no, self-
evident yes?
A. If I understood your statement to be that different organizations and different sources might be interpreted by people in
different ways, it seems to me that that is obviously so and that has nothing to do, per se, with my being a scholar. That is
something that people in general would agree to. I don't find anything remarkable about that situation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Did you attempt to assess the reliability of the source of information concerning the health hazards of cigarettes to which
the public was exposed?
A. I consider the term “reliability” to fall under the same rubric as the scientific evaluation, and I repeat: I am not a scientist, I
don't purport to be a scientist, and I don't evaluate the scientific validity, or if you prefer the term, reliability as part of my opinion.
Q. Is it your testimony that without being a scientist, people do not formulate the beliefs concerning the reliability of a source?
A. I don't think that I have entered any opinion as to how people formulate their beliefs.
Q. Let me ask it this way, then.
Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the source of the information is important in terms of people's beliefs or disregarding
the statement concerning the health hazards of cigarettes?
A. I would repeat what I just said, I entered no opinion as to --
Q. I know.
MR. PARRISH: Let him finish the answer.
A. -- people's belief.
Q. I am asking you whether you have one as an expert. I know you haven't entered one.
A. I haven't attempted to formulate, and I don't have at this time an opinion on the issue of what causes people to -- I think
your term was belief in this particular thing.
Q. Do you have the expertise to formulate such an opinion?
A. I am not a psychologist, if that is what would be pertinent.
Q. Did you think it was important to distinguish the different sources of information to which the public was exposed concerning
the dangers of cigarette smoking?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. Could you tell me what you mean by “distinguish”?
Q. Yes. Separate, separately identify.
A. Yes, I separately identified in that sense, distinguished between the various sources of the claims of the health hazards of
cigarette smoking.
Q. Did the separation into these different categories have an effect on your opinion in this case?
A. I think this goes back to the guidance question that you asked earlier, that as a professional historian, the way in my
professional judgment one should approach this is by trying to make an assessment of the variety of messages and the variety
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
of the forms of the messages and the variety of the sources of the messages, that that clearly is what I indicated, I believe, in
my first point under the kinds of guidelines that one should use in coming to a scholarly judgment.
Q. Why is the variety of sources of the information important?
A. Because if, as in this case, what I am interested in is what the level of the awareness is, I want to look at everything to which
an individual is exposed. If I am going to make a judgment of their awareness, I want to make as complete or as balanced an
evaluation of the range of information which is coming into the general public as is possible.
Q. Did you do anything to ascertain what the public's perception was of the various sources of information concerning the
health hazards attendant to the use of cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. As I think I made clear, I have an opinion about -- I have a scholarly judgment about public awareness, that is exposure to
the claims, I have no opinion. I have formulated no opinion about whether the public believed that, those set of messages.
If, by perception, you're referring to belief, then my answer is that I have formulated no opinion about the belief structure that
the public may have had.
Q. Are there any other factors which influenced the increase of cigarette consumption during the pre-1920 period other than
increasing urbanization, evolution of the pace of life and economic development?
A. The style of the kind of broad categories used there, I think I would probably want to add technological developments.
Q. Did advertising have an impact on the increase in cigarette consumption?
A. In this period, no, I don't believe it did.
Q. In any period, did cigarette advertising have an influence on cigarette consumption?
A. I have already indicated that I think advertising is part of the information that is available to the public. I did not do focused
research or specialized research on advertising, as I said before.
Q. Are you going to testify as to any influences on cigarette consumption post-1920?
A. If asked, I may.
Q. Do you have any opinions with regard to influences on cigarette consumption post-1920 as you sit here today?
A. Post-1920, by which you mean -
Q. After 1920.
A. To the present?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. In regard to those opinions, did you consider whether or not cigarette advertising had an influence on cigarette consumption?
A. Yes.
Q. In what way did cigarette advertising have an influence on cigarette consumption?
A. As I have repeatedly indicated, advertising is certainly part of the information that is available, so that I know it's there. But
I did not and do not believe that the advertising is a critical part of forming the basis of the opinions that I had.
Q. The question is very simple, Professor: Does cigarette advertising influence cigarette consumption, yes or no? Do you have
an opinion?
A. I do not have an opinion on that specific narrow question at this point.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not cigarette advertising ever had an influence on cigarette consumption, yes or no?
A. As I keep indicating, there are times when yes or no is not an appropriate answer, and in this case, it's not an appropriate
answer because that is not -- has not been the focus of the issues that I have considered.
Q. With all due respect, Professor, I am not really concerned whether it was the focus of your work for the tobacco companies.
All I want to know is whether or not you have an opinion as to whether cigarette advertising had an effect on cigarette
consumption at any point in time.
A. I think I have already indicated that for the pre-1920 period it was already my judgment that advertising was not an important
part of the set of influences that led to the increase in cigarette consumption.
Q. For the period 1930 to 1960, do you have an opinion as to whether or not cigarette advertising had an influence on cigarette
consumption?
A. Not at this point.
Q. During the period 1930 to 1960, do you have an opinion as to whether or not the public's awareness of the claims that
cigarette smoking caused heart disease and lung cancer, had an influence on cigarette consumption?
MR. O'NEILL: Objection.
A. I think I have answered that question before. You are asking a specific subset of a broader question that I have answered
clearly, that part of the information about the claims of cigarette smoking and health problems that discussed heart disease and
cancer was more substantial in the 1950s than the 1940s, and I'm not sure about the -- if that trend continued, but I haven't
looked specifically at what the narrow question about public awareness was about the specific set of health claims.
I have made an assessment of public awareness of the health claims and cigarette smoking in the broad framework that I have
indicated.
Q. Professor Carstensen, is the public's awareness of the health hazards attendant to the use of cigarettes a factor which you
considered in determining what influences cigarette consumption --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: Pre-1920?
MR. EDELL: At any point in time.
A. Then you said for --
Q. I didn't say anything.
A. My question would be for what period of time?
Q. For all periods of time to which you're going to testify in this case.
A. I don't know what I am going to be asked to testify to.
Q. Then for all periods of time for which you have formulated opinions with regard to this case.
A. For those periods, every time for which I have formulated an opinion, did I consider the public --
Q. Do you want the question read back again?
A. I am trying to --
MR. EDELL: Read the question back to the witness.
(Question read.)
A. All right. But first of all, again, it's not the public awareness of the health consequences but it's the claims, and for those
periods for which I have a scholarly opinion about the influences explaining the trends in cigarette consumption, I certainly
took into account the level of -- not the level, but the public awareness of the health claims, yes.
Q. In what way did the public awareness of the health claims influence cigarette consumption?
A. As a historian, I would emphasize that when assessing trends, what we typically find is multiplicity of influences that come
together to explain or at least to offer a partial explanation for what the pattern was.
There were a variety of influences in the pre-1920 period which combined, as I have indicated, to lead to an increase in cigarette
consumption.
In that period the fact of general public awareness of the claims of the health consequences of cigarette smoking, simply did
not deter the choice that people made to consume tobacco in that form.
Q. Is that the extent of your answer?
A. You asked whether I took it into account.
Q. Do you want the question read back again?
A. If you want to do it that way.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. I just want an answer, Professor.
A. Did I take into account when I formulated opinions about whatever period I formed opinions, I said yes.
Q. No, that you testified that you took into consideration, and I asked you in what way did the public's awareness of the claims
regarding the health hazards attendant to the use of cigarettes influence cigarette consumption.
A. I said it didn't.
Q. Tell me whether or not your opinion changed at any point in time.
A. About what?
Q. Whether or not the public's awareness of the claims that cigarette smoking caused various diseases influenced cigarette
consumption.
MR. PARRISH: For what period?
A. For the pre-1920 period?
Q. For any point in time. I thought we squared that away before.
A. Excuse me. I am a teacher, but sometimes you don't pay attention to your antecedents and that confuses me.
The other clear historical change in trend is the recent decline in cigarette consumption, and within the broad range of influences,
that as a historian, I think contributed to that decline, certainly the persistence of the general public's awareness of the claims
of the links between cigarette smoking and a variety of health problems has been a factor.
Q. At what point in time did the public's knowledge of the claims that cigarette smoking caused disease result in a decrease
in cigarette consumption?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. There is simply the historic fact that in the United States cigarette consumption has declined over the last 15, 16, 17 years,
something in that area. That is simply a statement of fact.
My judgment as a historian is, that one among a variety of influences that contributed to that was the persistence of the general
public's awareness of the claims of the links between cigarette smoking and a variety of health problems and diseases.
Q. What other influences did you consider to have an effect in decreasing cigarette consumption, along with the public's
knowledge of the claims that cigarette smoking caused disease?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I don't think I said anything about what the public's knowledge was. I would again emphasize what I have said repeatedly:
There was general public awareness of the claim.
As to the public, there was a persistence of exposure of awareness to the claims there were serious health consequences from
cigarette smoking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Other factors that contributed to the shift in the trend pattern of the last decade and a half roughly, clearly has been among
a variety of things.
The most obvious, in my judgment, is the change in the attitude towards physical fitness, which began I think roughly sometime
in the 1950s, and has had a series of subsidiary forms in terms of a concern with nutrition and whole patterns of diet and
increasing concern with what we may broadly refer to as lifestyle.
As part of that process of second clear influence I think has been the change in the attitude towards what we might refer to
as the sociability of cigarette smoking.
Q. Anything else?
A. I think those are the two things at this point. My judgment is that those are the two primary ones. As I think Mr. Parrish
indicated to you, we have -- I have ongoing research. I am looking at this question -- this was a question that I was asked to
address relatively recently.
So I am continuing to examine the sources to assess that, and those two influences have emerged very clearly and markedly in
my professional judgment. There may be some more that I can categorize in a similar kind of way.
Q. When were you asked to assess what factors influenced the decrease in cigarette consumption?
A. It's very hard for me to recall. I have been working on this general area of research now for what, about over two years, 26, 27
months, something, and relatively recently, I guess a couple of three months ago, when the question came up of the post-1966
period, and I was asked to extend my consideration of the issue of trends to --
MR. EDELL: Is this a supplemental report, Mr. Parrish?
MR. PARRISH: I am sorry?
MR. EDELL: Is this a supplemental report? Am I to be concerned with it?
MR. PARRISH: None of which you should be concerned with. This is not a supplemental report.
MR. EDELL: Obviously the witness didn't formulate this opinion previously. The report that I got was in March of 1987.
MR. PARRISH: Right.
MR. EDELL: So I assume this is a supplement to that report.
MR. PARRISH: Assume what you wish.
MR. EDELL; Is it or isn't it? I won't go into it any further unless it is a supplement to his report. If this is simply a report that
he is doing for you in another matter --
MR. PARRISH: It's not. It relates to this case.
MR. EDELL: Certainly not set forth in the March '87 report.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. PARRISH: That may be your position.
MR. EDELL: Okay.
Q. Let's take a look at the third paragraph on P-l. What do you mean by “continuously”? Can you define that for me, please?
A. Insofar as it's possible for a historian to determine that the messages were coming from a variety of sources, that one would
have been placed in front of them. They would have the exposure, they would be, in that sense, aware of these messages
It is not a claim that every minute of every day one is receiving these messages but within the broad time frame that the messages
are there, in my opinion, clearly in the environment throughout the period.
Q. That is your definition of “continuously” as you use it in the first sentence in that third paragraph, P-l, is that correct?
A. That the messages are there throughout the period, yes.
Q. That is your definition of “continuously”?
A. Well, I gave you a restatement of that phrase.
Q. I just want the word “continuously.”
How do you define it insofar as your use of that in that sentence?
A. As an experienced author and so on, as an editor, you raise that issue with me, I would rephrase the sentence so that any
concern about ambiguity, about the existence of those messages with the information that was present throughout this period
to the American public, if there was a concern about ambiguity, I would rephrase it, which is what I attempted to do in the
question, to alleviate any ambiguity.
All I can say is if you are still having a problem with ambiguity of the sentence as a whole, if you could explain to me the nature
of your concern, I would certainly attempt to speak as fully to it as I could.
Q. The nature of my concern is your failure to define “continuously.”
All I want is your definition of “continuously,” Professor.
A. Wait, that is not what I asked.
Q. You want the question read back?
A. What I meant by the use of that term in that sentence, which is not the generic definition of the word “continuous” -
Q. That's correct.
A. Which is it? You want it in that sentence or do you want the generic definition?
Q. I didn't know it would necessarily be different. You use words differently depending upon the context. Be that as it may,
why don't you define for us “continuously” as you intended it to be used in this sentence?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I have already done that by rephrasing the sentence.
Q. You haven't defined “continuously” for me, Professor. That is what I wanted you to define. If you think it's ambiguous and
you would like me to rephrase it, that is another question.
A. No. My sense was that you felt it was ambiguous, and to alleviate your sense of ambiguity I rephrased the sentence as I
think I made perfectly clear.
Q. That is your answer?
A. Yes.
Q. Let's take a look at the last sentence, the last line on that page. How do you define “dangerous” in that sentence?
A. I think this is simply a repetition in a larger framework of the series of questions that you asked me about the issue of
longevity.
It was dangerous to your health. You can get diseases, it was alleged that you could go blind, that you could get Berger's disease,
that you could get heart problems, that you could get respiratory problems, that you could get a whole variety of ailments, that
you could have circulatory failure, you can have ulcers, you can have digestive problems.
In the information that was presented to the public throughout this period, there are a whole variety of allegations about the
consequences of cigarette smoking: That it was habit-forming, it was life-threatening, that it promoted disease, that it made
recovery from other diseases more difficult.
So that the meaning of dangerous is that it would reduce the general quality of your health, it might shorten your life, I suppose
in the modern vocabulary, it would reduce the quality of your health.
Q. When did the public become aware that cigarette smoking more likely than not would cause cancer or heart disease?
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Read it back, please.
(Question read.)
A. Again, you're asking about cigarette smoking specifically as a form of consumption of tobacco, and I want to make that
clear. In the case of its association with diseases of the heart or, more generally, simply the circulatory system, those claims
were persistently present throughout the time that cigarettes were a form of consumption of tobacco.
The specific relationship with cancer, as I think I have already testified, the issue of lung cancer and its link to cigarette smoking
does not really enter into the array of information about these claims, until the late 1940s and especially in the early 1950s,
'50 and '55.
Q. Was Rose Cipollone exposed to teaching aids while in school that included information concerning the health hazards
attendant to the use of cigarettes?
A. At this point, I don't have any specific direct evidence that she was exposed to such teaching aids.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. Do you have any evidence that she was exposed to such teaching aids?
A. It's my professional judgment that there is a high likelihood that she was exposed to such teaching aids.
Q. What school did she go to?
A. I don't remember the name of the school off the top of my head.
Q. When did she go to grammar school?
A. She would have been -- she's in what? She must have be going roughly '34, '35, '36, in that period. She is out of high school
'40, '41, '42, the dates are a little fuzzy right now, of the exact years.
Q. What teaching manuals were used in her school which related to the health hazards of cigarettes?
A. I don't know what the specific textbook was that she would have used in the health courses.
MR. PARRISH: Excuse me, how much longer do you plan on going?
MR. EDELL: We can either like continue for probably another half hour or 45 minutes or come back tomorrow, whichever
you prefer.
(Recess taken.)
Q. Professor, what assemblies did Rose Cipollone attend at which she received information concerning the health hazards of
cigarettes when she was in school?
A. I don't know of any assemblies that she specifically attended.
Q. Do you know of any assemblies that she generally attended?
A. No.
Q. You have been very precise and I just wanted to make sure that I wasn't missing something, Professor.
What posters did Rose Cipollone see that related to information concerning cigarette smoking and health?
A. As a student?
Q. As a student, yes.
A. I have no information at this time on what posters she may have seen in her specific school.
Q. What clubs or student organizations was she a member of in which she received information concerning the health hazards
attendant to the use of 14 cigarettes?
A. At this time, I don't know of any clubs that she received any information.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. What essays or other contests did she participate in in which she received information concerning the health hazards of
cigarette smoking?
A. At this time I know of no such contests in which she participated in school.
Q. What pamphlets did she receive while in school which contained information concerning cigarette smoking and health?
A. I don't know of any specific pamphlets that she received.
Q. Do you know of any pamphlets which she may have received?
A. No, not at this time.
Q. Do you know of any information Rose Cipollone received in the participation of athletics concerning cigarette smoking
and health?
A. I don't know at this time of any specific messages she received from athletic activities.
Q. When was Rose Cipollone confronted with restrictive legislation on her ability to purchase cigarettes?
A. New York had restrictive legislation on minors purchasing cigarettes, so that was part of the environment in which she chose
to begin smoking.
Q. What information do you have to lead you to the conclusion that Rose Cipollone was aware of such legislation?
A. I don't recall anything specific on that issue at the moment.
Q. Professor, what are your chances of dying from cigarette-related diseases if you use cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I don't know.
Q. What are your chances of developing heart disease if you use cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I have not undertaken research on the particular statistical predictions that may have been compiled.
Q. Do you have an understanding, sir, as to what the chances are that you will develop heart disease if you smoke cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. Are you asking me as a scholar in terms of the research I was undertaking or just a general awareness of what --
Q. Either or both, sir.
A. I haven't undertaken to study the scientific literature as a scholar. Certainly, there is discussion of the association between
cigarette smoking deaths from heart disease and lung cancer that makes its way into the various forms of public information
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
that is available, for, say, in the mid-1950s. But I haven't been concerned about assessing or examining the particular statistical
prediction of likelihood.
Q. Is it fair to say you don't know what the chances of developing lung cancer are if you use cigarettes?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. It is the case that I don't know at this time what the specific problems that various people may have put on those likelihoods.
Q. Do you have a general understanding as to what the likelihood is that if you smoke you're going to develop heart disease?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
Q. You don't have to tell me it's a “.785” chance of probability. I just want to know a general impression, sir.
MR. PARRISH: I object to the form of the question.
A. As I indicated, as a scholar, I haven't undertaken research on that. Obviously I am aware of the claim that if one smokes,
one has a higher risk. But I honestly don't recall what the magnitudes are of the risk characteristics associated with the level
and duration of smoking.
Q. Did you ever smoke?
A. I tried a couple of times. I think one cigarette or something, and I smoked a pipe for six weeks, once.
Q. So you weren't really a cigarette smoker?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what the chances are that one will develop emphysema from cigarette smoking?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. Again, it's the same kind of answer I have given before. It's not a subject in which I have attempted to focus research.
Personally I am aware that there are claims that the incidence - but I don't know what the statistical probabilities are of intensity
and duration and emphysema.
Q. What is the probability that you are going to die from your cigarette smoking if you smoke for 20 years?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I have no idea what the statistical parameters are.
Q. Do you have a general understanding of what they are?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Again, we go over the same ground. As a scholar, I haven't attempted to study that information. As a person who reads papers
and so on, I am aware that there is a variety of claims on what the statistical probabilities are that link intensity and duration
of cigarette smoking with a variety of diseases and forms of death.
Q. But you don't know to what extent cigarette smoking increases the likelihood that you are going to die from cigarette-related
disease; is that right?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I think all I have indicated is that I studied it as a scholar, and I am aware of the claims that it increases the -- that there is, to
put it in terms that social scientists use, there is -- there are a whole variety of studies. It's my impression, just, again, a personal
impression, that correlate intensity and duration of cigarette use with a variety of diseases and with death.
So I am aware of the claimed direction of the influence, but I don't know what its magnitude is.
Q. When did the public become aware of statements that cigarette smoking was addictive?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I did not look for the particular use of the term that you used in the question, that is addictive; rather, I simply looked at it in
terms of what the nature of the claims were that cigarettes were habit-forming, and since it has been persistently available in the
information that was presented to the public, again, since the 17th century that tobacco use generally was habit-forming. So when
tobacco came to be used in the form of cigarettes, that information was already there, and it persisted right down to the present.
Q. Do you distinguish between habit-forming and addictive for the purposes of your analysis as to what the public was aware
of concerning claims regarding cigarette use?
A. No, because I don't have any biomedical or clinical skills that would permit me to make data-useful distinctions.
AS I indicated in my first answer, I interpreted your use of the term under the broad heading of habit-forming. So I, in my
research, simply approached it in terms of what the general nature of the messages that the general public was receiving about
tobacco as being habit-forming.
As I said, that message was there persistently from the time basically tobacco was introduced to European civilization.
Q. For purpose of your scholarly work you thought addictive was synoymous with habit-forming?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I didn't conceptualize it in that way.
As I have already said, I am not a biomedical expert and my impression is that addictive -- there are arguments about what its
biomedical application is, and I am not qualified to enter into that, what I would consider to be technical debate.
So for my purposes, what was useful and relevant was to approach it within the broad framework of simply references to habit-
forming or if it occurred in the literature addictive, without trying to parse out any differences.
Q. Turn to page 4 of P1, second full paragraph. What do you mean by the phrase “to a sufficient number of messages”?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Second full paragraph?
Q. Yes.
A. I think this goes back to the guideline issue that you asked me earlier about how as a historian one goes about deciding when
one can say that there is general public awareness. Precisely because it is not a wholly fruitful line of inquiry to try to simply
make some quantitative measure, I call it pseudo-scientific or something, but rather what a historian wants to do is to recreate
the historical situation or the historical pattern and look at all of the different facets.
I think you asked me a question at one point about distinguishing the sources of the messages. This is a summary of exactly
the point that I was making earlier, that if one looks at the variety of sources of messages about the health consequences of,
the alleged health consequences of the claims of the consequences of cigarette smoking, that is one of the two guidelines that
I outlined earlier as forming the basis on which a historian would say it's clear that there were a sufficiently widespread, that
is to say multitudiness sources of the messages about the health consequences, that the public was in general aware that is
exposed to these messages.
Q. At what point in time was the American public in general exposed to a sufficient number of messages from a wide variety
of sources that it became inconceivable tht anyone was unaware of the claim of adverse health effects regarding the use of
cigarettes?
A. As I think I have already indicated several times, it's my opinion as a historian that throughout this period there was persistent
public awareness of the health claims linking cigarettes with a variety of diseases and habit forming.
Q. When did it become inconceivable that anyone was unaware of the claim of adverse health effects regarding cigarette
smoking and health?
A. I think that is just the flip side of what I said, that it is my professional judgment that throughout this period I find it
inconceivable, inconsistent with the evidence that I have evaluated that people were unaware, that is to say, unexposed to the
claim that cigarette smoking had adverse health consequences.
Q. You used the word aware and exposed synonymously?
A. Yes.
Q. So it's your testimony that as early as the 1900's, it would be inconceivable that anyone was unaware of the claim of adverse
effects, health effects related to cigarette smoking, is that correct?
A. Yes, that's my judgment as a historian.
Q. When was it in point of time that it became inconceivable that anyone was unaware of the claim that cigarette smoking
caused lung cancer?
A. As I think I have already indicated, lung cancer as a discreet subset of this much larger environment did not emerge until the
late 40's, early 1950's, and it certainly came to occupy a larger part of the information of which the general public was aware.
I did not structure my research to address that particular subquestion. And so, at this time I am unwilling to enter an opinion
about the specific link with the awareness of the claims about the potential link between cigarettes and lung cancer.
Q. What claims of adverse health consequences of cigarette smoking was Rose Cipollone aware of during her teenage years?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. Rose Cipollone tells us in her deposition that she was a newspaper reader from the time that she was, I think, 8 years old
or so. I know that the newspapers that she told us were in her home are newspapers which contained articles that discussed
the health consequences of cigarette smoking.
I know that after her father died, I believe it's a brother who testified that their mother repeatedly told Rose that her father died
in part -- the mother repeatedly linked his death to his use of cigarettes. Rose Cipollone's deposition also tells us that she knew
that it was against school regulations to smoke and, therefore, she would sneak her smokes in the girl's room.
So for the teenage years, which I think is what you asked about, that is what I recall at this point of information that is relevant
to assessing her awareness.
Q. What adverse health consequences was she aware of in her teenage years? You don't have to tell me what sources she
may have had or what her mother told her. I want to know what health consequences Rose Cipollone was aware of during
her teenage years.
MR. PARRISH: Other than what he was saying?
MR. EDELL: I haven't heard anything.
MR. PARRISH: You missed the part about her father's death.
A. Her father had died, that her father's death was linked to the use of cigarettes, that I would consider, as I have testified already
many times, that you have this, what we might call generic association between the use of cigarettes and ill health, longevity,
a variety of diseases, variety of sources of death.
She was, according to her brother, told one such story repeatedly, specifically about her own father.
As I have indicated, there were a variety of articles in the newspaper that we know by her own testimony she read. I don't know
whether she read those particular articles but she said she read the newspaper, I think her word was from cover to cover. She
claimed she was an avid reader throughout this period. The information was certainly in the environment.
She said she was looking at those things, therefore, I assumed that she had exposure to these, what I would categorize as these
generic claims about the health consequences of cigarette smoking.
Q. Are you telling me she was aware of the generic claim that cigarette smoking had an adverse impact on her health during
her teenage years, is that right?
I am trying to find out, Professor --
A. It seems to me clear as a historian, if I can respond to that from the evidence that I have compiled in general, and the evidence
about Rose Cipollone specifically, that she was certainly aware of the claim that cigarette smoking is bad for you, to put it
in the simplest terms.
Q. What does that mean, bad for you insofar as the way you used that in that answer?
A. I think, as I have indicated before, it comes in lots of different forms. It can kill you, give you Berger's disease, heart failure,
respiratory failure, you can lose your eyesight, get ulcers, the whole plethora of diseases as described as being associated with it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
I don't have specific information that acknowledges that she was aware of one specific claim about one specific disease. She
clearly was in the presence of a lot of these messages. And we know that her brother, or I have seen his statement, that Rose
was told by her mother that her father's death was linked. And we know from Rose's own statements that she was aware of
the disciplinary rules in school.
And so that there is what I would call some acknowledgement of the exposure that she had an . 14 awareness, as a teenager,
of the claims that linked cigarette smoking with adverse health consequence.
Q. What adverse health consequences? You told me she didn't know about Berger's disease, respiratory failure, just that it was
bad, and her father had died from it and there were regulations, from her statement that she knew there were regulations at
school concerning the use of cigarettes. What health hazards do you believe she recognized from that statement?
A. I have no opinion on what health hazard she recognized.
Q. With regard to her father's death, what health hazards did she recognize from her mother that her father's death was linked
with cigarettes?
A. I don't know.
Q. What health hazards was she aware of regarding her review of these papers, these newspapers that cigarette smoking had
adverse health consequences?
A. The easy way to answer the question of whether she was aware, I would remind you she had exposure to, it was in her
presence, we can look and see what is in the clipping file for the Tribune or the New York Journal and the other papers that
came into her household.
But as I pointed out before, I don't have a general opinion about what constituted public belief or your term perception that my
opinion relates to awareness, to the exposure to the claim.
And similarly with Rose Cipollone, all I am saying is that as a historian, it's my considered judgment, based on the research
that I have conducted and the depositions that I have been shown with respect to this case, that Rose Cipollone was aware that
she had exposure to many of the same categories of sources of messages about the health consequences of smoking.
That is the extent of my opinion.
Q. Professor, I thought it was a very simple question. Without reference to the specific clippings, can you tell us, as you are
sitting here today, what adverse health consequences Rose Cipollone was exposed to by her reading those papers during her
teenage years?
MR. O'NEILL: Objection to the form of the question.
A. As I have already indicated, I have no knowledge of what she read specifically in the papers. Her testimony was she started
reading those papers at the age of eight, that she was a regular and thorough reader, I think her term, as I said, she described
herself as someone who read the paper from front to back. She read those papers, we look in those papers, we see these articles.
They were in her presence.
I have no opinion about how she perceived, processed, believed, conceived of the claims. All I said is that she had exposure, she
was aware of the health claims. The claims were in her presence from the time that she was 8 years old, by her own testimony.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. I understand that. But what were these claims?
A. I already told you.
Q. You didn't tell me. You said they were in the newspaper articles.
I want you to tell me what the claims in the newspaper articles were that you believe Rose Cipollone was exposed to during
her teenage years.
A. I can't do that without pulling out the clipping file. It would be absurd as a historian to try to pull out a memory of those
specific articles, especially since they are in the files that you and I have both had availabile to us.
Q. So it's your testimony that any of the articles which appeared in the newspapers for the time period during which Rose
Cipollone was a teenager, she was exposed to and therefore she was aware of?
A. In the way in which I used the term “aware” and in the context I have given, yes.
Q. Did you take into consideration where in the newspaper the ads appeared?
MR. PARRISH: Objection.
Q. In other words, did it affect your opinion as to whether it was on the front page or the 20th page of the newspaper?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I didn't say anything about ads. I talked about -
Q. I am sorry. It's getting late. I apologize. Let me ask the question, sir.
With regard to these newspaper articles, did you take into consideration whether or not the article was on the first page in the
newspaper or the 20th page in the newspaper?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any information with regard to whether or not people who read the newspaper pay more attention to the first
page of the newspaper as opposed to the 20th page of the newspaper?
A. I haven't attempted to make a separate study, scholarly study of how people approach reading matter.
Q. So if it was anywhere in the newspaper, regardless of how large an article it was, you considered that to be an exposure
to the public, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. What else in Rose Cipollone's deposition leads you to conclude that she was aware of the adverse health effects of cigarette
smoking?
MR. O'NEILL: Objection to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
A. I don't think I can separate out Rose Cipollone's deposition from other sources of information that I have had about -- that
is germane to this litigation.
Q. What in any of the other deposition transcripts that you reviewed, in conjunction with your research in this matter, leads you
to the conclusion that Rose Cipollone was aware of the claims concerning the adverse health consequences of cigarette smoking?
MR. PARRISH: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you read it back, please?
(Question read.)
A. Again, remembering that I am talking about the exposures that I had to these claims --
Q. I am talking about the deposition, sir.
A. I understand that, but I am talking about the -- you asked me what in the depositions formed the basis for my -- you said led,
I would prefer to say formed a basis to make a judgment as a historian, that she was aware, had exposure to these claims.
Let me just run through a short list of the things that I can recall quickly. Her husband, from before he was even her husband,
had complained to her about her cigarette smoking. And in his deposition, as I recall, he said that he would make a point of
identifying articles that discussed the claims of the health hazards of the use of cigarettes and he would show them to her.
Her children talked about their telling her that they preferred or that they said to her that she ought to quit smoking because it
was a threat to her health. I think her granddaughter even said to her at one point “Grandma, smoking kills or smoking gives
you lung cancer,” something of that nature, I can't recall the specific language.
So she got the message from her husband, she got it from her children, grandchild, she got -- her husband providing this material
that was in the print media. I think her friend acknowledged that she was familiar with slang terminology such as coffin nail,
which was used to describe cigarettes.
Rose Cipollone herself said that she watched television, she watched news shows, without knowing specifically that the news
worked like the print media, reconstruct to some extent what was on the news shows and whether there was a discussion of
the claims of health hazards associated with smoking. I know that again the newspapers that she said she had in her house, the
magazines that she read, some of the authors, the novels that she read, the simple and direct way was simply to go and look and
see whether in those various sources and in the depositions by her friends and family and so on was information, statements
that said she was exposed to, that this was presented to her, that she was, in that sense, aware of this variety of health claims
linking cigarette use with a variety of serious health problems.
Q. Have you met with any of the other witnesses who are going to testify on behalf of the defendants in this matter?
A. No, I don't believe so.
Q. Have you communicated with any of them?
A. I think I have indicated the other scholars that I have communicated with and I don't know whether Harp, Means or Sobel
have been or are supposed to testify. Those are the scholars that I have communicated with on this issue and they are the only
scholars that I have communicated with.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
Q. What opinions do you have concerning opinions expressed by plaintiff's witnesses in this matter?
A. Those are your people, right?
Q. Plaintiff's expert witnesses.
A. Pollay and Cohen are the two depositions that I have read. I only was given a copy of Pollay's deposition I think last week.
I have looked through it very quickly, but I haven't been able to look at it with care.
Cohen, I only had it three weeks ago, I have read that and I have looked through the supporting documents that came with
it. I think, as I indicated before, I understand what they did, but at this point I haven't had the time to sit down and make any
assessments. So that at this point I have no opinion about their accuracy or their inaccuracy.
Q. Any other plaintiff's experts who you're going to comment on their opinions?
A. Those are the only two depositions that I have seen at this point. I don't know, I can't tell you if I am going to be asked to
look at someone's else's deposition or not. You have to ask other people.
Those are the two that I have looked at, I have only had them very recently. And at this point I don't have an opinion, as I said
I haven't had an opportunity. So I only know what they have done, I can't render an opinion as to whether there is inaccuracy
or accuracy and whether I would disagree with them at any level.
Q. Did the introduction of filter cigarettes have an effect on cigarette consumption or the types of cigarettes consumed?
A. The easiest way to answer that is eventually.
Q. When?
A. Roughly in '56, '57. Filter cigarettes, I should point out, in one form or the other, the use of filters with cigarettes had been
around since at least 1931. They had not been an important part of the market, from what I have seen, until basically the mid
and late 1950's, at which point there clearly is a shift in the preference of consumers who choose to change to the use of the
filter cigarettes.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to what caused the consumer preference to filter cigarettes to change?
A. As I think I have indicated before on trend issues, historians tend to look at a multiplicity of causes. That particular issue
was one on which I have not focused a lot of attention. So that I have some sense as a historian about some of the influences
that precipitated it, but I wouldn't presume that they were necessarily the full set of influences.
Q. What are the influences that you are aware of as a scholar that had an effect on consumer preference for filter cigarettes?
A. On the one hand, it's a continuation of my comment earlier. I think they clearly had come to be a more general concern with
notions of physical fitness and lifestyle, even at that point. So people were more concerned, becoming more concerned broadly
with how the things that they ate and drank and consumed in whatever form, impacted their lives.
I think that one of the influences, I don't know how to weigh it, is that clearly was a public discussion particularly of a Readers
Digest article that talked about the effectiveness of filters in reducing tar and nicotine which it was claimed were associated
with the health problems that essentially everyone knew were associated or claimed to be associated with cigarettes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Exector of the..., 1987 WL 1371239...
MR. EDELL: Thank you.
MR. PARRISH: I have no questions.
(Time noted: 6:50 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90
