Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Original Image of 1991 WL 11685905 (PDF)
1991 WL 11685905 (D.N.J.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, D. New Jersey.
Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the Estate of Rose D. Cipollone, Plaintiff,
v.
LIGGETT GROUP, INC., a Delaware Corporation, Philip Morris, Incorprated, a
Virginia corporation, and Loew's Theaters, Inc., a New York corporation, Defendants.
No. 83-2864(SA).
March 26, 1991.
(Deposition of Kenneth M. Ludmerer)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Jurisdiction: D.N.J.
Name of Expert: Kenneth M. Ludmerer
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances:
On behalf of the Plaintiff: Marc Z. Edell, Esq.
Budd, Larner, Gross, Rosenbaum, Greenberg & Sade
150 John F. Kennedy Parkway, CN 1000
Short Hills, New Jersey 07078-0999
(201) 379-4800.
On behalf of the Defendant Philip Morris: Murray R. Garnick, Esq.
Peter K. Bleakley, Esq.
Janet L. Johnson, Esq.
Arnold & Porter
1200 New Hmpshire Avenue, N.W.
Thurman Arnold Building
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 872-5716.
On behalf of the Defendant Philip Morris: John J. Mulderig, Esq.
Brown & Connery
360 Haddon Avenue
P.O. Box 539
Westmont, New Jersey 08108
(609) 854-8900.
On behalf of the Defendant Liggett Group, Inc.: Francis K. Decker, Jr., Esq.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Webster & Sheffield
237 Park Avenue
New York, New York 10017
(212) 808-6133.
On behalf of Philip Morris & Lorillard: David K. Hardy, Esq.
William L. Allinder, Esq.
Shook, Hardy & Bacon
One Kansas Place
1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105
(816) 474-6550.
Continued deposition of KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., a witness herein, called for examination by counsel for Plaintiff
in the above-entitled matter, pursuant to notice, the witness being duly sworn by JAN A. WILLIAMS, a Notary Public in and
for the State of Maryland, taken at the offices of Arnold & Porter, 1200 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.,
at 10:20 a.m., Wednesday, March 26, 1991, and the proceedings being taken down by Stenotype by JAN A. WILLIAMS and
transcribed under her direction.
CONTENTS
THE WITNESS ... EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D. ... PLAINTIFFS
By Mr. Edell ... 202
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT NO. ... PAGE NO.
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 13 ... 337
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 14 ... 337
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 15 ... 400
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 16 ... 414
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 17 ... 414
Ludmerer Exhibit No. 18 ... 414
PROCEEDINGS
Whereupon,
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., the witness on the stand at the time of recess, having been previously duly sworn, was
further examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR
PLAINTIFFS -- Resumed
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, you understand you are still under oath?
A. Yes.
Q. And you understand the admonitions I gave you yesterday apply to today's proceedings?
A. I understand that they do. It would probably be helpful for you to review those.
Q. If any of my questions are unclear, they don't make any sense, tell me and I will rephrase them.
A. Okay.
Q. If you don't know an answer, you don't recall a particular fact, please tell us, because we are going to presume that once you
respond to a question you understood it and you are accurately answering it, all right? All of your answers have to be audible.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Not uh-huh, yes, no.
A. Yes.
Q. If at any point in time, like yesterday, you feel like you need to stretch, obviously you feel free to do so.
A. Okay.
Q. If at any point in time Mr. Garnick has an objection, please hold your response until he places his objection on the record, at
which point in time he will indicate whether you should or should not go forward with the answer to a question. If at any point
in time you want to refer to a document to refresh your recollection or to answer specifically, please do so.
A. Okay.
Q. Doctor, as of January 1st, 1964, was diet considered by biomedical investigators to be a contributing factor to the development
of lung cancer in human beings?
A. The dietary hypothesis had little support at that time.
Q. When you say little support, what do you mean, sir?
A. Few, if any, individuals involved in research maintained that diet was a contributing factor.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. And, during the 1930 to 1940 period, were there a substantial number of investigators who felt that diet had a contributory
effect on the development of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by a substantial number?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. The opposite of little.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by --
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You said few. I will say -- well, let me ask you, how would you describe the number of investigators who felt that diet was
a contributory factor to the development of lung cancer during the 1930 to 1940 time period?
A. Well, I think the best way to answer that question is to describe to you the events that occurred. There was a hypothesis
some time to the best of my recollection in the 1930's, early to mid-1930's that tomatoes and tomato juice might be related
to the development of lung cancer. This hypothesis resulted in a brief flurry of investigative studies, attempting to test those
hypotheses; and, to the best of my recollection, there might have been somewhere between, oh, approximately eight or ten
publications that I recall that investigated this hypothesis.
The initial studies could not be confirmed by the six or seven or eight studies that followed and as a result work in that area was
discontinued sometime in the mid to late 1930's. It is difficult to know precisely how many people were involved so to speak
because any work could be subject to reference in another paper referring to an article with that original work.
Q. Would you describe it as few as you described it in 1964?
A. I would say that in the 1930's there were probably seven or eight or nine or ten actual studies into that question.
Q. By seven or eight or nine or ten individual investigators?
A. Seven or eight or nine papers. I don't remember how many papers were additional studies and publications undertaken by
the same investigators as opposed to each study being undertaken by someone else.
Q. Well, in terms of evaluating the significance of that hypothesis, would it be important to ascertain how many investigators
considered that a possibility as opposed to looking at the number of papers on the subject?
A. That doesn't change the events as I related them to you.
Q. I understand that. Will you please answer the question.
A. Please restate the question.
MR. EDELL: Would you read it back, please.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
THE REPORTER: “Question: Well, in terms of evaluating the significance of that hypothesis, would it be important to ascertain
how many investigators that considered that a possibility as opposed to looking at the number of papers on the subject?”
THE WITNESS: Well, I think that the facts speak for themselves. There were seven or eight papers on the topic, the subsequent
papers were unable to confirm the original positive results, and that line of thought was eliminated.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, please answer the question. If one person wrote the seven or eight or nine or ten investigative papers as opposed to
seven or eight or nine different investigators, don't you think that that would be significant in terms of evaluating the overall
significance of that hypothesis at that time?
A. I'm not sure. May I run out to the restroom a second.
MR. GARNICK: Yes.
THE WITNESS: No problems with the question, but I need to use the restroom. Excuse me.
(Recess)
MR. GARNICK: Mr. Edell has proposed that, in the interest of saving time, instead of having Dr. Ludmerer read the contents
of his notes into the record, that Mr. Edell take the notes with him and have his secretary transcribe them, then send them to us
and we would have Dr. Ludmerer read over the transcribed notes to insure that they are accurate.
In the interest of saving time and in light of the position stated yesterday by Mr. Hardy, it's our position that the deposition will
end at four o'clock today, we will take him up on his proposal, and we would agree to it with the understanding that Mr. Edell
take all necessary steps to preserve the integrity of some of these documents which are quite fragile.
MR. EDELL: Much to my secretary's chagrin, I thank you for your acceptance of my offer.
(Discussion off the record.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, as of January 1, 1964, was radiation still considered to be a possible risk factor in the development of lung cancer
in human beings?
A. There were some individuals who were concerned about radiation.
Q. How many individuals, sir?
A. I don't know the precise number, but that was a theory that was still entertained.
Q. Would the same number of investigators still feel that that was a viable theory in 1964 as in the period 1930 to 1940?
A. Probably the same, if not more, because the radiation hypothesis had substantial support to it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. With respect to pollution, we touched upon that yesterday, would you say the same number of investigators felt that pollution
was a contributory factor in the development of lung cancer in January 1964 as in the period 1930 to 1940?
A. Probably more investigators were concerned about pollution in January of 1964 than in the 1930's.
Q. With respect to tars, I think you described the tars on the road, is that how you indicated it?
A. Well, the tarring of the road and vapors that come from that.
Q. Is that part of pollution or is that separate?
A. well, people at the time tended to separate it out.
Q. All right. Let me ask you this then, in 1964 did people still believe that tarring of the road might contribute to the development
of lung cancer in human beings?
A. That was one of the hypotheses that again had essentially lost its support.
Q. How long did it have support?
A. Oh, it was a popular hypothesis in the thirties and the forties and then in the fifties and the sixties it began to fade away.
Q. How many investigators thought that there was a relationship between tars on the road and the development of lung cancer
in human beings in the period 1930 to 1940?
A. I'm not able to give a precise number.
Q. You don't know whether it was one or ten?
A. I don't remember.
Q. Or 10 or 20?
A. I don't remember precisely.
Q. You don't have any idea?
A. I don't remember precisely.
Q. Well, what do you remember?
A. Well, I remember that it was one of the theories that was advanced actually quite regularly as a speculative theory. So in that
regard the number would be fairly substantial, but I'm not able to give you a precise number.
Q. How many clinical reports appeared in the literature between 1930 and 1940 by practitioners relating exposure to tars on the
road with the development of lung cancers in their patients? If you would like to refer to your notes, sir, please feel free to do so.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Well, I don't recall how many actual reports there were. I do remember that, in the typical article of the period that was
representative of the period, a review of lung cancer, tarring of the roads or pollution, these other cautions, would usually be
listed as postulated causes, the point being that people were speculating more than they were investigating.
Q. Doctor, can you recall one clinical report during the period 1930 to 1940 where a physician correlated their patient's lung
cancer with the patient's exposure to tars on the road?
A. Well, I'd have to review the studies. But as I indicated all of these theories were primarily conjectural as opposed to a line
of scientific inquiry.
Q. The question is, Doctor, can you recall as you sit here today one clinical study where a physician correlated their patient's
lung cancer with the patient's exposure to tars, yes or no?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, there were a number of clinical reports that indicated that tarring of the roads may be related. But as
I have said that type of conjecture does not go very far in science and this was the extent of the support that most of these
theories had at that time.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Can you name one clinical report where a physician correlated their patient's lung cancer with the patient's exposure to
lung cancer?
A. I would have to go back and review not only my notes but bibliographies from the literature.
Q. All right. Can you review your notes to see whether or not your notes reflect any such study again during the period 1930
to 1940, please.
A. Sure.
Well, as I suspected these notes which are a shorthand to the literature cannot precisely answer the question. I would have
to see the original papers. For example, Miller, from American Review of Tuberculosis, January 1930, is an article that is
typical of articles of this period. And, in a general review of lung cancer, he discusses etiology and he makes the point that the
etiology of lung cancer is unknown. And I'm quoting him now, many theories have been ascertained to account for the origin of
pulmonary cancer but little is actually known. I did make a note to myself that in that particular paper tobacco was specifically
not mentioned as a possible cause. And similarly a paper by Bohner from the Journal of the American Medical Association,
1930, the period you're asking about, again is a paper on lung cancer.
Q. Doctor, I was asking you about clinical reports.
A. These are clinical reports on lung cancer.
Q. Is that what you consider to be clinical reports, Doctor?
A. These are articles that are typical of the literature of the period.
Q. Are they clinical reports, Doctor?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Yes, they are clinical reports.
Q. By physicians correlating their patients' exposure --
A. By physicians --
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: These are clinical reports of the question of lung cancer, clinical reports studying lung cancer and discussing
various aspects of that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. How do you define clinical reports, Doctor?
A. These are studies of patients with lung cancer, investigating various aspects of the diagnosis of lung cancer by clinicians,
that's the definition of a clinical report. And so Bohner also discusses in his clinical report what was known at the time about
the cause of lung cancer. He said that the etiology was not known. He mentioned that there had been various theories that have
been postulated. He too specifically did not mention tobacco as one of those theories at that time.
What I'm suggesting is that my notes are a shorthand and I have many such reports that list a variety of possible causes that were
speculated to be related to lung cancer, but generally speaking I didn't list them all in this bibliography. So it would be necessary
to go back to the original papers rather than to use my notes, my notes are not sufficiently detailed on those particular points.
Q. Doctor, during the period 1940 to 1950, what investigative tools were available to biomedical investigators to determine
whether or not a substance was a potential cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, the tools at that time were in general very crude relative to tools that were developed in the fifties and continue to be
developed today. And as I remember we discussed this yesterday.
Q. we discussed 1930 to 1940 yesterday, sir.
A. Well, essentially the same tools available in the 1930 to 1940 period were the ones that were primarily used in 1940 to 1950.
Q. Just so I'm clear please, in 1940 to 1950 what were the tools that were available to biomedical investigators in assessing
whether or not a substance might be a potential cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, the source of discussion was very similar to the discussion that we described yesterday. This includes physicians giving
armchair opinions, gee, I've seen three cases of lung cancer and all of them smoked.
Q. Those are the anecdotal clinical reports?
A. Those would be anecdotal clinical reports. In some cases there were studies of larger numbers of patients, though quite small
numbers of patients relative to the studies of the fifties and sixties. Those papers studied -- those papers suffered, excuse me,
for lack of controls or lack of good controls.
Q. Are those epidemiological controls?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
THE WITNESS: They would be considered retrospective reviews of the literature, they would not be considered retrospective
studies meeting the criteria that later came to be developed.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I understand that, sir. But were these considered to be epidemiological studies?
A. No, they were not. They were more accurately described as patient series, you know, a surgeon might have 40 cases or 60
cases, they would be a review of an individual's experience. I think it would be inaccurate to call them epidemiological studies
as such studies were later performed.
Q. I'm not talking about -- I don't want to look with hindsight, Doctor, you have told us that a number of times, we don't
want to use hindsight. But, regardless of what they consisted of, regardless of how perfect or imperfect they were, were there
epidemiological studies conducted during the period 1940 to 1950 by biomedical investigators with respect to lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by epidemiological studies?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You don't know what epidemiological studies are?
A. How are you using the term?
Q. As it's commonly used in literature, sir.
A. How are you using the term?
Q. I'm not going to define it because I'm not an expert. In your review of these materials, was there any references made to
epidemiological studies during the 1930 to 1940 time period, and then you can tell me how it was defined during that time frame?
A. Well, I don't remember if the term epidemiology was used with reference to any of these studies or not, I would have to
see the exact papers, because you will remember that epidemiology, as it applied to acute diseases and infectious diseases, was
already an established discipline. And so it's possible that the term epidemiology might have been bandied about by someone
here or there.
So I cannot answer that question as I sit here today with absolute certainty. But certainly, if one gets beyond labels and looks
at the conduct of these studies, they would not be considered epidemiological studies as those studies were later defined.
Q. I understand that. But, in evaluating the studies and whether they were good or bad epidemiological studies for the time
period in question, investigators didn't have the benefit of knowing how epidemiological studies would develop in the sixties,
seventies, and eighties, did they?
A. That's absolutely true, they did not have those techniques.
Q. So, in evaluating the studies during the time frame, in the relevant time period, they used their state of the art then?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. They used their state of the art which consisted of reviews of individual experiences. As I understood the question you asked
before, was the term epidemiology ever used by anyone in reference to those uncontrolled relations of one person's individual
clinical experience, and I just don't remember as I sit here today.
Q. What other tools were available to biomedical investigators during the 1940 to 1950 time frame with respect to identifying
potential contributing factors to the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Essentially that was it.
Q. No chemical studies during that time frame to determine the chemical constituents of different substances including tobacco
and cigarette smoke condensate?
A. That's a question that has to be put into context. And the reason it has to be put into context is that there were chemical
studies and skin painting studies that were undertaken, but those were negative. And, when such studies ultimately did become
positive, among the reasons positive studies were obtained at a different period of time is that different techniques were used
in conducting those studies.
Q. The question is, Doctor, very simply did biomedical investigators during the period 1940 to 1950 use as one of their tools
analysis of the chemical constituents of a substance to determine whether it might be a potential cause of lung cancer in human
beings?
A. They attempted to analyze those substances. Results were unsuccessful and, indeed, later repudiated.
Q. When you say later repudiated, with respect to tobacco smoke or tobacco condensate, when you say later repudiated, were
there any substances identified in smoke condensate or tobacco smoke that were considered to be potential causes of cancer
in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Between 1940 and 1950?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Yes.
A. To the best of my recollection, no, not in those years.
Q. In later years?
A. In later years, yes.
Q. And were there identified in smoke condensate chemicals that were thought to be potential causes of cancer in human beings
in the 1950's?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: Can you please repeat that question.
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Sure. You said in the period 1940 to 1950 any chemical studies to determine whether there were potential carcinogens in
tobacco smoke or tobacco condensate proved to be negative, correct?
A. In the 19 --
Q. 1940 to 1950 time frame, proved to be negative.
A. Correct.
Q. I thought that you indicated that, during the 1950 to 1960 time frame, such studies proved to be positive?
A. There were some studies, not all studies, but somewhere in the mid-1950's there were substances isolated from smoke
condensates that were found to have substances that were thought to be potentially carcinogenic.
Q. What substances were those, sir?
A. Well, the one that received the most focus was benzpyrene.
Q. And when was that first identified as a chemical constituent of smoke or smoke condensate?
A. To the best of my recollection, by Cooper & Lindsey, 1954, '55.
Q. Were there any other tools available during the 1940 to 1950 time frame that we haven't discussed? Again these are tools
available to biomedical investigators in assessing whether or not a particular substance might be a potential contributing factor
to the development of lung cancer in human beings.
A. Well, as I already mentioned, there were a few animal experiments, primarily mice, skin painting experiments which had
essentially negative results at that time.
Q. Doctor, in assessing the reliability of an investigation with respect to lung cancer, how did you assess the credibility of
the investigator in your analysis of these materials in the case? Maybe I should ask you first whether or not you thought it
was an important issue in reviewing a particular article to assess the particular author's credibility in the scientific and medical
community at the time?
A. Well, I think that it is fair to say that different investigators carry different stature, that the work that -- there are thousands
of scientists and some are, indeed, more prominent and more prestigious than others, no question about that.
Q. Then how did you make an assessment or did you make that assessment with respect to authors of publications during the
time period 1930 to January 1964 with regard to investigations correlating cigarette smoking to lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, there are a number of ways to assess the stature of --
Q. I want to know how you did it, sir, not theoretically the number of ways, just so you understand.
A. Well, there were many factors that I took into consideration.
Q. Please tell me what they are.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. One factor, just as an example, would be the position of the individual. None of these factors in and of themselves you'll
understand are conclusive. But a professor at Harvard University or Johns Hopkins or Yale is likely to have higher scientific
standing than an instructor or assistant professor, someone at a lower academic rank and someone at institutions of lesser
significance. Someone working for the National Cancer Institute would have had to have had certain qualifications to be able to
work at the National Cancer Institute as opposed to someone working at some minor medical school or minor research institute
that you or even I may never even have heard of. So the position and location of work is one indicator of the scientific standing
of an individual.
Q. What other criteria did you employ?
A. Well, there are many.
Q. I want to learn them, I want to know what they are.
A. Well, another criteria would be the place of publication. There are thousands and thousands of medical journals,
overwhelming quantity of medical literature. And actually I happen to be involved with a number of medical journals, and one
of the things we talk about is impact factor.
So we know this has been studied, that there are certain journals that are more prestigious, the best articles are submitted to
them. It doesn't necessarily mean that they are right or that they will prove to be right later. But publication in some journals
represents greater importance than publication in journals of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh tier that have much lower
readership, much lower circulation, and much less prestige.
Q. Okay. I'll let you finish up the criteria, sir, we have the position of investigator or the author, we have the journal in which
the article appeared.
A. Other factors come from knowing something about who the investigator is. In part this is just a matter of knowing their
position. But especially, as you look at the secondary literature, you become familiar with the list of medicine.
As you read -- just as you read broadly, it becomes possible to identify those who are important scientists. There are bibliographic
sources of American Men of Science, for example, where scientists who have achieved certain distinction are elected to this
bibliographic source.
It is possible to check through standard references the honors, the awards, the recognitions that a scientist has achieved. It is
possible to read secondary sources in the history of medicine, where a subject is reviewed and in the process of that review the
author has done much of this work, indicating that so and so was a major figure, so and so was a minor figure. So this would
be another way to assess the stature of an individual.
Q. With respect to journals, during the period 1930 to 1940, what journals enjoyed the greatest credibility or reputation with
respect to the issue of cancer and cancer research?
A. Well, I would have to go back to the library to see when various journals began. For one thing there wasn't a lot of research
in cancer to begin with at that time. And much of the research that appeared that was done did appear in clinical journals.
So perhaps a better way to answer your question would be to say that articles on cancer appearing in important clinical journals
would be one vehicle of publication of important work on the topic of cancer. Later on there did begin journals with an exclusive
focus on cancer, but I do not remember offhand precisely when those journals began to publish.
Q. Do you remember the decade in which they began to publish?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Not offhand.
Q. In terms of important clinical journals during the period 1930 to 1940, can you name us what those important clinical journals
would be?
A. Well, important clinical journals of the 1930's and 1940's would be similar to the important clinical journals of today, New
England Journal of Medicine, Journal of the American Medical Association, Annals of Internal Medicine, those would be a few.
Q. In terms of assessing the credibility of the journals, I'd like to know all of them in maybe ascending order, if you could, or
in descending order, however you feel more comfortable for the 1930 to 1940 time frame.
A. I'm not able to give a precise ranking of journals from that period of time.
Q. Why don't you give us groupings then, Doctor, which you consider to be highly credible sources, moderately credible sources,
and the lesser credible sources; does that make it easier for you?
A. I would really need two bibliographical tools that are not immediately present to do so. I would need to see the Index Medicus
to review the titles and in addition there is a bibliographical tool called I believe Citation Index that lists the number of times
an individual paper is cited which gives an indication both of how often an individual paper is cited, if it is cited at all, as well
as how often individual journals are cited in the scientific literature.
Your question cannot be answered at this moment. And, in fact, I do not know if those bibliographical tools necessary to answer
your question precisely even extend back that far in time. We do have something today called the Citation Index that would
help give a precise quantitative handle on the question that you are asking. I do not know if that existed for the period that
you are asking.
Q. Doctor, the number of times an article is cited, is that of some significance in evaluating the importance of the article?
A. Absolutely.
Q. In what way?
A. Well, over half the articles it's been said by some medical editors and some people who have studied medical information
never get cited at all. And clearly, for an article to be significant in the context of the period, it has to be received well by
other people working.
An article that is not quoted, is not cited, regardless of its merits, has certainly not impacted the medical thinking of the period
in distinction to an article that may be cited regularly in the medical literature. So as I say the frequency of citation is a very
important handle on whether a certain article was influencing the scientific discussion at that particular point in time.
Q. Would the same be true with respect to an author, if an author is cited a substantial number of times on a particular subject
during this particular time frame, would you tend to believe --
A. I'm using the two interchangeably, author and article, because it's possible that scientist Marc Edell might have written five
papers, one of which was never cited, three of which were cited once, but one of which might have been cited quite a few times.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Okay. Before I go on, would your answer be true with respect to the time frame 1940 to 1950 also with respect to your
inability to answer either in ascending or descending order the reliability of various different journals with regard to again
journals -- we are talking about clinical journals now.
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: The reliability or the prestige?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Credibility, reliability, I thought we were using that sort of interchangeably.
A. I think it would be more accurate to say prestige and weight of opinion given to it, because it's important to recognize that an
article that appears by the most distinguished author in the medical journal of the widest circulation may ultimately be shown
to be untrue or an idea advanced that might subsequently be rejected.
Q. So what we're talking about then is apparent credibility during the time frame that the publication is issued?
A. Not even necessarily apparent credibility, it's more than that. Someone may advance a new path-breaking hypothesis to
account for a phenomenon of nature; it may be purely hypothetical, no data, but I have a hypothesis as to how the universe
may have been created. A hypothesis or a conjectural paper may lead to an enormous amount of discussion, getting people to
think, to debate, it's not merely a matter of advancing data and is this data credible or not. There are different types of articles,
articles are published for different purposes.
Q. I thought we were trying to assess the apparent credibility of different clinical journals during the time frame.
A. I'm using the term, and I think it's a more accurate term for what we are both looking for, impact.
Q. Okay.
A. Impact I think would be more accurate.
Q. Can you tell us which clinical journals during the time frame 1940 to 1950 had greater impact?
A. I'm not able to answer that question precisely because I do not have the quantitative information that has subsequently
become available that allows us to know how often articles are cited from different journals. The principle is true, the principle
is as true in the 1930's and 1940's as it is in the 1980's and 1990's, that some journals have wider circulations, that some journals
are much more likely to be read and to be cited by other authors. But I don't have those numbers and, in fact, I don't even know
when such calculations originally began to be done as I sit here right now. It might be possible to get that information, but I
don't have that information right now.
Q. Doctor, in making your assessment as to the impact of a particular author's paper during the time period 1930 to 1940 and
1940 to 1950, did you review publications such as American Men of Science?
A. I did not refer to American Men of Science.
Q. During the period 1930 to 1940, who was considered by biomedical investigators at that time as to be reliable investigators
in the issue of lung cancer in human beings?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by reliable investigators?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. As opposed to unreliable investigators.
MR. GARNICK: I still object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, recognizing I'm not quite sure I understand what you mean by reliable investigators, most of the literature
on lung cancer that was done at that time was done by individuals who were either physicians in practice relating their in some
cases just anecdotal observations, in more cases relating the series of patients they had seen, their own clinical experiences.
In some cases the people who were writing on this subject were associated with medical schools and had academic positions
with distinguished medical schools. And I think as a generalization the people who were writing at this time who might have
had the position of professor of medicine at the University of Chicago Medical School, that's a hypothetical, would have been
considered to be the most authoritative people looking into the field at that time, academic, appointment and rank.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What about reputation such as Ochsner and DeBakey, were those people who were considered to be reliable investigators
during the time frame 1940 to 1950?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Ochsner was a respected surgeon. To the best of my knowledge, his reputation lay with his surgical skill,
his operative ability, and not with his contributions as a medical researcher investigating more basic questions. DeBakey I am
unable to answer you with certainty at this time because DeBakey, if it's the same
DeBakey that I'm thinking of, cardiothoracic surgeon of today, and I'm not certain of that, if it is the same DeBakey, he would
have been much younger in his career and a much junior colleague, still forming a reputation.
Ochsner did have a fine reputation as a surgeon. But, as a critical medical engineer, investigator, researcher, discoverer of new
knowledge, et cetera, et cetera, his reputation did not lie in. that area.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did he have a poor reputation in that area, did he have no reputation?
A. Oh, it's difficult to say, without investigating his biography and doing more work which is certainly doable, whether he had
no reputation or whether he had a little reputation. I think the qualitative point remains correct, that his reputation had to do
with his surgical expertise as a surgeon, not as an investigator looking into causes of disease, new forms of diagnosis, following
the natural history of disease.
There are a number of lines of medical inquiry beyond that of causation. And he really was not considered an investigator in
any of those sorts, he was a fine technical surgeon who was well respected for his contributions in surgery.
Q. Nationwide?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Nationwide.
Q. And his surgery, when you say thoracic surgeon, that means surgery of the chest, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. That includes surgery involving the lungs; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And am I correct that he did a substantial amount of surgery involving removal of lungs in patients who had cancer during
the 1940 to 1950 time frame?
A. That's correct.
Q. And that he also published some of the clinical retrospective patient studies that you referred to previously; is that right?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: He did not conduct what I would call a retrospective study. He published an account of his own patient
experience. It would not be considered a retrospective study, it had no controls of any sort. It was what we call in internal
medicine a typical surgeon's paper, a recounting of his experience doing a certain operation and describing the results of that
operation.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And were the use of controls a standard investigative tool during the 1940 to 1950 time frame with respect to conducting
retrospective studies?
A. It had been recognized for a period of time that, if one were to draw conclusions that would be meaningful, it would be
important to use controls. And, indeed, the fact that many authors did not have controls in their study rendered them meaningless
in terms of certain conclusions that they might draw from those studies.
An uncontrolled study might have certain other functions that it could provide, what were the results with his operation or what
was the natural history of the disease, but certainly it was recognized that lack of controls were a limiting factor in a variety of
conclusions that could be drawn from any one physician's individual experience.
Q. That was recognized in the forties?
A. Oh, sure.
Q. And the fifties?
A. Recognized long before.
Q. How many retrospective studies with respect to lung cancer employing controls were conducted during the period 1940
to 1950?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. To the best of my recollection --
MR. GARNICK: Let me object to form. Do you mean lung cancer and cigarette smoking or just lung cancer?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Lung cancer.
A. I'm unable to answer that question.
Q. You don't know?
A. With respect to lung cancer?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. That's an important clarification and I would not be able to answer at this time how many were done with lung cancer,
because there are dozens as I pointed out to you of alleged factors; and people might have looked into radiation, you know,
other causes. So I could not tell you the total number of studies that were done regarding possible causes of lung cancer.
Q. You don't know, is that what you're saying?
A. I'm saying I don't remember.
Q. But you did know?
A. I'm saying I don't remember as I sit here, right now.
Q. But you did study the issue as to epidemiological studies conducted during the time period 1940 to 1950 with respect to
lung cancer that employed controls?
MR. GARNICK: Object to form.
You may answer the question.
THE WITNESS: Could you please repeat that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Yes. What I'm trying to find out -- you said you don't remember. I want to find out whether you ever made a study of the
studies investigating lung cancer during the period 1940 to 1950 which employed controls.
A. I did consider the issue of studies into the causation of lung cancer including causes other than cigarette smoking. But, as
I sit here today, I just do not remember those details precisely.
Q. Did you investigate what epidemiological studies were conducted looking into the potential causes of lung cancer during
the period 1940 to 1950 that employed controls?
A. I considered that issue, but I do not have precise recollections of that, I don't remember the details of that as I sit here today.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. I'm not asking whether you considered the issues, sir, I want to know whether or not you made an investigation into that
area. Considering an issue is much different than making an investigation into the issue. Is that all right?
A. I believe so.
Q. We know that you've considered it. Did you make an investigation?
A. well, part of my study was the state of knowledge of lung cancer and its causes; and as part of that it was important to
ascertain the different types of studies, the ways they were conducted, and the different substances and theories tested and how
they were tested. The focus of my work as I have mentioned was on the specific issue of the relation of cigarette smoking with
lung cancer, and details that are fresh in my mind as we are talking today are primarily on that particular subject.
Q. You still respectfully, Doctor, didn't answer the question. Did you review epidemiological studies conducted during the time
frame 1940 to 1950 that explored the relationship between substances other than cigarettes to lung cancer in human beings that
employed controls? Yes, you did; no, I didn't, simple.
MR. GARNICK: I would object to form.
THE WITNESS: To the best of my memory, just speaking from memory, I did investigate other types of retrospective studies
that attempted to link lung cancer with other types of causes. I am unable to remember as we sit here today to what degree those
studies were controlled at all or well controlled, I just don't remember.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. When you say you looked into other types of retrospective studies, does that mean you actually reviewed retrospective
studies that looked into the other potential causes of lung cancer in human beings during the period 1940 to 1950 that employed
controls?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form, asked and answered.
MR. EDELL: No, there's a big difference. You can consider different types of epidemiological studies. As to whether you have
actually reviewed the specific epidemiological studies is another issue.
MR. GARNICK: I thought he said he investigated the question.
MR. EDELL: No, he said different types. I wrote it down specifically.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I want to know whether you read the epidemiological studies.
A. To the best of my knowledge, the -- could you repeat that question, we are going back and forth here.
MR. GARNICK: Can I make a suggestion, that we repeat his answer and then he repeat the question.
MR. EDELL: Sure, you can do that, too.
MR. GARNICK: I think that will be clearer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. EDELL: It was his use of the word types as opposed to actually review other retrospective studies that caused my concern,
maybe overconcern.
THE WITNESS: It may be overconcern. I think we can get this resolved if you read back from wherever.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: To the best of my memory, just speaking from memory, I did investigate other types of
retrospective studies that attempted to link lung cancer with other types of causes. I am unable to remember as we sit here today
to what degree those studies were controlled at all or well controlled, I just don't remember.”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I want to know whether you actually looked at other retrospective studies of the time period 1940 to 1950 as opposed to
investigating other types.
A. I'm glad you asked that question because I realize that I made an error in my answer to you. This allows me the opportunity
to correct it. I considered the issue of other possible causes of lung cancer and I did look at studies that investigated those issues.
I would scratch the word retrospective studies, I looked at other studies that explored putative associations with causes other
than lung cancer. I would not necessarily call those studies retrospective studies; in fact, I would not wish to characterize them
in any such facts without having the opportunity to review the original papers.
Q. At what point in time was the -- let me see if I can phrase it this way, excuse me, I will withdraw that.
At what point in time was the state of the art with respect to epidemiology such that a retrospective study using controls of
patients with lung cancer possible to attempt to correlate a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A. Early to mid-1950's.
Q. Prior to that point in time, the state of the art was such that such a study could not be done; is that correct?
A. Correct.
Q. What was the state of the art during the period of 1940 to 1950 with respect to epidemiological studies attempting to correlate
cigarette smoking to lung cancer?
A. It didn't exist.
Q. What do you base that on, sir, that statement?
A. I base that on the extensive study that I did into the history of clinical epidemiology, how a new science was created, and how
new views of research and new methods of procedure interpretation were developed to study the problem of chronic diseases in
distinction to the long-standing plague of infectious and acute diseases. Those sources are indicated on my bibliography entitled
Paradigm which includes both secondary sources as well as individual landmark papers that I investigated.
Q. In assessing the contents of the secondary sources, did you take any steps to evaluate these authors' credibility or reliability?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And how did you do that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. There were a number of papers written by some of the most distinguished clinical epidemiologists of the past half century,
many, if not most of them, participants in the lung cancer controversy who reviewed how their new science was created.
These were the established leaders of the field of clinical epidemiology, leaders in the study of chronic diseases recounting how
their new science was created. And, in addition to that, there have been a few historical accounts of the creation of this new
science by history and of medicine that I know to be distinguished and reputable.
Q. How did you go about making the assessment of the credibility of these epidemiologists?
A. Well, there are many ways to do so.
Q. How did you do it?
A. Well, for example, if you have an article written by someone who is an acknowledged leader of the field, an author of a
major textbook who has been president of major societies of clinical epidemiology, who has received numerous awards for his
work in that field and who is generally referred to with respect and reverence in the writing of others, has received numerous
honors from other scientific groups besides epidemiologists and epidemiology groups, I think it's fair to say that individual is
a leader of the field.
Q. And how do you make the assessment as to whether they were a leader in the field during a point in time past?
A. Well, that can be done a number of ways; who is writing the major articles at the time, who is forming the first professional
organizations in the, field, who are the officers the first and second and third year, who have the most important positions,
academic positions, in that field at that time; say, for example, 1960 who are the individuals being invited to give the guests
lectures in the subject of epidemiology at various scientific meetings.
These would be but some of the ways you can assess the importance of a person at that time. Very important too, what are they
publishing at that time, who is reading it, who is talking about it, who are the editors of the new journals, you know, a whole
variety of ways, all of which reinforce each other.
Q. In assessing the state of medical knowledge at any point in time, is it helpful to speak to people who were involved in a
particular area of investigation at that point in time?
A. Could you please clarify that for me.
Q. Sure. In other words, if we were trying to find out, Doctor, what was going on in the area of cigarette smoking and health
in the 1930's and 1940's, would it be helpful in making that assessment to speak to people who were actually involved in that
investigation at the time?
A. Speaking with them at the time you mean?
Q. Speaking with them whenever you could speak with them, be it five years down the line or ten years down the line.
A. It may or may not be.
Q. How do we make that assessment?
A. Each circumstance is different.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. What elements do you use to consider whether or not the person's statements will or will not be helpful in assessing what
the state of the art was at a prior point in time?
A. Well, there are a number of factors.
Q. Let's do it.
A. Well, for one thing it depends on the quality of the person's mind at the time that you are speaking with them. You know,
if we are talking about events of 1940 and we're talking about an interview with someone in 1991, well, that person, say he
was 40 years old at the time, would be 91 years old. Memory may be failing. The quality of the mind, ability to remember the
facts related to that would be proximity to the events.
If we are talking about something that happened three years ago, it is likely, not necessary, it is likely that memories would be
sharper than if we are recalling events 30 years ago. We had that experience yesterday in our conversation. I thank you very
much for bringing up the subject of eugenics and, in fact, I would kind of be tickled if we got back into that subject because it is
not very often that I get asked about the earliest scholarly work that I do and I feel pleased that someone is still interested in it.
Q. We will touch on it later then.
A. We will touch on it later then.
Q. Mr. Bleakley wanted to get involved in that.
MR. BLEAKLEY: That's why I'm here.
THE WITNESS: With the point being that my own personal recollection, and I think I have a pretty good memory, is certainly
much clearer for work that I've done in the last year or two than work 20 years ago that I haven't thought about. So the time
from an event is important.
It's very important to know about the individual before you conduct an interview, because individuals may have a vested interest.
For example, today AIDS. Was the AIDS virus discovered by Gallo's group at NIH or by Luke -- I don't know how to pronounce
his last name, the French group.
Well, those two groups have a very vested interest in the outcome, but one of them is going to get the Nobel prize. This is likely
to influence the accuracy of events as they relate it. They both may give different perspectives in the same events to advance
their own interests. So an individual may have a vested interest to overplay or perhaps to downplay his or her involvement with
a certain event. So you have to know something about the individual.
Most important, any oral history in my judgment as an historian of medicine is valuable only, only to the degree that the historian
has done a heck of a lot of homework before conducting an interview to know what questions to ask, what types of information
might properly be obtained from a certain individual. I might interview one scientist, hoping to get some types of information,
and another scientist for other reasons, to have an independent context to know if I'm receiving inaccurate answers or answers
that may just with time be incorrect. And there are other things too. Oral history is useful but has to be done very, very carefully
with all of these reservations and hesitations taken into account.
MR. EDELL: Want to take our morning break?
MR. GARNICK: Sure.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
(Recess)
THE WITNESS: During the break, it occurred to me that I gave an answer that might be appropriate to clarify. I'm not sure
if I answered one of your earlier questions correctly.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Go ahead, I will listen. You discussed that with Mr. Garnick?
A. No, I didn't, it occurred to me on my own.
Q. And you didn't discuss with Mr. Garnick the fact that you -- I don't want to use the word revelation, you realized that you
may have responded inaccurately or not completely to a question with Mr. Garnick prior to our beginning this deposition?
A. No, that's not correct. We exchanged pleasantries. But what I would like to relate to you now reflects my own independent
realization.
Q. Did you discuss this realization with Mr. Garnick before we came down to put this on the record?
A. No. As I told you, we exchanged pleasantries and that was our discussion.
Q. Okay.
A. The issue has to do with the emergence of the field of clinical epidemiology in the 1950's. And, as I did indicate, the
1950's was a period that gave birth to a new science and included investigations of causes of chronic disease using new tools
which included both prospective studies, retrospective studies, it was really a much broader field than that. Part of the clinical
epidemiology had to do with new designs of therapeutic trials. If you're testing a drug for high blood pressure, how do you
create the proper experimental conditions to test a drug in human populations. So clinical epidemiology I might add as an aside
is a very broad field.
And what I would like to clarify is that in the 1940's there were a few studies retrospective in nature that did attempt to use
controls in investigating a relationship between lung cancer and cigarette smoking. I do not wish to give the impression that no
one tried in the 1930's or the 1940's, there were three or four studies.
These studies were very poorly done, did not have the impact of the new techniques and the revolution that occurred in the
1950's. On the other hand, there were some efforts to use controls before 1950 and I do not wish to suggest that there were not.
Q. Doctor, if you were a consultant to a cigarette manufacturer in 1945 and they said to you, Doctor, we have seen some of
these reports correlating the use of our product to lung cancer, what do you think we should do, what recommendations would
you make to them?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I really have no expertise in recommending research programs to companies.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So you're not capable of answering that question?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. That goes beyond my -- it is not my specific expertise to make recommendations of research programs to companies.
Q. You don't feel comfortable answering that question, therefore; is that correct? Or answer the question with all that
qualification, whichever you choose.
A. At this time I do not feel comfortable answering that question because I have never had any experience either as a physician
or as an historian recommending research programs to any type of company.
Q. What research relating to cigarette smoking and lung cancer was conducted by the tobacco industry prior to 1954?
A. I have not studied the activities of tobacco companies and I am not able to comment on what research activities they did,
if any, I don't know.
Q. Well, in your review of the publicly available literature dealing with cigarette smoking and health, what reports did you see
of research sponsored by the tobacco industry during the period 1930 to 1954?
A. I paid relatively little attention to sources of funding. I would have to go back to original papers, all the many hundreds of
them, to see what citations, if any, were made about sources of funding. And I certainly at no point went through any company
records to know what research, if any, they had funded. So the question you're asking is really beyond my ability to answer
at this time.
Q. Would the same be true if I asked you the question with respect to the period 1950 to 1960?
A. Not entirely.
Q. What would your answer be with regard to that time frame?
A. Well, I do know that, with the formation of the TIRC in 1953 or 1954, that the tobacco industry did become involved with
research; as I said before, if they had had any involvement before then, I'm just unable to comment on the nature of it. But
certainly from secondary sources I know that the industry did become involved sponsoring the research after 1953, 1954.
Occasionally, as I would read a paper in my own work, I would see reference to funding from the tobacco industry or a tobacco
company, just as there might be reference to funding from the Public Health Service or the National Cancer Institute. I did not
study this in any systematic way and this is certainly not a comprehensive review of all the research that the tobacco industry
might have sponsored. I think that would be the extent of my knowledge.
Q. Did you make any evaluation to determine whether this research sponsored by the tobacco industry I guess from 1954 to
1964 related to the question of whether cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Could you please repeat that.
Q. Sure.
Would you do that, please.
THE REPORTER: “Question: Did you make any evaluation to determine whether this research sponsored by the tobacco
industry I guess from 1954 to 1964 related to the question of whether cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in human
beings?”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
THE WITNESS: Well, I think that the wording that you use is a different wording and a stronger wording than I would use,
because this was an open scientific question certainly at the time that I investigated. Questions had been raised regarding whether
tobacco might be in some way linked to the problem of lung cancer. And, in my review of the literature of the fifties and sixties,
I did come across articles, good articles, of different sorts that acknowledged funding sources from a tobacco company or the
TIRC, I don't remember precisely how it was identified.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That related to answering the question as to whether or not cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. I don't understand the question.
Q. Well, the proposition, sir, was that people were suggesting that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in human
beings during that time period, 1950 to 1960, correct?
A. There was a thesis that it might be related to lung cancer.
Q. There wasn't a thesis that cigarette smoke was a cause of lung cancer from the period 1950 to 1960?
A. Well, people were looking into the causes of lung cancer.
Q. Was that a hypothesis during the period 1950 to 1960 that it was, in fact, a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, you need to define the period. I think that you are using --
Q. 1950 to 1960.
A. If you're looking at the mid-1950's, the predominant hypothesis might be stated with different language than that what you
used, that excessive cigarette smoking might be a cause of cancer in certain individuals was a more proper and accurate way
of reflecting it in that period.
Q. And what research did you see sponsored by the tobacco industry that sought to answer that question as to whether the
product was or was not a cause of lung cancer in human beings in or about that time frame?
MR. GARNICK: Are we talking about the mid-1950's?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Mid-1950's, yes.
A. I don't remember precise titles and articles, but I do remember that some of the published papers dealing with skin painting
experiments using tobacco condensates were published either by one or another -- were sponsored by either one or another of
the tobacco companies or by the TIRC. And I also remember that some of the studies looking into the constituents of cigarette
smoke condensates were also studied by -- excuse me, sponsored by tobacco money from one or another source.
Q. And both those areas of study came back positive with respect to the issue or positive with respect to smoking and lung
cancer; isn't that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. No, that's not correct.
Q. what did they show?
A. There were studies from the standpoint of smoke that showed that benzpyrene was a -- I would have to look at the articles,
possibly other certain carcinogenic or purportedly carcinogenic substances, I'm not sure, that were present in tobacco smoke
condensates could be separated by chemical analysis.
Q. Is that a positive finding, Doctor?
A. That's a positive finding, but clearly it is a separate finding from evidence that cigarette smoking under human conditions
causes lung cancer. So you were misstating the nature of the work.
And similarly you were misstating the nature of the skin painting experiments. It was of interest that tobacco smoke condensates,
under certain experimental conditions, could induce skin cancers on certain strains of certain laboratory animals. And, yes, that
was a positive finding. But what was clearly recognized by everyone, including the investigators, was that that did not represent
proof that cigarette smoke in humans was a cause of human lung cancer. So I do think that precision in terminology is important.
Q. Well, that's why I asked the question, whether or not the tobacco industry sponsored any research to answer the question
as to whether or not cigarette smoking was or was not a cause of lung cancer in human beings. And you just told me that they
sponsored animal studies and smoke constituent studies, both of which resulted in positive findings. But then you told me they
don't relate to making an assessment as to whether or not cigarette smoking is or is not a cause of lung cancer in human beings.
So let's get back to the original question. Were any studies conducted by the tobacco industry or sponsored by the tobacco
industry, during the 1955 time frame to determine whether or not the hypothesis that their product was killing people by smokers
developing lung cancer correct or incorrect?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: You're doing an excellent job of twisting words and misrepresenting the conditions of the 1950's. Research
was being done on a number of fronts. And those who are familiar with the 1950's will also be familiar with the frustration that
workers had even as they pursued these new lines of inquiry. They wanted to do more, they wanted to solve the problem of
lung cancer, and they were frustrated at the lack of tools to get to the most definitive and conclusive answers.
Research was being conducted by honest, conscientious investigators doing the best job they could to learn about the problem
of lung cancer which indirectly, of course -- excuse me, learn about the problems of tobacco which indirectly, of course, will
lead to the ultimate question, does it cause lung cancer.
So the studies that were funded were funded with an intention to learn about the problem. And to suggest otherwise is a gross
misrepresentation of the nature of that work. To suggest that a positive study from skin painting experiments was proof of lung
cancer is an incorrect conclusion and that I also pointed out.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, maybe I missed it before. The criteria employed during the period 1950 to 1960 by biomedical investigators to
determine whether a substance might possibly be a cause of lung cancer in human beings, what were the tools available during
that time frame?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. Are you asking the tools available or the criteria used?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. The tools that were available.
A. Well, a number of tools were being used, some of which were epidemiological tools, prospective -- excuse me, retrospective
studies initially, prospective studies later on. There were a variety of experimental tools among which, though certainly not
exclusively, included analysis of cigarette smoke for possible carcinogenic factors, various skin painting experiments with
cigarette condensates as well as with other substances.
There were also a variety of inhalational experiments, though, to the best of my knowledge, those experiments at least before
January 1964 all had negative results. So those were some of the types of studies that were being conducted looking specifically
at the issue of cigarette smoke.
Q. What other study tools were available during that time frame to make the assessment as to whether or not cigarette smoking
might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, there are many lines of inquiry. And, as I sit here today, I can't guarantee that I can remember every type of study.
There were autopsy studies, looking at changes in lungs. But, to the best of my memory, those are the ones that I primarily
remember now.
Q. As of the mid-1950's, what were the results of the epidemiological studies, the retrospective epidemiological studies looking
into the hypothesis that cigarette smoking might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, by the mid-1950's a number of such studies had been done. And they tended to suggest an association of lung cancer
with cigarette smoking. The meaning of that association was unclear. But certainly there was a consistency in results of a
number of studies, some of which were better done and better conducted than others, which did show a higher incidence of
lung cancer in those who smoked compared with those who did not smoke.
Q. Were there prospective studies that were being conducted in that time frame?
A. Which time frame?
Q. Mid-1950's.
A. Yes, there were.
Q. And what were the results of those studies?
A. Well, the prospective studies tended to confirm the results of the retrospective studies insofar as they too showed increased
incidence of lung cancer in patients who smoked compared with patients who did not smoke. The strength of this association,
the degree of risk would vary from study to study.
Q. What was the range, Doctor?
MR. GARNICK: Again we are talking about the mid-1950's?
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Correct.
A. Well, there are so many studies that I don't remember precisely.
Q. You don't have any idea what the range was?
A. To the best of my recollection, the range was as low as two or threefold, as high as fortyfold. And, of course, the Surgeon
General's report summarizing all of this literature suggested a tenfold increase.
Q. A tenfold what?
A. Tenfold increase of lung cancer in those who smoked compared with those who did not smoke.
Q. Is that a significant finding?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by significant finding?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Important in terms of assessing whether or not a particular substance may or may not be a cause of lung cancer in human
beings. Again we are talking about in the mid-fifties. In the state of epidemiological and investigative art into lung cancer at that
time, was that finding considered to be a significant indicator that a substance might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Can you please repeat the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You told us that there was a finding by the Surgeon General of an approximately tenfold increase in the incidence of lung
cancer in smokers versus nonsmokers.
A. That was not a finding per se, it was not an original work. I was doing the best that I could to answer your earlier question
as to the magnitude of increase, and I do remember the figures cited from the Surgeon General's report.
Q. All I want to do is find out whether or not a tenfold increase was considered to be a significant increase for the purpose
of evaluating whether a substance might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings during the time frame of 19 -- let's call
it 1950 to 1957.
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object, I don't think that question makes any sense whatsoever.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You don't understand the question either, Doctor?
A. I'm confused about the dates and about the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Sure. You told us that the Surgeon General's committee evaluated these epidemiological studies in the mid-fifties --
A. That began to appear in the mid-forties. The Surgeon General's report was 1964.
Q. Let me ask you a simpler question, Doctor. What was considered to be a significant increase in terms of epidemiological
findings in the mid-forties in determining whether or not a substance might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. What do you mean by significant increase?
Q. Important, of moment, indicative of, whatever. If you give me a thesaurus, I will go through it for you.
A. It depends on what scientist you talk to.
Q. I'm talking about the epidemiological art, the state of the art of investigators of lung cancer in the mid-1950's.
A. I'm glad you asked that question because the state of the art was one of extraordinary confusion and uncertainty. And those
same results were subject to a variety of interpretations by different individuals, all of whom were men of prestige, dignified,
respected, people who respected each other. The meaning of that finding was hotly debated.
Q. I'm not asking about the meaning of the finding, I'm talking about in terms of whether or not it was a significant increase or not.
MR. GARNICK: I object.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Not whether or not you can extrapolate and say this means that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in human beings, but
whether or not it does support the hypothesis that cigarette smoking might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings.
A. Well, that has to do directly with the state of medical knowledge in the mid-1950's which is characterized by confusion
and uncertainty about those results and, indeed, about the best way to proceed in investigating this perplexing question of lung
cancer.
There were those who did not accept the finding in the first place, some who said that the retrospective or prospective studies
were flawed, biased, would not even agree with your initial statement that there was an increase; they would say the studies
are flawed and it remains to be proved that there's an increase. And, of course, there were others who might acknowledge that
there was an increase and have serious reservations as to the meaning of that increase. There were controversies of all different
types, ranging simultaneously with each other.
Q. Who were the respected biomedical investigators in the mid-forties who considered the retrospective and prospective studies
to be so flawed and biased that they couldn't be indicative of anything?
A. The answer to your question has to be separated out. Are you asking retrospective or are you asking prospective?
Q. Both.
A. Where would you like to start?
Q. Make it easy on yourself.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. In that case we will go chronologically and start with the retrospective studies since they occurred earlier. The good
retrospective began as you know to appear in 1950 and others followed. And almost everyone was cautious in terms of any
conclusions that would be drawn about the retrospective studies because of various problems intrinsic to retrospective studies.
And I think it's very pertinent to point out that the intrinsic problems of retrospective studies, the doubts that were created by
them, was part of the impetus that gave rise to the prospective studies.
So, if one were to look at the distinguished participants in the field from the perspective of those who advocated the smoking
hypothesis, people like Doll and Hill and Hammond and Dorn and so forth, the reason they began the prospective studies came
out of their duties about retrospective studies. So retrospective studies were in question by everyone. I do want to go stretch.
Q. Let me just ask you one question before we stretch. Is it your testimony that Doll and Hill and Hammond and Dorn thought
that the retrospective studies were so flawed and so biased that no inferences could be made?
A. I think that that is an overstatement. I think that they recognized that the power of retrospective -- the intellectual explanatory
power of retrospective studies even among statisticians was much less than that of prospective studies, that the intrinsic nature
of prospective studies left important questions unanswered; so they would be sufficient to raise a question. But to get better
answers to the question, a different type of investigation had to be conducted that turned out to be the prospective studies.
Indeed, it's my recollection from one of the secondary sources that Dr. Hammond asked in the mid-1950's as he's conducting
the prospective studies does cigarette smoking cause lung cancer. His reply was that's what we are trying to find out with these
prospective studies. I do feel how I have phrased it now is a more accurate reflection of how prospective studies were viewed.
Some of the --
Q. Prospective or retrospective?
A. Excuse me, retrospective. I think some of the more colorful words such as flawed are totally meaningless, I believe they
were your words, they're certainly not my words.
Q. I just want to find out whether there was anyone who thought that the retrospective studies were so flawed or biased that
you couldn't draw any inferences from them?
A. Well --
Q. Again we're talking in the mid-1950's.
A. I don't remember for sure, but my impression is yes.
Q. And you don't know who they were?
A. My recollection -- and as I say I don't remember for sure. But I do believe that there were -- let me restate. There were
criticisms of prospective studies -- excuse me, retrospective studies at different levels. Some thought that they were sufficient
to raise a question and, indeed, further research was necessary. And that was certainly a dominant view.
On the other hand, there are many problems of bias in retrospective studies by their intrinsic nature. And, though I am not
absolutely certain, I do believe there were some statisticians who felt that other work should be done, they agreed that questions
should be raised, but they were really very, very skeptical of any conclusions that might be drawn from retrospective studies.
MR. GARNICK: Why don't we just take a stretch.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
(Recess)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, getting back to the question, were there any credible investigators who felt that the retrospective and prospective
studies regarding cigarette smoking and lung cancer in the mid-1950's were so flawed that no conclusions could be drawn
from them?
A. Actually I'm glad that you asked that question again.
Q. Me too.
A. Because during the break I remembered even more important answers to that question, and the answer is definitely yes.
Q. And who were they, sir?
A. well, what you have to understand to appreciate the answer to that question is how medical science was evolving in that
period.
Q. I appreciate that, I just want to know their names.
A. These would represent the dominant group of biomedical investigators in the United States and in England who were products
of the experimental tradition of the previous century which asserted that the requirement to show proof of cause of a disease
has to come from laboratory experimentation, such as showing that pneumococcus causes pneumonia. So investigators trained
in experimental methods and believing that experimental studies were necessary to show proof of causation would and were
critical of any statistical evidence, retrospective and prospective.
Q. And they considered the studies to be so flawed and so biased that no inferences could be drawn; is that correct? Not a
cause and effect, Doctor, just a fact that no inference could be drawn. Such as I inference that cigarette smoking might in some
way be related to --
A. You are putting words into my mouth and possibly into their mouths. And the only way to know for certain their specific
views would be to go back to their original writings. And I do not know at this time, I just don't remember specific things they
said about the retrospective studies. I don't remember that they said the studies themselves are flawed or if they said, you know,
the study itself has a certain logic to it, but I just don't accept this type of evidence. The important point, the substantive point
is that there were a -- the predominant group of investigators at the time this controversy started to open up were products of
an experimental tradition. And they looked for experimental rather than statistical evidence as a requirement to be able to draw
conclusions about causality.
Q. I'm not talking about causality, I'm talking about to identify a substance as a potential cause of lung cancer in human beings.
Is it your testimony that those people were of the opinion that the retrospective and prospective studies could not be used to
identify substances that could be a potential cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. No, that is not what I am saying. And I think that it is fair to say that many of those people would look at the retrospective
studies and say, aha, here is something that we might try to test in a laboratory.
Q. For what period of time had that been the indication, that they would look at retrospective studies and say, aha, this might
be something that we should test in the laboratory?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. If you were looking in relationship to what?
Q. Chronic diseases.
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to the form. Do you mean how long before 1950?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. No, how long before the mid-1950's.
A. Well, this had a history, as you well know, because experimental studies did not begin in the 1950's, we talked about this
yesterday, that the suggestion that tobacco smoking might be related to lung cancer in the 1930's inspired a few people to try
to do experimental studies to test that hypothesis. Those studies essentially were unrevealing.
And then, in terms of experimental studies, after about 1940 the issue was dropped. And then, beginning in 1950 and in the
early 1950's, so much more impressive studies came along, the retrospective studies that we've been discussing, this inspired
another generation of experimentalists to look again at this question.
Q. Doctor, you mentioned Dr. Berkson's name I believe the other day. Do you know whether Dr. Berkson had any affiliation
with the tobacco industry at any point in time?
A. No.
Q. Do you think that would be important to assess the objectivity and the lack of bias with respect to his comments on the
cigarette smoking and health issue?
A. Not really. You know, people are funded by all sorts of agencies, from the National Cancer Institute to the private foundations,
people get grants from pharmaceutical companies, there are a variety of sources of funding, both private and public, that are
customary in science.
And I think what is most important is the quality of argument and the quality of data and not whether someone happened to be
sponsored by the Tobacco Institute, the National Cancer Institute, American Heart Association, it's the work that matters. And,
indeed, as I already indicated, there were some reputable experimental studies that were published in good scientific journals
that were funded by tobacco. So it's really the quality of argument, the quality of work that matters the most.
Q. What training do you have that permitted you to evaluate the quality of Dr. Berkson's work during the mid-1950's?
A. Well, as an historian of medicine and as one who has investigated this question more recently, I'm familiar with the fact that
Joseph Berkson was arguably the most distinguished biomedical statistician in the United States.
Q. Upon what did you make that assessment?
A. His position, the assessment of his peers, recognitions he received. I don't recall everything precisely. I do have the distinct
impression that he was a prominent biomedical statistician.
Q. The question was what in your training and background gave you the expertise to evaluate the credibility of his work?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. That was not the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That's the question I just posed, though.
A. My historical training.
Q. In terms of your ability to evaluate the credibility of his comments and his work, your historical training gives you the
ability to do that?
A. Well, as we have already discussed, there are techniques historians use to determine which individuals are leaders in the
field. We have discussed some of those this morning.
Q. Okay. In other words I just want to make sure it's not something that you learned in terms of epidemiology or in terms of
statistics or anything else that gives you the expertise to say his work was very good and his comments were logical and well-
founded based upon the science of statistics or epidemiology?
A. If it might help in explanation, I am not an epidemiologist and I did not go back and review his mathematics. But as an
historian I am aware that he had positions of eminence, that he was spoken of very highly by everyone in the field including
those who might have disagreed with him in the smoking controversy. And I also am aware that there have been articles on the
history of medical statistics, epidemiology, by historians that have given him a prominent role in the field.
Q. But you didn't ask Mr. Garnick or any one of these other defendants as to what Berkson's relationship was to the tobacco
industry?
A. Did I ask them that?
Q. Yes.
A. No.
Q. You didn't see any internal documents that might indicate that he acted as a consultant to the tobacco industry and not just
received funds from the TIRC?
A. I'm unaware as I indicated to you of the internal history of the tobacco companies, their internal operations I have no opinion
as to what relationship he might have had with the tobacco companies.
Q. And that wouldn't be important to you in assessing the credibility of Dr. Berkson on the various issues that we are discussing;
is that correct?
A. Well, it's interesting that you phrased the question in that light and also in relationship with Dr. Berkson who as it happened
was an opponent of the cigarette hypothesis at that time. And I say that for two reasons.
The first is to reiterate the basic point that those who understand how science works recognize that funding comes from a
variety of sources. And, in assessing the quality of work, you look at the quality of work and the quality of ideas. That's point
number one.
And, secondly, I do think that it might be relevant to recognize that a variety of investigators had contact with the tobacco
industry including those who supported the tobacco hypothesis. Now, I say this not as an expert in internal company documents,
but I do remember from Dr. Harris' own documents that he put forth in the Cipollone trial that Dr. Wynder was consulting
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
with the tobacco company. So it cuts both ways. What I would suggest to you is that the source of funding is less important
than the quality of work.
Q. Does that mean it's not important, Doctor?
A. I would say that the quality of work is what is important. If you can see that bad quality work was done, then that's bad. I'm
saying that the quality of work is the standard of measurement, not the source of funding.
Q. can you tell us what medical school had the first genetics department in the United States?
A. I don't know, I don't remember. I may have known at one time.
Q. It's in your book.
MR. GARNICK: Shall we get Mr. Bleakley here?
MR. EDELL: Maybe we should invite him back.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. It was coincidentally the Bowman Gray School of Medicine; does that jog your memory?
A. Not really. That was work that I did over 20 years ago and I'm happy to be refreshed on that.
Q. Do you know who Bowman Gray was?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Doctor, what is your definition of state of the art?
A. Well, actually the term that I most commonly use is state of medical knowledge; namely, the ideas about a given treatment,
given therapy, given explanation of the cause of disease or pathophysiology ascertainable from the published medical literature
of the period.
Q. Are you finished?
A. Yes. We can go further if you have questions, but that would be a first definition.
Q. I want to know your definition.
A. I gave you my definition.
Q. Okay. Doctor, how do you determine whether there's a consensus in the medical community on a certain issue?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by consensus?
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. If you can't answer the question, then tell me.
A. I'm asking you what you mean by consensus?
Q. You've never used the word consensus in the context of the cigarette smoking and health issue?
A. Well, it has different meanings and you're asking the question and I would be grateful if you would define to me how you're
using the term.
Q. It's really a term that I can't define for you, sir. If it's not a term that's used in the history of medicine, then fine, I'm not going
to create a definition for a word to describe something in medicine. I had assumed that there are various points in time where
you might make an assessment as to whether or not there was a consensus in the medical community on a certain subject. If
that's not the case, if that's just my ignorance speaking, so be it.
A. I think perhaps the best way to look at it would be accepted medical opinion, recognizing that sometimes accepted medical
opinion is that you don't know.
Q. How do you determine accepted medical opinion?
A. One does that by -- and again this is very important because the historian is obligated to avoid hindsight and to go back to
the period of time in question and examine what physicians and scientists at the time are saying. If views change with time,
if information became available at a later point in time, that's irrelevant to the question of what the point of view was at an
earlier point of time.
Q. I understand that we can think that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer today and a decade from now they can
discover the mechanism, somebody will win the Nobel prize, and we can find out that, in fact, there's no correlation between
the two. But, be that as it may, the accepted medical position of the time now is that cigarette smoking is probably related to
cancer in human beings.
A. That's your statement, that's not an opinion that I'm rendering.
Q. I know that, you don't have an opinion on that issue. But what I'm trying to find out is how do you determine what the
accepted medical opinion is at a point in time?
A. The accepted procedures in an historical investigation would be to do a systematic review of the published medical literature
of the period to see what opinions would be rendered, if any, about a particular theory, a particular treatment, a particular idea.
Q. What historiographic techniques do you employ to make the assessment, the judgment, as to at what point in time there was
an accepted medical consensus or opinion on a specific issue?
A. Well, I can give you an example.
Q. I want to know what criteria do you use?
A. The criteria is to do a comprehensive bibliographic search of the literature of a period of time, to make certain that all relative
-- excuse me, all relevant literature and opinions are incorporated into this assessment, and it is an assessment that an historian
renders as opposed to pick something selectively that may prove a point.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
You have to be very balanced, you have to be very comprehensive, you have to look at the totality of what is out there. If the
totality is so massive that it would be physically impossible, then you devise a system to do a representative sampling. And
you must be very thorough, complete, comprehensive, you read them, you see what people had to say, you see what ideas are
current, you see who is being cited. It's very possible that someone may have -- and, in fact, this has happened. That someone
may have an idea that is overlooked. That has happened.
So that basically would be the technique, this comprehensive, systematic, thorough, rigorous, objective, critical reading of the
body of literature from a point of time.
Q. Okay. I had understood that from yesterday, you know, you go through this systematic analysis of the secondary literature,
the primary literature, and then you make an assessment of the individuals who have participated in a particular field. But doesn't
it come down to a judgment call on your part as an historian or is there a formula that we can employ to make a determination
as to at what point in time there is an accepted medical opinion on a specific issue?
A. Ultimately everything is a judgment call. That's true not only in history but in medicine and in science and in law and in other
fields. And what matters is the evidence that can be brought to support the theory. But, yes, ultimately it is a judgment call.
Q. I guess what I'm trying to find out is is there some type of accepted technique that's employed after you go through this
reading of all this massive information to try make an objective analysis as to at what point in time there was a specific medical
opinion on a specific subject?
A. Yes. If one reads the literature of a certain time and finds that virtually everyone writing on that ascribes to the validity of
a certain treatment, the usefulness of a certain diagnostic test, you find this in all the major journals, the major review articles,
the major textbooks, the medical teaching, if you don't find anyone in literature disputing the reliability of that or if you find
so few people disputing it for such tenuous reasons that they're considered charlatans today. You can find someone saying that
Laetril will cure cancer. I don't think many people consider that part of the standard medical knowledge. If you assemble the
information in this way, I think the conclusions become apparent to objective, fair, balanced readers of that literature.
Q. That's the easy example, though, Doctor, where 99.9 percent of the medical community has adopted a specific position.
Isn't that the easy answer?
A. Well, that is a more clear-cut example. But certainly the state of medical knowledge might be that something is unresolved.
And you can have, for example, different treatments that might be advocated today. For example, in cardiology, people have
come to the view that, if you can get someone who has had a heart attack within four to six hours after the heart attack, that it
would be a good idea to give a blood clot dissolving agent. But you've got some people who say give Streptokinase and some
people who say give TPA, a TPA, a product of genetic technology. So the state of medical knowledge might be that a question
is open, that there are different interpretations, different theories, it happens all the time.
Q. Might there be a point in time where there's a majority view in the medical profession on a subject and a minority view
on the subject?
A. That's difficult to say because there so many workers that it's hard to count them up. It's hard to know who may have spoken
out on a subject in a conference or in an unpublished setting or in a teaching. Also there's a qualitative factor, you have to take
into account the stature of the person who was speaking. So for Albert Einstein to take a view would be more important than
perhaps 50 physicists of minor stature. So it's a more difficult calculation than what you are suggesting.
Q. But isn't that assessment made by historians as to what the majority view was on a specific subject and what the minority
view was at a point in time? And, if we look at medicine, can't we say that at different points in time there was a majority view
on a specific subject and there was a minority view on a subject?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Well, you can say that. Sometimes things are clear-cut and there's not much disagreement and sometimes you have a number
of competing theories. And certainly some theories or treatments may be more strongly argued than others at certain points
of time.
Q. Let's talk about cigarette smoking and health. I assume at some point in time the minority view was that cigarette smoking
was a cause of lung cancer in human beings and the majority view was we don't think that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung
cancer in human beings. At some point in time, that changed; whereas, the majority view was that cigarette smoking is a cause
of lung cancer in human beings and a minority view became cigarette smoking is not a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object as to form, specifically majority and minority.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Is that not a fair analysis as to what has transpired over the last 50 years?
A. I don't know what has happened in the last 37 years.
Q. Well, let's talk about what happened in the --
A. Twenty-seven years.
Q. -- 34 years that you analyzed. Would you say that in the 1930's there was a very, very small minority view that cigarette
smoking was a cause of cancer in human beings?
A. I would say that in the 1930's and in the 1940's there was no reliable scientific evidence to suggest that cigarette smoking
represented a major threat to the public health. And that was part of the state of medical knowledge as of 1950.
Q. What do you mean by reliable, sir, how do you define reliable?
A. I'm defining it as evidence, data, more than a hunch, something that was taken seriously by contemporaries of the time.
When someone would write a letter to the editor and say I've seen two patients and they both smoke and they both have lung
cancer, when you have leading biomedical scientists reviewing the literature and saying, you know, this has been said about 25
different things, we don't really have any good evidence to support that, the few experimental studies have been negative, almost
everybody smokes and we really don't see much illness, I really think that smoking is safe, that type of anecdotal impression
would be discounted and it was discounted prior to 1950.
Q. Doctor, what is your definition of reliable in the context of your answer?
A. I thought I answered.
Q. No, I want a definition. As you ask me for definitions, I want your definition of reliable.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. I thought he just gave that.
MR. EDELL: That's a form objection?
MR. GARNICK: It's my objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. EDELL: Not even in Washington is that an objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm using it to underscore evidence. In other words you need evidence, not merely conjecture or speculation,
evidence that can be confirmed by others, evidence that might make sense with other phenomena that are being observed. The
leading figures of the field and, indeed, the wisdom of medical knowledge prior to 1950 was that there was no reason to suspect
that smoking was a major health hazard.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What do you mean by major health hazard?
A. By major health hazard, I'm referring to lung cancer and coronary artery disease, that it was not a threat to the public health,
that it did not decrease survival, and that there was no scientific reason to recommend a prohibition against smoking for health
reasons.
Q. Did that view change?
A. It changed after 1950 and particularly in the mid-1950s as I stated, when evidence for the first time came forth, evidence
as opposed to mere speculation --
Q. Reliable evidence as you have previously defined it?
A. Yes, and evidence that could be confirmed and duplicated. Replication is part of the process of assessing evidence. If there
is one study or one experiment and no one else is able to repeat it, that tends to be discounted. This has to do with your question
of reliable evidence.
On the other hand, if you get confirmation, then that same finding is given more attention. And, as we have talked about at
length, studies of different types appeared beginning in the 1950's that did change the thinking and did lead people to suspect
that smoking might be linked to the cancer problem.
Q. So is what you're saying that there was reliable evidence in the mid-1950's that cigarette smoking might be a major threat
to the American public?
A. I'm saying that there was reliable evidence that -- that there was evidence that smoking might be a contributing factor to
lung cancer.
Q. My question was, Doctor, in your opinion, as of the mid-1950's, was there reliable evidence to suggest that cigarette smoking
was a major threat to the American public?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: What is wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: Major threat to the American public is undefined.
MR. EDELL: Those are his terms as defined previously.
MR. GARNICK: I don't think he used the precise term major threat to the American public. And, if he did use it, I still don't
know what it means.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. EDELL: He defined it.
MR. GARNICK: And I don't think the jury would know what it means.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, we'll see.
A. Well, I would not agree with that terminology.
Q. What terms would you not agree with?
A. I would say that --
Q. No, what terms would you not agree with?
A. Major threat to the American public.
Q. Would you agree that, as of the mid-1950's, there was reliable evidence that cigarette smoking was a major threat to the
smoking public?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: I would not agree with it.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Would you agree that as of 1964 there was reliable evidence that cigarette smoking was a major threat to the smoking public?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: The same thing as before, major threat to the smoking public is undefined. Major, minor.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. As you used major threat previously, sir, lung cancer, coronary artery disease, that's how you defined it previously.
A. What I would say is --
Q. Just answer the question. If you can't answer the question, tell me.
A. I'd like to answer the question if you would permit me to do so.
Q. I will let you answer the question, sir, but I want an answer to the question.
MR. GARNICK: Let him answer the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. As of January 1, 1964, was there reliable evidence to suggest that cigarette smoking was a major threat to the smoking
public, yes or no?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
Answer it yes or no if you can; but, if you can't, give whatever answer you can give.
THE WITNESS: That question has some false premises to it, and I can speak like this too, but it does not allow a yes or no
answer.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So you can't tell me whether there was or was not reliable evidence at that point in time to suggest that cigarette smoking
was a major threat to the smoking public; is that correct?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form. That's not what he said.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Tell me if you can or you can't.
A. I would be pleased to tell you the findings of my research.
Q. I don't want to know about your findings unless you tell me an answer to the question, sir. I'd like an answer to the question.
Either you tell me yes or no or you say, Mr. Edell, I can't answer that question.
MR. GARNICK: And, even if he has an answer, if it's not yes or no, you don't want to hear it.
MR. EDELL: If he needs to explain his yes or no answer, he can feel free to do so.
MR. GARNICK: But, if he can't give a yes or no answer --
MR. EDELL: There's got to be a yes or no or I can't answer that question.
MR. GARNICK: I don't think that's right.
MR. EDELL: What else could there be?
MR. GARNICK: There could be an explanation.
MR. EDELL: What else could there be?
MR. GARNICK: Why don't you let him answer.
MR. EDELL: Either he agrees or disagrees and explains or he can't answer the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: Marc, I don't want to argue with you. And, if he has an answer that is not yes and not no and not I can't answer
the question, you don't want to hear it.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sir, would you agree that as of January 1, 1964, there was reliable evidence to suggest that cigarette smoking was a major
threat to the smoking public?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Yes or no or I can't answer it, Mr. Edell.
A. Your question is based on faulty premise and does not lead to a yes or no answer.
Q. Can you answer the question?
A. I can answer the question with appropriate qualifications.
Q. You can't tell me whether you agree or disagree with that statement?
MR. GARNICK: Marc, he's already answered that three or four times.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You can't agree or disagree with that statement?
A. And I can talk like this too and tell you that you are asking a question that is based on faulty premises and however many
times you want to ask the same --
Q. The faulty premise is as to whether you agree or disagree with it, sir. If it's a faulty premise, you say I don't agree with
that statement, Mr. Edell.
A. That's what I just said.
Q. That's fine. Then tell me why you don't agree with it. Go ahead, it's your record.
A. As of January 1964, there was evidence that smoking may be related to lung cancer and to heart disease. This evidence was
disputed which was not part of your question and, indeed, the total importance of the health hazards of smoking were still in
question at that time.
Q. Sir, would you agree that there is reliable evidence today to suggest that cigarette smoking is a major threat to the smoking
public?
MR. GARNICK: I thought we went through all that yesterday.
MR. EDELL: No, we didn't, we went through causation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You don't know, you don't have an opinion one way or the other on that?
A. I do not have an opinion on that subject, an expert opinion.
Q. well, do you have an opinion as a physician?
A. No, I don't have an opinion on that subject.
Q. Sir, do you know what the tobacco industry's relationship is to Washington University --
A. No.
Q. -- in St. Louis?
A. No.
Q. You don't know how many millions of dollars they have provided in terms of funding and specifically capital improvements
to the university?
A. No.
Q. Do you know Dr. Lacey or Dr. Ackerman?
A. Which Lacey and which Ackerman?
Q. One is a Loren Ackerman, Lacey, I could get his name for you if you would like. Is it Loren Ackerman?
A. I'm not sure.
Q. Do you know a Loren Ackerman?
A. No.
Q. I don't remember the first name, sir. You do know a Dr. Lacey at Washington University?
A. Which Lacey?
Q. Do you know a Dr. Lacey, period, at Washington University, any Dr. Lacey, any and all Dr. Laceys?
A. Let me see. There's a Dr. Paul Lacey.
Q. Do you know Dr. Lacey?
A. I know Dr. Paul Lacey. Is that the Dr. Lacey that you were referring to?
Q. I'll try to help you out in a second. What position does Dr. Lacey have at Washington University, Dr. Paul Lacey?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Dr. Paul Lacey is the former chairman of our pathology department.
Q. That sounds like the right guy. But you don't know Dr. Ackerman, Loren Ackerman?
A. Not offhand.
Q. The name doesn't sound familiar?
A. Sure, it sounds familiar, but I don't know if I know him or not.
Q. How about Theodore Sterling?
A. I do not know that name.
Q. Were you aware, sir, that -- are you aware as to what the Fisher hypothesis was with respect to lung cancer?
A. Ronald Fisher?
Q. Ronald A. Fisher, the one and only.
A. Were you referring to the constitutional hypothesis?
Q. Yes, sir, with respect to lung cancer and smoking.
A. It's been awhile since I've reviewed that, I'm familiar with it in general.
Q. Is it fair to describe it as one that attributes inherited or genetic makeup as a cause for smoking and lung cancer?
A. That's correct. And are you aware that it has always been the industry's position that, if they could prove that, it would be
their best hope?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Their best hope for what?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Their best hope as to cigarette smoking and the health issue.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: With the understanding for the record that I'm not quite sure what you mean by cigarette smoking and the
health issue as the best hope, I have no information whatsoever as to views of the industry, hopes of the industry, plans of the
industry, I'm unable to comment on any of their thinking, psychology, or strategy.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And you only have a vague recollection of Dr. Fisher's relationship to the industry; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. My recollection is firm; my understanding of the details is vague. I have heard it said that in some way he was consulted at
some time by the industry. But, as I indicated yesterday, that's the extent of my knowledge.
Q. You don't know that he was retained as a tobacco manufacturers' standing committees' consultant in 1957?
A. Well, I don't know the details. I have seen reference to the fact that the tobacco companies did consult with him. I don't know
the year or the title, if what you said is consistent with what I recall, I don't have specific details.
Q. Is it your understanding that he was doing the same thing in England for tobacco companies over there that Dr. Little was
doing for tobacco companies in the United States?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: I'm not clear what you mean by what Dr. Little was doing for the tobacco companies in the United States.
MR. EDELL: Maybe you should read the internal documents then.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sir?
MR. GARNICK: But the point is he hasn't either.
MR. EDELL: Maybe he doesn't know what Dr. Little was doing, maybe he doesn't know what Dr. Fisher was doing.
MR. GARNICK: Maybe he has a different view of it than you do.
MR. EDELL: Maybe, maybe.
THE WITNESS: I do not know what specific responsibilities that Dr. Fisher had in that capacity as consultant, assuming that,
indeed, you accurately reflected the title and what his position was, I do not know what his responsibilities were.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And that's not important in trying to assess his potential bias on the cigarette smoking and health issue; is that correct?
A. I've indicated a couple of important points relevant to that question in the course of the two days. One is that it is customary
in science for individuals to receive funding from a variety of sources including pharmaceutical companies, including chemical
companies, public agencies, and that what ultimately matters is the quality of the work, not the source of funding.
Q. I'm not talking about funding, Doctor, I'm talking about employed by --
A. I don't know how he was employed.
Q. But wouldn't it be important to find that out, wouldn't that be something that you would be interested in as an historian to
determine whether or not there might be a biased perspective on the smoking and health issue?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. The question of bias would come forth in evaluations of work and not in the source of his paycheck.
Q. But you don't have the qualifications to evaluate Ronald Fisher's work, do you, sir?
A. Well, as I indicated yesterday, though I am not a statistician, Ronald Fisher was the most important scientific figure in the
entire debate in the smoking and health controversy, that every individual that you would bring forward that I presume was a
hero in this debate, the Hammonds, the Dorns, the Dolls, the Hills, the Wynders, et cetera, et cetera, who put forth the positive
side of the case, acknowledge Fisher as the founder of their new science of clinical epidemiology. He was the giant. Those who
executed the studies were his intellectual progeny.
And I admit that I am speculating, but it would have been almost negligible for a company in the interest of the outcome not to at
least consult the source the same way that a company or a government with a major project in physics might have felt the need to
consult an Albert Eistein as the United States Government did when it came time to develop an atomic bomb, he was that great.
Q. What epidemiological studies did they ask Dr. Fisher to perform, either retrospective or prospective, with respect to cigarette
smoking and cancer since he was the source? Did you think that they went to him and said, Doctor, you're the source, you're
the father of all epidemiology, we are going to give you umpteen million dollars, go out and do the perfect epidemiological
study on cigarette smoking and lung cancer; did they do that?
A. I don't know, and you're distorting my answer. What I told you is that I do not know exactly what work Fisher did, in what
capacity they consulted him. My comment was that, if there is a question, it seems to me very reasonable to consult with an
individual who is considered the world expert in that field. And you have told me that they did consult with him and I'm saying
that seems to me a very plausible, logical, sensible thing to do and something you can justify to stockholders. What, in fact,
they asked Fisher to do, what he did I have no knowledge or information on.
Q. Well, you reviewed the literature, did you not, sir, for the period 1930 to 1964?
A. Of course I did.
Q. Well, tell me about me about all the epidemiological studies that Dr. Fisher performed with respect to cigarette smoking
and lung cancer, point to one?
A. That's a separate question than what he did for the tobacco companies.
Q. Then we can talk about whether or not it was funded by the tobacco industry.
A. Fisher, as you very well know, was critical of the conduct of the epidemiological studies that were done for various reasons,
reasons of bias, reasons of alternative explanations, the constitutional hypothesis being one. I am unaware that he did any new
studies on his own. The published work that he did that I am familiar with as I sit here discussing this subject with you this
morning had to do more with critiquing the studies that were done as opposed to conducting new studies.
What his specific relationship was with the tobacco companies, what they asked him to do, did he perhaps refuse to do it, I have
no information whatsoever on his association with the tobacco companies other than what you tell me now, that they approached
him in some sort of consulting fashion, that he may have had a title; assuming that's correct, that's my total knowledge of his
relationship with the tobacco companies.
Q. Did he make any attempt to conduct any epidemiological study with respect to cigarette smoking and health that you're
aware of ever?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. In the published literature that I'm aware of, he rendered his assessment of the quality of the work that had been done. He
was not an original investigator in new epidemiological studies.
Q. In other words he sat there and criticized these various epidemiological studies and identified flaws in them, correct?
A. Yes, he did. And I would add that that's an important role in science, especially for a senior statesman.
Q. Did he go forward and try to conduct epidemiological studies to try correct those flaws?
MR. GARNICK: That's the fourth time you've asked the identical question.
MR. EDELL: And?
MR. GARNICK: And I think it's harassing.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor?
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, please answer again for the fourth time.
THE WITNESS: Well, for however many times it is, to my knowledge he was not the investigator, he was not an investigator
of new studies, he served the very crucial role of rendering analytical judgments of work that had been done which contributed
to the discussion of the issue. Also, remember that this man died in 1960.
And here I would like to point out for the record I'm getting speculative, I don't know the biography of R. A. Fisher, all ins
and outs of his life at any point in time, but I do know that he died approximately in 1960. For all I know he was getting ready
to embark on such a study.
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, let me instruct you not to speculate.
MR. EDELL: I thought he died in '62, but be that as it may.
THE WITNESS: I thank you for that caution about speculating, though I did admit it was pure speculation, though it does
bear upon your question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You weren't even aware of the fact that R. A. Fisher came all the way from England to act as an expert witness for the
tobacco industry in a product liability suit similar to the one we are involved with here, were you? And that was in 1960.
A. I'm unaware of his connection with the tobacco industry. I do not know if he had any involvement as an expert witness, I
don't know how frequently, how often he met with the tobacco industry, I don't know how many times I can give you the same
answer, that I am unfamiliar with this aspect of his career and of the nature of the relationship he had with the tobacco company.
But it has not influenced the essential point that the entire field of clinical epidemiology was the result of his scientific work.
He was the progenitor of the field and he was considered by contemporaries and by workers and historians today as the most
significant figure in the field. That's independent of any relationship he may have had with the tobacco companies of which I
have no ability or information to comment upon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, in assessing what the medical opinion was on a specific subject at a specific point in time, do you consider the
position of various health organizations?
A. That would be one factor to take into account.
Q. I don't remember exactly where, whether it was in the Kotler transcript or otherwise that I saw I a reference to some editorial
in JAMA in 1948 on the cigarette smoking and health issue; is that in 1948?
A. I believe so.
Q. And what was the significance of that editorial?
A. Do we have a copy of it?
Q. No, I don't.
A. Well, it would be helpful to have a copy of it to review.
Q. As you well know, there were boxes and boxes and boxes, I'm sure Mr. Garnick has that article somewhere here.
MR. GARNICK: Marc --
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Be that as it may, you don't remember that article?
A. Well, there were two articles from the Journal of the American Medical Association from 1948.
MR. GARNICK: Marc, if you want me to make them available after lunch, I would be glad to do that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. We can talk about it some more. I'm talking about an editorial. Both of them were editorials, sir?
A. One was an editorial, one was an article. I remember the editorial, but I don't have it in front of me.
Q. What was the substance of the editorial so far as your recollection is concerned?
A. Well, the editorial discussed a number of things. It would be very helpful to have the editorial here.
Q. You don't recall what it discussed insofar as its pertinence to your opinions in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. It discussed the issue of whether it was appropriate for the journal of the American Medical Association to accept
advertisements from cigarette manufacturers in the journal. In discussing that issue, it reviewed salient points of what was
known about the health hazards of cigarettes and it was brought up in that context.
Q. And do you know who wrote the editorial?
A. As we sit here right now, I don't remember, I don't know.
Q. That would be important, though, to know who the editorial was written by in order to assess its reliability and credibility;
wouldn't that be important?
A. Well, of course, it's helpful to know the author. Editorials usually are written by the editor of the journal. Whether it was
a signed editorial or whether there were initials there, I don't remember. Sometimes it just said the editor. You're asking me
questions that I don't remember from a document that is not in front of us.
Q. Who was the editor of the journal in 1948?
A. I don't remember the editor's name.
Q. Would Morris Fishbein ring a bell?
A. Morris Fishbein does ring a bell. He could have been editor at that time, I don't know for certain.
Q. Do you know for what period of time Morris Fishbein was the editor of JAMA?
A. It's my recollection, though, not my certainty, this is an educated guess since I have not studied the history of Morris Fishbein
in doing this work, but I do recall from general knowledge that he had a long association with the American Medical Association.
I do believe that he spent a period of time as editor of the journal, I would like to qualify that by saying that that's as we sit
here discussing now. I would have to review information on that.
Q. And the editorial basically supported the proposition that the journal should continue to accept cigarette advertising; isn't
that correct?
A. It supported that policy, that's correct.
Q. And you're aware that cigarette advertising contributed significant dollars to the American Medical Association during that
time period; isn't that correct?
A. I have no information as to revenues of either the Journal of the American Medical Association or of the American Medical
Association as an organization at that or at any other time.
Q. So you don't know of what significance advertising was to the American Medical Association at that time?
A. No, I don't.
Q. And that's not a factor that you think is important in assessing the credibility of the editorial that you referred to in 1948?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. The editorial in 1948 justified a policy based upon existing medical thought, both on the health hazards of cigarette smoking,
and that's very clearly pertinent to the analysis and to the discussion. To what degree revenues came from any form of advertising
and to what degree those revenues were important to the journal or to the organization I have no comment, I don't know.
But I can tell you that the analysis of the condition of medical knowledge that was put forward in that editorial as a justification
for continuing to accept advertisements was very consistent with the state of medical knowledge as I ascertained it, having done
a detailed year-by-year study of hundreds of articles.
Q. And do you know what Dr. Fishbein's experience was in terms of his expertise to evaluate the current state of the art on
cigarette smoking and health in 1948?
MR. DECKER: Objection.
MR. EDELL: What's the objection?
MR. DECKER: I don't think we've established that Dr. Fishbein or Mr. Fishbein, Morris Fishbein was at this particular time
in any relationship with that particular journal.
MR. EDELL: I will represent to you that in 1948 Morris Fishbein was, in fact, the editor of JAMA.
THE WITNESS: Even with that representation, the question that you ask is --
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What is the question, Doctor, what's the question?
A. You're asking as I understand it about Morris Fishbein's qualifications.
Q. That's right. Do you know what his qualifications were in 1948?
A. May I proceed?
Q. Sure.
A. I'm saying that the question you asked, even assuming that Morris Fishbein was the author, nonetheless is based upon faulty
premises as to how journals work.
Q. All I asked you was what his experience and training was to qualify him to evaluate the state of the art?
A. Do you know how that editorial was written, do you know who peer-reviewed it?
Q. Would you answer my question, Doctor.
A. Your question is unamenable to answer because it is a hypothetical that has no bearing in reality to how editorials are written.
Q. Doctor, I asked you a simple question. Do you know what Morris Fishbein's training was that would enable him to evaluate
the scientific and medical literature on cigarette smoking and health? Yes, I do,
Mr. Edell; no, I don't.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: I don't think that was the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, that's the question.
A. That's a different question than I understood it.
Q. Then answer the question please, sir.
A. Number one, I am unable to comment at this point in time about Dr. Morris Fishbein's qualifications; though, as an editor
of a major medical journal, these are generally well-informed people. So to portray such an individual as a totally uninformed
person is usually an erroneous view. But I would also point out that there is nothing in the information that you have provided
that indicates how that editorial was written, and that's the point that I'm making.
Q. Okay. That's important, isn't it?
A. That's a very important point.
Q. To find out whether it was peer-reviewed or not?
A. Or discussed among the editorial committee.
Q. Or discussed. You don't know that, do you?
A. I do not know the circumstances of that particular --
Q. Do you know what kind of power Dr. Fishbein exercised over that journal?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by power?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Control.
MR. GARNICK: You mean over the articles that appeared as editorials?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Over the journal, JAMA, during that time frame.
A. He was a strong editor.
Q. Do you know when he was kicked out of the American Medical Association insofar as his position as editor of JAMA was
concerned?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That was a bad question. Do you know when he was removed as editor of JAMA?
MR. GARNICK: Objection as to form.
MR. EDELL: what's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: I don't know if he was removed.
MR. EDELL: Well, he was removed. Because you don't know doesn't mean that that's an objection to the form.
MR. GARNICK: It assumes an allegation that hasn't been established.
MR. EDELL: That's a foundation objection and has no applicability to a deposition.
MR. GARNICK: Marc, after the deposition you can teach me these things, but why don't we just proceed. I'm not telling him
he can't answer these questions.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, do you know when Dr. Fishbein was removed as editor of JAMA?
MR. GARNICK: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I do not know the precise time.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you know why he was removed?
A. I do not remember the circumstances as we sit here today.
Q. Is that important to your assessment as to the credibility of his editorial in 1948?
A. No.
Q. Is the American Medical Association's position on smoking and health an important factor in your evaluation of the state
of the art, if you will, on cigarette smoking and health?
A. What do you mean by the position of the American Medical Association?
Q. The position of the American Medical Association on the issue of cigarette smoking and health. You don't understand that
question?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. DECKER: Objection to the form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Are you aware as to whether or not the American Medical Association has ever taken a position on cigarette smoking and
health?
A. What period of time?
Q. For all relevant periods of time, sir.
A. When are you interested in for purposes of this question?
Q. For all relevant periods of time, 1930 to 1964.
A. The American Medical Association was one of the later groups to advise that it would be prudent not to smoke or to smoke
less. I do not remember precisely the year that an official statement was made by the American Medical Association analogous
to statements by some of their other organizations.
Q. Was that an important factor in your assessing the state of the art?
A. Was what an important factor?
Q. The fact that the A.M.A. did not take a formal position on cigarette smoking and health.
A. No, it was one piece of data among many.
Q. But you did consider it?
A. I considered everything I looked at.
Q. Do you know what the American Medical Association's relationship was with the tobacco industry?
MR. GARNICK: At what point in time.
MR. EDELL: At all relevant points in time, at any point in time.
THE WITNESS: I have not studied the history of the American Medical Association or the history of the tobacco industry and
its external relationships, I cannot comment as we sit here in time on what relationship, if any, they may have had.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You don't think that's an important issue to consider?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, if I'm not mistaken -- well, I'm not an expert on the relationships of the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A.M.A with the tobacco industry or any other industry. I do have recollections as we sit here today that are only recollections
of some research arrangements that were undertaken between the A.M.A. and the tobacco industry. If I'm not mistaken, some
of those arrangements were discussed by Dr. Harris in his testimony.
But as I say that's recollection as I sit here today. But nothing in this changes at all my assessment of the state of medical
knowledge as determined by the study that I have done.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you know when advertising was no longer accepted by the journal?
MR. GARNICK: Tobacco advertising?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Yes, I'm sorry, tobacco advertising.
A. I have read in secondary sources that at some point the journal stopped accepting tobacco advertising, but I do not remember
when that happened.
Q. Is that important in your evaluating the state of the art with respect to smoking and health issues?
A. It is not important to the opinions that I am prepared to render based upon my study of the literature.
Q. Doctor, when was the first formal group put together by a public entity to evaluate the cigarette smoking and health literature?
A. The first formal group?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object as to form.
THE WITNESS: Can you be a little more specific.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I'm asking you.
A. What do you mean by formal group?
Q. An official- composed group to investigate the cigarette smoking and health issue by any governmental entity.
A. To conduct original investigations or to assess?
Q. To assess the state of the art, sir.
A. To the best of my memory as we sit here today in the United States, there was a Surgeon General's discussion of this in
1957 in the United States.
Q. What do you mean a Surgeon General's discussion of this?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. There was a statement from the Public Health Service. And I believe, though I'm not certain, but I believe the Surgeon
General at that time was Leroy Burney.
Q. What is your understanding about the composition of the group and who were members of the group and what it did and
what the results were?
A. Well, I did not look at the internal operations of the group. It's my recollection that a statement from the Public Health Service
was issued either written by Burney or written by his recommendation in approximately 1957, a brief statement.
Q. You didn't think it was important to examine what the group did and who the members were to assess what the state of
the art was in 1957?
A. Well, you must recognize that the reasons, the discussions, the arguments were contained in the statement. I did not feel that
it was necessary to even attempt to locate, if they existed at all, internal records of whatever committee there might have been
Q. Did you attempt to obtain any publications by the group?
A. By which group?
Q. By the group that was composed -- that Surgeon General Burney put together in 1957 to examine the smoking and health
issue.
A. I believe I answered that question to the best of my recollection as we sit here today. As I conducted my year-by-year
bibliographic search, I encountered a statement that was published as an official statement of the Public Health Service of the
United States my recollection is in 1957. It was important, I did read it, I did include that, incorporate it into my conclusions.
If there were other reports from that group at that time, that escaped my memory.
Q. And what was the composition of the group, who were members of the group?
A. I don't remember the specifics of the 1957 statement beyond what I've told you.
Q. Isn't that important in assessing the credibility of the conclusions of the group, to know who the members were and how
that information was received by the medical community?
A. I think that, if you would listen to my answers, you would recognize that I have indicated my opinions on those very questions.
In terms of the importance of the statement, I have already told you that I consider it an important statement, that it was an
important statement for its significance, for its logic, for its authority.
And I say that independent of having any knowledge of all the circumstances that led to the statement and whatever staff people
might have helped. I've already told you that I consider that an important piece of information. And, secondly, you have not
asked me until now about the issue of the reception. And I will tell you that it was a piece of work that engendered a great
deal of discussion, both pro and con.
Q. What was the conclusion of the group?
A. There were a number of statements by different groups.
Q. I'm talking about this group, sir.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. I know that. Do you happen to have the statement.
Q. Surgeon General Health Service study group that was put together by Leroy Burney June of 1956 and issued its
pronouncement in 1957.
A. It would be helpful to have the statement. I read the document, I'm familiar with it.
Q. Read what documents?
A. The statement that was published I believe in the Journal of the American Medical Association; if not in the Journal of the
American Medical Association, in another important journal. I read the statement. If you're going to ask me specific questions
about it, I would like to have the document.
Q. I'm asking you about the state of medical art, that's what I'm asking you about. I told you I didn't bring the 500 articles here
and you said it was a very important pronouncement.
A. What is your question?
Q. Do you remember what the position was of the group on cigarette smoking and health?
MR. GARNICK: To facilitate matters, I would be happy to provide it during lunch.
MR. EDELL: I'm testing his memory, I can do that.
MR. GARNICK: I'm just offering.
MR. EDELL: I appreciate that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You don't remember what the substance of the conclusion was, Doctor?
A. There were a number of conclusions that did vary among each other in wording, tone, and caution, and the degree to which
they were willing to draw conclusions from evidence there. And I do not wish to confuse that particular recommendation with a
number of other important recommendations from important groups that were issued approximately at that same period of time.
Q. Doctor, does that mean that you don't recall what the conclusion was of this group with respect to the cigarette smoking
and health issue, is that what that means? It's okay, you can tell us you don't recall, I told you that in the beginning of today's
deposition and I told you that yesterday. If you don't recall, tell me?
A. I'm telling you I don't wish to speculate.
Q. Well, that's your recollection then?
A. My recollection and what I can comfortably say now is that it was a statement that gave weight to the evidence that was
accumulating that excessive tobacco smoking, cigarette smoking, might be related to lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
In terms of the specific language, the specific conclusions, the specific warnings, anything beyond what I have just said, I would
need to see the document. As I have said, there were a number of similar reports in a very short period of time and it's easy
to get the wording of one confused with the other.
Q. What other similar groups were composed about that period of time?
A. You might remember that Dr. Burney did testify in 1957 at the Blotnick hearings and he was questioned about that report.
And he did say that in his judgment, despite the public caution that was made about cigarette smoking, it was his judgment
that there was no reason at that time to issue a warning against cigarette smoking to the public. I do remember his testimony
in the Blotnick hearings about that paper.
Q. What was the question, Doctor?
A. I was just answering your question a little more fully.
Q. What was the question?
A. Why don't you ask me the next question then.
Q. I have a question pending, you were just answering it supposedly. What was the question?
A. Since I was answering your previous question more fully, I apologize if I missed the subsequent question.
(Whereupon, at 1:00 p.m., the deposition in the above-entitled matter was recessed, to reconvene at 2:15 p.m., this same day.)
AFTERNOON SESSION
(2:15 p.m.)
(The documents referred to were marked Ludmerer Exhibit Nos. 13 and 14 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to show you what we've marked as Ludmerer 13 and 14. Would you please tell us what they are?
A. Item 13 is what I presume would be called a declaration of what I have done in this project and areas that I might be called
upon to render an opinion. There may be a correct legal term for it. It reads Declaration of Kenneth M. Ludmerer.
Q. Did you make a determination as to what was known and understood by the medical and scientific community as opposed
to what was knowable at the various points in time that we've been discussing? Do you understand the question, sir?
A. Yes, I do. And the answer is yes.
Q. So you did not make an analysis as to what was knowable at various points in time?
A. I thought I answered the question differently. Part of my review of the literature had to do with not only the findings,
conclusions, and opinions, but also the available techniques. So as part of that I was able to form opinions as to what types of
questions were approachable with available techniques and standards at different points in time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. So you did make an assessment, then I may have misinterpreted your answer?
A. I believe so, I did make an assessment, the answer is yes.
Q. Did your answer with respect to the question that you were investigating, what was known and what was knowable at
different points in time, ever differ? In other words did you ever come to the conclusion that, for example, in 1955 it was known
that cigarette smoking might be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer and say to yourself at that point in time it was
knowable, if they had done X, Y, and Z or if they had dedicated another $10 million to research at that point in time, they could
have answered the question or something like that?
A. Yes, that was part of my assessment.
Q. Well, what I'm asking you is did there ever come a point in time in terms of this time frame we are dealing with, 1930 to
1964, where you said, you know, this is what the state of the art is with respect to their knowledge; but, if they had taken extra
steps, they could have known a lot more about it at that point in time or a considerable amount more?
A. My finding was that, as a generalization, there was a congruence between what was known and what was knowable; in
other words, as new evidence came forth, suggesting that smoking might be implicated in lung cancer and in other diseases in
the 1950's which I have acknowledged as part of my findings, that was part and parcel of the creation and invention of new
techniques and new approaches as opposed to using approaches that had been in existence for some time and just not employed.
Q. So is it your opinion that it wasn't for a lack of funding that the discoveries in the 1950's, if you will, with respect to cigarette
smoking and lung cancer had not occurred earlier?
A. That is my opinion.
Q. That it was more a situation where the tools just were not available in the earlier period?
A. Right, it is my assessment that new tools from a variety of fronts were created in the 1950's that made questions amenable
to study that previously had not been and the results sprang from them.
Q. Doctor, on Ludmerer 13, paragraph three, you used the term reliable in the context of reliable, scientific, and medical
evidence. The definition that you provided to us earlier with respect to reliable, would that pertain here?
A. Yes, it would. To reiterate I'm referring to evidence as opposed to anecdotal impression or uncontrolled studies or even
experimental studies that were unable to be replicated by others, with the point there being that confirmation is part of the test
of assessing reliability of scientific information.
Q. That's the definition of reliable?
A. Yes, the definition that I'm using.
Q. Okay. On page 2, second line, it says that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. How did you define caused in the context of that statement?
A. That smoking was the responsible factor for lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. was it responsible as opposed to a responsible?
A. At what point in time?
Q. I just want to know how you defined caused, I have to understand what you mean by caused in order to understand your
statement.
A. I think that it might be more accurate to say a cause or a contributing factor.
Q. And again what do you mean by cause, how do you define cause for the purposes of this statement?
A. Well, I was using the term as people at the time commonly used it. It's possible to get very philosophical and epistemological
about what is the cause, that gets to be a very abstract discussion. But essentially, as it's being used here, as people at the time
used it, there was no reliable scientific evidence that, if you smoke cigarettes, you are at risk to develop lung cancer or that it
would be involved in some way with the actual production of lung cancer.
Q. You used the phrase significant threat as opposed to what we discussed before, major threat. Are they synonymous?
A. Oh, I think so, significant, major, I think so.
Q. Generally are they synonymous, in the context of your use of the two phrases are they synonymous?
A. Oh, I think as we've been speaking now I might use significant factor, major factor in interchangeable fashions.
Q. How did you make an assessment as to whether or not something is a significant threat as opposed to a moderate threat
or a minor threat?
MR. GARNICK: You mean in this context or generally?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Obviously in the context of making an assessment of a public health threat, period, whether something significant, moderate,
or unlikely.
A. Well, I can reply specifically to the phraseology in this case.
Q. Significant threat?
A. To the phraseology used here in this sentence.
Q. Start there.
A. What I mean by that is that the medical views toward the possible health hazards of cigarette smoking change with time as
evidence changes with time as I know you're very familiar with. The change from the 1950's compared with earlier periods of
time was that studies were done and evidence was brought forth suggesting that cigarette smoking might be related to some
very important major diseases, particularly lung cancer and also as you know coronary artery disease.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
And these were considered by people at the time much more serious public health threats because of their frequency in the
population and because of the seriousness of the diseases themselves compared with the health hazards that had been attributed
to smoking before 1950. It's not that before 1950 smoking was considered totally innocent, it was viewed as a minor nuisance,
there were a number of conditions in which, if a person had -- that smoking might not be prudent; if you had bad circulation,
maybe you had better not smoke and so forth.
But those conditions were far different than the specific illnesses of lung cancer and the specific illnesses of coronary artery
disease which were much more serious illnesses and affect much larger numbers of the population, and that is the change that
I was referring to in that sentence.
Q. On the bottom of the page, you indicate that this controversy continued at least up to January 1964 when the Surgeon
General's report on smoking and health was released?
A. That's correct.
Q. You're not going to render an opinion as to whether or not the controversy continued after January of '64?
A. Well, I don't have an expert opinion on that, I have not followed it forward, though I perhaps could point out that there were
individuals before the Surgeon General's report in December 1963, January 1964 who did not accept the types of evidence
that the Surgeon General's committee gave more credence to. I think it's unlikely that such individuals immediately changed
their mind because the surgeon General's report took a stand. Other organizations had taken similar stands before. But you are
correct, that my expertise, if you will, and testimony, if asked to give it, do conclude with January 1964.
Q. Now, who were these individuals who you say questioned the Surgeon General's report on smoking and health?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, as I replied I did not study the literature after 1964 and, hence, I could not tell you who said what about
it. As I said there were people debating the issue on both sides until the Surgeon General's report, and I do think that views
were firm enough and the Surgeon General's report essentially recapitulated evidence that was already known as opposed to
presenting new evidence.
So I would wager a hunch which perhaps I shouldn't do since it really is a hunch that some people probably did maintain
opinions that they had held the month before. But to be precise I really have no informed or expert opinion, no comment to
make about anything that transpired after January '64.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You didn't read one piece of paper that related to a period post-1964, none of these secondary sources that you read related
to the cigarette smoking and health issue post-'64?
A. Well, as a matter of fact, since you asked --
Q. I'm glad I did.
A. Yes, since you asked, there were secondary sources that made the point that some individuals were unconvinced by the
Surgeon General's report and continued to publish articles on the other side of the case after the appearance of the Surgeon
General's report.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
And my reading there, as I say my information there comes from secondary sources, that's not something that I went through,
like I didn't go to 1965, 1968, and 1970 and trace it through. But there were individuals listed in my secondary bibliography
who did examine later points in time and pointed out that not everyone was convinced by the report.
Q. Did those secondary sources identify the people who were unconvinced?
A. They did give specific examples and specific citations.
Q. Do you recall --
A. I don't recall precise names, precise papers. I do remember one of the sources referring to a prominent investigator who
published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1965, for some reason that issue sticks out my mind, though
I cannot tell you who the investigator was or what the grounds for his objections were. I do recall in my general recollection
from the secondary literature the point that debate did not end because of the publication of that report.
Q. Did any of these secondary sources indicate that the debate continued through the sixties and seventies and eighties?
A. I do not remember the detailed discussion of the debate after the Surgeon General's report because it was really not part of my
assignment. There are certain things I noticed and I do remember comments made about immediate responses to the Surgeon
General's report. But my focus in reading secondary sources was to get insight into the earlier period so my recollection is
actually much sharper on the earlier period because that's the period that I was preparing to concentrate on in my own work.
Q. Let's take a look at Ludmerer 14. Have you ever seen this document before?
A. I don't remember precisely this document.
Q. Not that very copy of the document, but either the original or some other version of it, if you will.
A. Exhibit 13 I remember, it was -- and you will understand my lack of familiarity with the legal terminology. I believe this
was the declaration of my potential role for purposes of this case. Document 14 is very similar in substance to Document 13.
But, as we sit here now, I do not immediately recognize it nor. could define it for you.
Q. Does one have to be a medical doctor in order to conduct history of medical knowledge at given points in time?
A. It certainly is helpful to be a medical doctor insofar as one is dealing with technical concepts and having some technical
expertise can make a scientific literature, technical literature more readily understandable. It's not necessary that a person
actually have a formal M.D. and, indeed, there are many fine historians of medicine who are not physicians.
Q. Does one have to have formal education with respect to history in order to conduct an evaluation of medical knowledge
at various points in time?
A. Now, that is a different situation. There I would say that there is nothing in scientific or medical training that prepares a
physician or scientist on that basis to do a meaningful historical study.
I would go further to say that there is rigor and method to doing history that needs to be acquired by someone doing a legitimate
respectable academic study of an historical topic. whether training and background and expertise in historical method is picked
up through formal training and getting degrees, whether it's picked up more informally, much of education is informal, there
are various routes to acquiring the rigor and the methods.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
But I would say unequivocally that historical work has a rigor and method to it and, indeed, the circles of historians in medicine
and historians of science tend to be very unflattering in their views of purported historical studies undertaken by physicians or
scientists who have not had background in history. And it has led to a number of chuckles and laughs about the inadequacy of
the results by virtue of their not having been trained in historical methods.
Q. On page 2 of Ludmerer 14, the first sentence, “Dr. Ludmerer is also expected to explain that, beginning in the 1950's medical
and scientific articles began appearing in the leading scientific and medical journals suggesting a possible link between cigarette
Smoking and lung cancer.”
Had there not been articles previous to the early 1950's that suggested a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer
that were contained in leading scientific and medical journals?
A. Well, this has to go back to the issue that we have discussed a number of times during the course of the past two days as to
what constitutes persuasive and significant evidence. As I have already indicated, suggestions that there might be a link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer go back for a long period of time.
What changes in the early 1950's is that the data and the evidence to substantiate that hypothesis was brought forth and that
individuals who previously tended to dismiss such allegations as mere speculation and, indeed, who admitted that they frankly
didn't believe it began to change their minds in response to new work that began to appear in the 1950's.
Q. I understood all that, that's why I was questioning this particular sentence. I mean the sentence may be wrong. As I understand
it, you didn't author it. I understand your position that there wasn't significant scientific or reliable scientific medical evidence
until the 1950's on the subject.
A. I believe, if I'm not correct, I believe that that is what this sentence says. Please let me read it.
Q. Let me read it again, “Dr. Ludmerer is also expected to explain that, beginning in the early 1950's, medical and scientific
articles began appearing in the leading scientific and medical journals suggesting a possible link between cigarette smoking
and lung cancer.”
Doctor, I just heard you say that there had been suggestions previous to the early 1950's in the scientific and medical literature
of a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
A. Well, if you would read to the sentence before, the last sentence on the previous page, it reads -- the last two sentences.
Q. That's a different paragraph, though, Doctor, and it's a different thought.
A. No, it's a different paragraph, but I think it directly addresses the issue that you're raising now.
Q. That says, “He is further expected to testify that, prior to the early 1950's, there was no reliable scientific or medical evidence
that cigarette smoking posed a serious threat to the public health.” And we have discussed that ad nauseam.
This is a new thought here, this thought is a completely new thought, that's why there's a new paragraph. And this suggestion
suggests that there was no medical and scientific articles in the literature prior to the early 1950's suggesting a possible link
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. You don't have to defend it, it's not your words. If you think that's an appropriate
statement, tell me; if it's not, tell me.
MR. GARNICK: What's the question, is that an appropriate statement? I've lost the question. I know generally the topic we are
talking about, if you could restate the question for the doctor.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sure. Doctor, were there articles in the medical and scientific literature prior to 1950 suggesting a possible link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer, yes or no?
A. Well, I believe I understand what your question was.
Q. No, my question is because I don't want to confuse things for Mr. Garnick. I have a specific question now. I want an answer
to that, please. You want it read back?
A. No, I want to study the statement.
Q. The statement has nothing to do with it, I have asked a question.
A. I would like to study the question because this is the question you're asking.
Q. I'll go to the men's room while you're studying the statement.
(Recess)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, would you like the question read back?
A. Please read the question back.
THE REPORTER: “Question: Doctor, were there articles in the medical and scientific literature prior to 1950 suggesting a
possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, yes or no?”
THE WITNESS: I'm reflecting on this just to answer some background questions because, as you correctly stated, I did not
write this. And secondly, though I in general agree with the content in here, I do not recall at this moment having seen this
before and I'm not certain what this document is or where it falls into the whole scope of things.
I would not agree with the statement that before 1950 there were articles suggesting a link between cigarette smoking and
lung cancer.
MR. EDELL: Could you read that back, please.
THE REPORTER: “The Witness: I'm reflecting on this just to answer some background questions because, as you correctly
stated, I did not write this. And secondly, though I in general agree with the content in here, I do not recall at this moment
having seen this before and I'm not certain what this document is or where it falls into the whole scope of things.
I would not agree with the statement that before 1950 there were articles suggesting a link between cigarette smoking and
lung cancer.”
THE WITNESS: To help you I'm suggesting, as it is used in this sentence, evidence brought forth that was persuasive to peers at
the time who read it. Of course, there are articles on the subject and, of course, there are people who would give their anecdotal
impressions. But they didn't have any evidence to suggest a link, it would be more Dr. So-and-So saying, gee, I've got a hunch.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What's the difference between a hunch and a possible link? Those must be medical or scientific terms, but what's the
difference?
A. I'm not sure I answered that question, maybe it's late in the day, but I'm not sure how I can help you with that question.
Q. Doctor, I thought that a couple of questions back you indicated that there were articles prior to 1950 that suggested a link
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. And the record will reflect that one way or the other, but I thought that's what
you had said.
A. Well, in that case let the record reflect clearly the nature of the medical literature both before and after 1950. The subject
of lung cancer was discussed in articles both before and after 1950. The difference is the nature of the articles and the types of
logic, evidence, and experiments brought forward to support that hypothesis.
Q. I understand that. In other words the quality of the evidence and the quality of the studies and the quality of the reports and
the quality of the suggestions changed over a period of time?
A. I would go beyond that. It's not only a question of quality. I would suggest that essentially there was no evidence before
1950; whereas, after 1950 in published papers evidence began to be brought forth.
Q. How do you define evidence?
A. Well, as I've suggested already, in science data matters. So, if we are looking, for instance, at epidemiological studies, the
well-designed, well-conceived, well-executed retrospective study such as Doll and Hill or the prospective studies which were
even more influential in changing the opinions of physicians and medical scientists had a persuasive effect on contemporaries
that anecdotal observations of some or another physician who had seen six patients with lung cancer who happened to smoke,
that those observations had at an earlier point in time; that would be an example.
The former studies, the retrospective and prospective studies, the studies that came out of this new science of epidemiology had
control and rigor that gave meaning to their results. Studies that were at best uncontrolled, I have 100 patients and 70 of them
smoke, studies that were mere anecdotal studies at best, three patients at best, articles, letters that were published that said, you
know, I've happened to notice that cigarette smoking more and lung cancer is more common, maybe they are related, that did
not constitute evidence the same way that expressly designed, well-executed studies of the 1950's brought forth evidence. And
the proof of the pudding, of course, would be the response of contemporaries.
Q. I still lost your definition of evidence. I understand there's a difference in terms of the quality as you indicated of the evidence
before 1950 and after 1950. But, however meager the evidence may be, there was some evidence, be it anecdotal or otherwise,
prior to 1950, wasn't there, Doctor?
A. That's incorrect.
Q. Tell me what evidence means?
MR. GARNICK: I will object, he's already answered the question twice.
MR. EDELL: You tell me what the definition of evidence is then.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: He's talked about meaning, he's talked about various things.
MR. EDELL: Tell me what evidence means.
MR. GARNICK: We can read back the question.
MR. EDELL: You can't answer it because no one knows from that answer what his definition of evidence is. And, if that's his
goal, to avoid telling us what it is, that's fine.
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, if you can clarify it, please do so.
THE WITNESS: Well, evidence can come from a variety of fronts. If one is talking about studies of patients, one needs controls.
And anecdotal impressions of physicians before the 1950's lacked controls and, hence, they might be considered interesting
thoughts or observations; but, because of the lack of controls, they would not be considered evidence as scientists even at the
time demanded.
Similarly, if one looks at experimental work, negative results would not be considered evidence. And almost all of this small
amount of experimental studies that were done in the 1930's and forties were negative. Evidence also requires confirmation.
Confirmation as I know you know is important in science.
So, insofar as someone might have had a suggestion that his experimental work would have been positive, the inability of others
to duplicate this would render initial observation meaningless. As a result, if you were to look at paper after paper after paper as
I have done from peers in the 1940's, assessing everything it is we need to know today, they would say that essentially there is no
reliable evidence to support the idea that we should be fearful of cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer at this point in time.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. In other words you were saying there were no controlled retrospective studies?
A. I'm saying that clinical studies suffered from lack of controls, that experimental studies which were done were essentially
negative.
Q. But I thought you told us earlier today that controls were not employed in the 1940's in retrospective studies. So how could
they have been critical of the fact that a particular study didn't have controls if no one was using controls?
A. The concept of a control was not a new concept. In fact, it goes back for a period of time. And the importance of using
controls in studies was recognized. The fact is that the individuals who published in this study either did not use controls or did
not know the various parameters that would be needed to establish effective controls.
As a result their observations were discounted by the majority of workers in the field. And, of course, this is the situation that
changed in the 1950's when there was a methodological revolution in terms of how to design a study that included proper
controls and how to set up the controls.
Q. So it was possible given the state of art of epidemiology in the forties to employ controls in retrospective studies; is that
correct?
A. No, that's not correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Well, if the state of the art was in the 1940's that we can't use controls in the studies, why would they then be criticizing
epidemiological studies that were conducted without controls?
A. The need for controls was well-recognized. The absence of controls in the studies before 1950 was a vitiating weakness of
virtually every study that purported that there might be a relationship between lung cancer and cigarette smoking. The problem
of the 1940's was not that individuals were insensitive to the need for controls. But they had not yet figured out how to design a
study and to create the types of controls that would control for a whole range of variables that might be important in evaluating
the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
And the paper that turned the tide more than any other was the Doll and Hill paper in 1950 which historians of epidemiology
will point to as the prototype of the retrospective study that we take for granted. There were intellectual breakthroughs in that
paper, that paper was significant for its methodological breakthroughs, not merely from the conclusions from it, it presented a
major turning point in the creation of this new science of clinical epidemiology. Workers of 1945 or 1940 or 1935 may have
recognized the need for controls but did not know how to design such a study to answer those needs until Doll and Hill and
also Wynder and Graham had intellectual breakthroughs and created new methods.
Q. Wynder and Graham published their epidemiological study in what year, sir?
A. It was published in 1950.
Q. When did they conduct it?
A. Well, the study had been conducted, I don't know precisely, the year before.
Q. And in the 1940's who were those who were critical of the retrospective studies that lacked controls, who were the authors
of these criticisms?
A. Well, there were many such authors in my detailed year-by-year assessment of the literature. It was pointed out by many,
many authors who were summarizing the condition and state of knowledge of lung cancer in 1945, 1946, in a review of the field,
etiology is unknown, some would say it's unknowable, and they would say that suggestions about tobacco or other substances
have been made, but the evidence is unimpressive.
That happened many, many times both in the JAMA -- I would have to review the two to speak precisely. But, between Dr.
Churchill's article in JAMA in 1948 and the editorial in JAMA in 1948 that I did cite in the Kotler trial, those authors certainly
pointed out that any claims made about cigarette smoking and lung cancer to that date in their view were unjustified and should
be dismissed.
And finally, and I think this is highly significant, the harshest critics of, the literature before 1950 were those who did the early
studies, Wynder and Graham, Doll and Hill, the authors of these early retrospective studies who were making the methodological
breakthroughs were themselves very critical of the quality of studies that preceded them. They had a very conscious sense of
their place in history, of their place in the evolution of this study, and they recognized that their work was significant not only
for whatever conclusions about the specific issue of lung cancer they might be studying, but they also recognized that they were
starting to create a new science, that they had approached it with tools that previous workers had not employed, and, hence,
they themselves dismissed the work.
Q. I understand that. That's using the retrospectoscope, Doctor. They're looking back at the studies that were conducted a decade
before them.
A. I disagree with you and I believe you have not listened closely to my answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Wynder and Graham criticized those retrospective studies that occurred during the 1940 to 1950 time period prior to the
publication of their 1950 study?
A. I'm saying two things.
Q. Just answer that question, please.
A. I'm saying two things, I would like to explain my thoughts correctly for the record.
Q. I would just like you to answer the question.
A. I would like to explain my opinion for the record. And that is, number one, as I had stated and as I had hoped you had listened
to that, there were many writers in the 1940's who were reviewing the state of medical knowledge who were familiar with the
various clinical observational studies who in the 1940's criticized them and said that conclusions for them were unwarranted.
And, as to specific examples, I did bring to your attention the two articles from the Journal of the American Medical Association
in 1948.
I disagree with you that the investigators writing in 1950 were applying the retrospectoscope, I respectfully disagree with you.
That is not Mr. Edell or Dr. Ludmerer in 1951 applying the retrospectoscope, these were participants in an ongoing scientific
inquiry who realized at the time that what they had done represented a breakthrough and they expressed that, that's primary
data, that is not secondary data or retrospective analysis.
Q. You mean to tell me, if they were criticizing a 1942 study in 1950, that they are not using hindsight to criticize that with this
new-found information that they've generated from this innovative epidemiological study? That's not hindsight, Doctor?
A. They did not need their -- it reinforced the point. Because individuals in 1942 and in 1944 and in 1946 and in 1948 and
in 1950, any year you would choose to select, at that time were unimpressed by any claims that had been made suggesting a
relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. Reinforcing that in my opinion is the observation that in 1950 Doll and
Hill and Wynder and Graham, Levine and the others, recognized that they had done something new and that they had developed
new techniques that had not previously been employed.
Q. And, having recognized those new techniques, they criticized the earlier studies, correct?
A. They did criticize the earlier studies.
Q. What we're talking about is contemporaneous with the earlier studies criticisms of those studies; not a look back, if you
will, over a period of a decade?
A. Well, as I have said four or five times already and as I will say another time now, individuals in 1940, 1942, 1944, any year
you may wish to choose, refused to accept the suggestion that tobacco smoking might be related to lung cancer on the grounds
that there was no evidence, no responsible logic to justify that claim, and that was done at the time.
Q. We have that today, though. Does that mean there is no relationship?
A. You asked me the question were people at the time impressed or unimpressed with the evidence. I replied to your question.
Q. The fact that people are not willing to accept it means that that's no reliable evidence; is that the test?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Well, I have no comment or knowledge, expert knowledge, about the discussion of lung cancer in 1991. I do have information
on what was happening in the 1940's. As I have said several times already and I think very clearly but will be happy to say
again, the issue of the possible relationship of lung cancer and cigarette smoking was referred to by numerous people writing
on this subject at that time, virtually all of whom dismissed the idea on the grounds that there was no evidence to support the
idea and it was contrary to common sense as they perceived it at the time. And we are talking people in 1942 responding to
the state of knowledge in 1942.
Q. Did Dr. Wynder prior to 1950 publish any criticisms of the earlier retrospective studies on cigarette smoking and lung cancer,
yes or no?
A. I don't know.
Q. You didn't come across any?
A. I don't remember any as we sit here today.
Q. Do you recall whether Dr. Graham published any criticisms prior to 1950 with respect to the earlier retrospective studies
conducted in the 1940's?
A. I'm unaware of any as we sit here today. To the best of my recollection at this moment, the first publication by wynder and
Graham was their 1950 study from JAMA.
Q. Who were the epidemiologists in the 1940 who criticized the retrospective studies for their lack of controls; epidemiologists,
sir, please limit your answer to epidemiologists?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to the form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: It's unclear whether you're using the standard of epidemiology today or whether you're talking about
epidemiologists which might be under a different definition, if it was used at all,
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY, INC. back in the 1940's. In other words were these people recognized at the
time as epidemiologists or were these people that we today with present knowledge looking backwards would recognize as
epidemiologists?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. People who were recognized at the time as epidemiologists; at the time, sir, because we don't want to use the retrospectoscope.
A. You had better not.
Q. I will not.
A. I won't let you. It's kind of a silly question you asked because as I've said before the science of clinical epidemiology as it
applies to chronic disease didn't begin until the 1950's.
Q. I understand that. But there were epidemiologists who were conducting epidemiological studies in the 1930's and 1940's and
continued into the 1950's. What I'm asking you is -
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Who are you referring to and what type of studies?
Q. Any type of studies. You mean epidemiology differs as to whether you're studying a chronic disease as opposed to an acute
disease?
A. That's an absolutely fundamental point.
Q. The actual methods and tools you employ are different, you don't use controls in a study of acute disease?
A. The epidemiology of infectious diseases and acute diseases represents different techniques and different intellectual
challenges compared to chronic diseases.
Q. No doubt, but the fundamentals are the same?
A. No, they're not.
Q. In what way are they different, Doctor?
A. Infectious diseases and chronic diseases behave differently.
Q. No, I understand how the diseases behave. What I'm asking you is what are the differences in the fundamentals of
epidemiology in the context of conducting studies for infectious diseases or acute diseases versus chronic diseases?
A. The sophistication of the mathematical tools needed to analyze data to allow inferences about causation to be made in diseases
and -- chronic diseases that behave much differently because of the length of time to develop them, the fact that many factors
can contribute to a chronic disease, problems of bias, problems with confounding, and so forth. A short answer would be that
the epidemiology of chronic disease is a discipline of great mathematical sophistication that was not required to conduct very
good studies in the epidemiology of acute and infectious diseases.
Q. I understand that, Doctor. The sophistication is much greater, but the fundamentals are the same, are they not?
A. Actually they are not.
Q. In what way are they different?
A. Well, as I said before, the diseases behave different.
Q. I understand that. But I'm talking about the
fundamentals of the study, not the diseases. Don't you take a look at one group and compare it to another group, isn't that part
of epidemiology?
A. Well, that's part of epidemiology.
Q. And don't you do the same with respect to chronic diseases and infectious or acute diseases?
A. Well, insofar as you have different groups you look at, I would agree with you, that there are similarities.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. And don't you try to control for bias in epidemiological studies dealing with chronic diseases and in epidemiological studies
dealing with acute or infectious diseases?
A. Acute diseases and chronic diseases involves different biology that requires different techniques of analysis, they don't
behave the same. Experimental approaches that work with acute diseases and acute infectious diseases do not work with chronic
diseases which is one reason there was so much trouble in the 1930's and 1940's attempting to study the chronic diseases. And
that was the significance of the scientific revolution of the 1950's in which new tools were developed, primarily mathematical,
to come to grips with differing biological behavior of the chronic diseases.
Q. what was the question, sir?
A. Why don't you repeat the question.
Q. You don't recall the question?
MR. GARNICK: I don't recall the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What was your understanding of what question you were answering?
A. It was my understanding you were asking me the difference -- if the epidemiology of acute illnesses is the same as that of
chronic illnesses. My reply is no.
Q. That wasn't the question, though, sir.
A. If you would like to ask a different question or if I misunderstood your question, then by all means, please repeat it.
Q. Sure. The question dealt with bias. In epidemiological studies dealing with chronic diseases and infectious diseases, they
both try to keep out bias, don't they?
A. That answer requires an explanation.
Q. Well, do they or don't they? I haven't heard an answer yet, then you can give your explanation. Do they both try to control
for bias?
A. The problem of bias is insignificant in terms of infectious disease, acute disease, it's a profoundly major problem in terms
of chronic disease. Your question is misleading in tone because the nature of the problem of bias is so different in infectious
disease and infectious epidemics; and in chronic disease it is so different to be qualitatively different in terms of the approach
demanded. One cannot equate the science of clinical epidemiology dealing with chronic diseases with the method that was
applied with infectious diseases.
Q. Does that mean that both types of studies attempt to keep out bias albeit differently, albeit one more easily than the other?
A. Well, certainly bias is much more easily kept out of the study of infectious diseases.
Q. Well, I understand that from your long answer. The question is don't both types of studies attempt to rule out bias regardless
of the difficulty in one versus the other?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Well, I would need to review further the epidemiology of acute infectious diseases. But I would reiterate the point that you
were talking qualitatively about two different sciences.
Q. So you don't know, Doctor, is that what you're saying?
A. I'm saying that I would need to recheck certain definitions in terms of that.
Q. That means you don't know as we sit here today?
MR. GARNICK: Let him finish.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I thought he had finished. Did you finish, Doctor?
A. I'm saying that I don't remember precisely. I'm not certain that bias was even a consideration in the acute infectious diseases
so manifest were the infections that resulted.
Q. And there was no attempt in infectious diseases to keep out confounding factors, was there?
A. I would have to reply at this time that I would not be certain and would need to check.
Q. You don't know as we sit here today?
A. I'm saying I don't remember.
Q. Now, getting back to the question originally --
A. But I can tell you as I said before that whatever issues there might have been with bias and epidemics of food poisoning
and things that were readily manifest, the intellectual issues were qualitatively different from those necessary to study chronic
diseases. And I will say for the record that, as we sit here today, it would be appropriate for me to review some of the earlier
aspects of the epidemiology of infectious disease, I acknowledge that.
But I also would say that the epidemiology of chronic disease was a new science that did not exist before, it involved
extraordinary mathematical rigor and sophistication, and that it is completely erroneous to make any pretension that the two
sciences were the same.
Q. Is it fair then to say, Doctor, that the epidemiological studies conducted in the 1940's with respect to cigarette smoking and
lung cancer were done as well as they could have been done given the state of the art at that time?
A. I would say probably so for the reason that I gave. The breakthroughs in clinical epidemiology came in the 1950's. I think
that the people working in the 1940's worked in good conscience with the best available methods and tools and conceptual
framework that they had. They did not have the good fortune of workers in the 1950's who studied the problem as a new science
was being created and with that new tools, concepts, and methods.
Q. Who were reliable epidemiologists in the 1940's who investigated the issue of cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, let me ask you an easier question. Who were reliable investigators who conducted epidemiological studies in the 1940's
looking into the question of cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I would like to stress for the record that your question in my judgment is based on inaccurate premises
because, as I've said before, there was no epidemiology of chronic disease before the 1950's and it would be a mistake to call
those who studied lung cancer in the 1940's to be epidemiologists, even those who might have wrestled with the question of
risk factors.
What you have in the 1940's are a variety of clinicians who are giving their anecdotal experiences or their series of 80 patients
that they've operated on and who are doing the best they can at a time of limited knowledge and information to try to come
up with some ideas as to what causes lung cancer. That was the nature of the work at the time. Its unrigorous, uncontrolled,
impressionistic nature is what made it so unconvincing and unimpressive to peers. It would be an error, it would be your word
and not mine, it would be your word and not those of the time to call them epidemiologists.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I just simply called them reliable investigators.
A. They were investigators --
Q. Reliable investigators. Who were reliable investigators looking into the question of cigarette smoking and lung cancer in
the 1940's?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with that?
MR. GARNICK: I understand reliable evidence and reliable studies. Reliable investigators I don't understand. I don't understand
if it means trustworthy investigators, untrustworthy investigators, or what. It just doesn't make sense to me.
MR. EDELL: Okay.
Q. You would never use the term reliable investigators?
A. It's not a term that I would customarily use.
Q. Then I won't use it. Were there any respected investigators in the 1940's looking into the question of cigarette smoking
and lung cancer?
A. There were a number of clinicians who would relate their individual experiences with lung cancer. They were, for the most
part to my knowledge, considered to be honest and to be considered individuals of high integrity. None of them to my knowledge
were considered particularly eminent in the medical community. The most eminent individuals as I suggested before recognized
that the problem was so difficult, the tools were so lacking, that they put their energies into other questions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
If you were to look at the overall medical quality of those who wrote about -- if you were to look at the individuals who
were writing about causes of lung cancer, whether those advocating the smoking hypothesis, those advocating the air pollution
hypothesis, or the pneumonia hypothesis, you're talking about a tiny handful of investigators in the total medical community
and you are talking about individuals whose scientific stature was generally much less than investigators who were working
on other scientific problems.
Q. Well, wasn't there only a tiny handful of investigators looking into the causation issue of cancer during that time period?
A. Well, as I suggested the total inquiry was small in scope, the total number of investigators was very small. So I would agree
with that. As I said before, most of the people who were working are not people who were considered particularly eminent.
Q. Were any of the people working in the field considered eminent, however you define eminent?
A. Working in what field?
Q. Cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
A. Oh, I don't remember precisely. I do know that the people were considered conscientious, honest, people of integrity. I don't
offhand recall any who were considered to be particular luminaries.
Q. Doctor, in the 1940's who were considered to be eminent epidemiologists, regardless of whether it's in the field studying
chronic diseases or infectious diseases?
A. I'm unable to give you specific names as we sit here today for the reasons that I've already explained. My familiarity at this
moment in time, my recollections are much fresher with regard to the epidemiology of chronic disease. And the whole field
of clinical epidemiology had its beginnings in the late 1940's and late 1950's. Late 1940's was other therapeutics, drug trials.
I thought I would give you that one just to let you know that epidemiology is more than the study of causation. So, since we
don't yet have the science, it's difficult to come up with names of people who are not yet working in that area.
I can tell you that the person whose work gave rise to the science of clinical epidemiology was Ronald Fisher more than any one
single person. Certainly the epidemiology of infectious disease was already an established discipline in medicine. But, aside
from some of the differences and the nature of the science between epidemiology of infections and epidemiology of chronic
disease that we discussed before, I would need to go back and refresh myself in terms of who the leading figures were.
Q. Doctor, were there any other influences on physicians in the 1940's other than the lack of controls in these retrospective
studies and the lack of consistency of the animal studies that led them not to believe a causal relationship existed between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A. I'm not sure I understand what you mean by influences, could you please explain.
Q. Any other factors.
A. Oh, I suspect that there were.
Q. What were they?
A. Well, for one thing, as we've already discussed in the course of these two days, speculation about lung cancer was not
confined to any possible relationship with cigarette smoking. But in the 1940's there were quite a few factors with the same
degree of speculation that were advanced as possible causes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
And one of the truisms in science is that, when you have a lot of possible hypotheses about a certain event, that's really proof
that you don't know what's causing it. So just the very existence of so many conflicting and competing theories, essentially
all of which were speculative, essentially all of which was evidence to critical thinkers that they really did not know what the
cause was. So that would be one example.
Q. Any other examples?
A. I believe there are other examples.
Q. Let's have them.
A. Well, for one thing -- and again this is a challenge to us, and I know you appreciate this, that we have to understand the past
in its own terms. And the amount of cases of lung cancer in the 1930's and the 1940's, especially before World war II, was very
small; though increasing during that period, it was still very small with what it became and what it continued to become. And
one thing that arouses interest of scientists to investigate a particular problem is whether they think it's a problem to begin with.
And a disease that is considered rare as it might have been in 1930 or unusual as in the 1940's is going to attract less attention
than that of any other disease that is considered to be more common. So, if you're looking at the thirties and early forties, the
relative scarcity of lung cancer at that time was certainly a factor that tended to direct the attention of people interested in cancer
into other types of issues. And, indeed, as the incidence of lung cancer later rose, that was one of the factors that got some of
the new workers into the field circa 1950.
Q. So that would all the factors?
A. Well, there are other factors that I can think of.
Q. Try to find them all.
A. Okay. For one thing, even though in the thirties and the forties the number of deaths attributed to cancer cases was rising,
as you know there was significant disagreement during those two decades as to whether the disease really was more frequent
or whether it was just being recognized more frequently.
Insofar as there were investigators who thought -- some of the finest biologists of the period thought that the perceived increase
was apparent, not real, if that's the case, why worry about a problem that you don't have. So that was a point of view.
Q. Were you finished?
A. Actually I can think of something else. A lot of people in the 1940's smoked, you know that, you know the statistics better
than I do, I'm sorry. But smoking was an American habit when two-thirds or 80 percent of the public smoked. The fact that
serious illness was so infrequent in proportion to the number of smokers led many people at that time to doubt that smoking
was responsible for serious illness because, if it were responsible, why didn't everyone who smoked get it. So that point of
view was also advocated.
Q. Any other factors?
A. well, there very well could be. But, as we get toward the end of the day, I think my memory reaches its saturation point and
for the moment those are the ones that I remember at this time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. Did you meet with Dr. Burnham at any point in time?
A. Who?
MR. GARNICK: On smoking and health related issues or just generally?
THE WITNESS: Which Dr. Burnham is it?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. John.
A. What do you mean did I meet with him?
Q. Let's talk about have you ever spoken with him?
A. I know John Burnham, I've known him from many years in medical history circles. I have known for some years that he has
never had any involvement with this case or any issue relating to this case and I have never discussed any of these subjects with
him, I have never discussed the subject of tobacco or lung cancer with him.
Q. How did you become aware of the fact that he had participated in some fashion in this case?
A. At some point in conversation with counsel, it was mentioned to me that they had contacted John Burnham at some point to
have discussions with him. I do not know what those discussions consisted of, what he did, I just know that he had independently
-- that attorneys had had some discussions with him and that is the extent to my knowledge. I know John Burnham, I've known
him for approximately 15 years. I have never discussed any of these matters with him.
Q. Did you review his article dealing with cigarette smoking and health and the state of knowledge at given points in time?
A. I subscribed to the bulletin the History of Medicine where the article appeared. You'll notice that I did include it in the
supplemental bibliography that I gave you. So I think it's apparent that the answer is yes, indeed, I've already indicated to you
that I have seen that article.
Q. Did you agree or disagree with the article?
A. It's been a while since I've seen the article. Did you have any specific points about the article that you might wish to ask?
Q. If there's nothing in your mind that stands out as something you would disagree with him on, that's fine.
A. As we sit here now, not having seen that article for a period of time, there is nothing of a major sort that is gnawing away
at me to say that I disagree with, no.
Q. Okay. On the bottom of page 2, it indicates that you are also expected to testify how this controversy was addressed by
public health officials.
A. Where are we, which exhibit?
Q. Ludmerer 14.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
MR. GARNICK: Is there a question?
MR. EDELL: I just want to direct his attention to it.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you have it, Doctor?
A. Yes.
Q. Tell us, how was this controversy addressed by public health officials?
A. Well, I'm speaking in generalities now because I do not know what questions, if any, will be asked of me in trial, if this
case comes to trial. So I am speaking in a vacuum.
Q. I guess I will have to ask you to tell us what your understanding was of how public health officials addressed the cigarette
smoking and health issue or controversy during the period 1930 to 1964, because I don't know what they're going to ask you
either?
A. Well, certainly in the United States there were no warnings from public health types before 1954. Now, I would have to
check my notes to know when the first official warning from public health officials came.
Q. Feel free.
A. Okay.
Q. They're in front of you.
A. By notes I'm using that generically about the articles from which these notes are taken, books from which they're taken, I
don't have all the information available to me here, all I have is the shorthand.
Q. So you can't answer the question based on the information you have before you?
A. well, I think I'm trying to answer the question in a fair manner, if you'll let me proceed.
Q. I'm just trying to find out if there's something here that will help you provide a more complete and helpful answer, that you
avail yourself of the documentation so that you can do so.
A. I believe that, without referring to the documentation here, I can give you an accurate and concise answer to the question,
recognizing that I have additional materials at the library and at home that possibly might enhance. There was no warning, there
was no mention of the term primary prevention by anyone to my knowledge before 1954. You probably are aware of that. But
the term primary prevention was first used only in 1954 and not before that year; primary prevention, in other words, advising
individuals that, if they smoked less, the risk of lung cancer might decrease, warnings of the primary were made for the first
time in 1954. And I believe that that was done by the American Cancer Society.
It's also my recollection that the term primary prevention did not enter the American Journal of Public health or the public health
literature until 1954. Subsequent to 1954, as we've already discussed in part, there were a number of statements made by official
bodies. In some cases these statements were made by editorial staffs at journals such as the New England Journal of Medicine,
in some cases and I think particularly in 1957 a statement was made by the Public Health Service, Leroy Burney's group.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
And, of course, the culmination of this came with a report of the advisory committee to the Surgeon General which was
conceived, if I'm not mistaken, November of 1962, I'm not precise about the dates, and published in January of 1964.
Q. That's your knowledge concerning public officials' pronouncements or activities in the area of cigarette smoking and health
during the period 1930 to 1964?
A. That is a schematic outline. I can add to that statement that there were no warnings to my knowledge from public health
officials before the early 1950's; indeed, the reverse was said circa 1950 that there is no reason to prohibit cigarette smoking
on public health grounds. That was the view before 1950. So any public health pronouncements that were and, of course, there
were began in the early 1950's.
They came both from government agencies as well as private agencies, there were a number of these, they varied among each
other in terms of the language they used; some were stronger in wording, others were more mild in wording. These culminated
in the United States with the Surgeon General's report. I believe that is a fair and accurate outline of the sequence of events
and interpretations.
By no means would I portray that as anything -- as everything I'm going to say because I don't know what I'm going to be
asked to say. You asked a general question and I gave you the best general response that I believe. I would be glad to answer
any further questions.
Q. I don't want a schematic, Doctor, because I don't know what they're going to ask you at trial either. I want to know what you
know about in terms of what public officials did with respect to the cigarette smoking and health controversy?
A. Well, I believe I gave you an accurate description of actions taken by public health authorities. It was more than a schematic,
but it was a description pointing out that it began in the early 1950's and was absent before then, that warnings against cigarette
smoking and various health hazards came from a variety of groups culminating with the Surgeon General's report during the
period of my knowledge, that they varied from one to another. I would be happy to answer any more specific questions that
you might have.
Q. Is that all you know about the actions of public officials with respect to cigarette smoking and health during the period
1930 to 1964?
A. No.
Q. What else do you know?
A. Well, I'm unable to answer your question because it's too general. You can ask me what I know about medical education,
I've written a book on it and I'm writing another. I wouldn't know where to begin. I'm happy to answer any specific questions
you have, but I wouldn't even know how to begin a lecture at this moment of two minutes before four o'clock.
Q. What does the time have to do with the lecture?
A. This could be nine o'clock in the morning, this could be yesterday --
Q. Sure, we could be in New Jersey, we could be in St. Louis, but we're not, we're here in Washington and it's two minutes
to four and I asked you a question.
A. You asked me a very general question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. That's correct, because I don't know what you're going to say, Doctor. The purpose of the deposition is for me to try to
ascertain what you're going to testify to. Therefore, I don't know what questions he's going to be asking so I have to find out
what you know on the subject matter.
A. I don't know what questions he's going to ask me either. Your question was so general, I gave you the best and most specific
answer I could. It would be the same answer that I would give you at any time of day, any day of the week, any city or
circumstance in which we might meet. I would be happy to answer any question you would have if you could be a little more
specific.
MR. GARNICK: I want to object to it on the same grounds that Mr. Darnell objected to Mr. Carney's questions of a similar
vein, what do you know about the subject. He invited you to ask more probing questions on it.
MR. EDELL I can't justify Mr. Darnell's questions in light of the fact that I wasn't at the particular deposition that you were
referring to. Mr. Darnell may have asked an appropriate question or Mr. Carney may have asked an appropriate question and
Mr. Darnell may have given him an inappropriate response, I don't know. So, if Mr. Darnell made an inappropriate observation
or an inappropriate objection, that's for them to resolve. All I'm trying to do is find out what the witness knows with respect to
how public officials addressed the controversy of cigarette smoking and lung cancer during the time frame 1930 to 1964.
THE WITNESS: I believe I've answered that question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That's fine. But then you told me that you could go on and lecture for what appeared to be a considerable period of time on
the subject, but you didn't want to start it at two minutes to four.
A. No, you're misrepresenting the nature. You asked me a general question and I gave you as concise and precise and detailed
an answer to a general question as I possibly could do. You have asked me many, many specific questions about many, many
specific topics. If you had specific questions about this, I would be happy to answer.
Q. I will do that then. In what way did the public health officials in the United States address the issue of cigarette smoking
and health in the period 1930 to 1940?
A. As I indicated to you, this is not a new answer since I have already stated this three or four times. Public health officials at
that time were concerned with infectious diseases, not cancer or lung cancer, and there were no admonitions against cigarette
smoking for public health reasons, for scientific reasons at that time.
Indeed, as I already told you in answer to your first question, the first specific warnings that it might be a good idea to smoke
less from public health officials were 1954. I don't know how many times I can say the same thing in the same way. The first
suggestions were 1954, meaning that it was not addressed before 1954 which includes the 1930's and 1940's.
Q. I thought you indicated that there were statements made in 1950 by public officials with respect to cigarette smoking and
health. I thought you said that there was a statement in 1950 that the evidence was such that it didn't warrant the prohibition
of cigarette smoking; is that what you testified to and wasn't it 1950?
A. There were statements, state of the art type statements that said -- that's right, there were no prohibitions prior to the early
1950's.
Q. I understand that. But they did address it at a point prior to 1954?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. Yes. The hour is getting late and I realize the distinction you are drawing in that question and I misunderstood you and
apologize. The issue had been considered at least by some knowledgeable people before the early 1950's. The recommendation
as exemplified by the statement of the American Cancer Society in 1948 was that there was no reason to prohibit cigarette
smoking for medical or public health reasons, that's correct.
MR. GARNICK: Marc, it's after four o'clock.
MR. EDELL; We didn't start until like 20 or 25 after nine this morning and I was here at five to nine. So the four o'clock our
hour is not the bewitching hour.
MR. GARNICK: We can go to until 20 after then.
MR. EDELL: You suggested that it's four o'clock and I don't want you to at some later juncture say, well, Mr. Edell, I answered
some of your questions at four o'clock, I told you I was tired and I wasn't thinking clearly.
THE WITNESS: Please rest assured that I will always answer all your questions fairly and with confidence at any hour of the
day under any circumstance. If I feel the need to take a break, I will do so, and it's good take a break now. But please rest assured
that I will not have occasion to question any statement on such reasons.
MR. EDELL: Good.
MR. GARNICK: Let's agree that when we resume we'll go to 4:30.
(Recess)
(The document referred to was marked Ludmerer Exhibit No. 15 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to show you Ludmerer 15. Can you tell us what that is, please?
A. This is a report from the library committee of the Cornell Medical School that appeared with official faculty minutes in 1937.
I do not recall offhand if this is the entire report of the library committee or a portion of the report.
Q. How did you find that?
A. I found this in conjunction with independent research of my own that I've been conducting in the history of medical education
in the United States.
Q. Are the statements in there consistent with your general understanding with regard to journals during that time frame?
A. Yes, they are.
Q. Let me just grab one of your -- let's take a look at the notes on the lung cancer literature from 1930 to 1950, I don't have
the number in front of me, okay?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. I will at some juncture or you will be receiving a typed transcription of these. But, in order for us to maybe better understand
them, I'd like to go over some notations that you've made. For example, on No. 3, there are some initials, what is it, ILL?
A. Yes.
Q. What does that signify?
A. Interlibrary loan.
Q. And on No. 5, it's Spruce St?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And what does that mean?
A. That means Spruce Street Storage.
Q. Number 8, is that MG?
A. Yes.
Q. What does that mean, sir?
A. That means Murray Garnick. That was one of the handful of articles, a list of which you have received, that I uncovered
going through the Index Medicus year by year. The title of the article would be given in English, but it was also indicated in the
Index Medicus that it was published in a foreign language and a foreign publication. And I knew that Mr. Garnick had access
to facilities for translations and I requested that that article be translated and a copy of the translation sent to me.
Q. There are a number of articles in the left-hand column given it looks like a T and a circle. Is that a T?
A. Yes.
Q. What does that signify, sir?
A. I don't know if I did this consistently. But, as I indicated earlier, in going through the Index Medicus, to be confident that I
was comprehensive, I had to look up several entries in the Index Medicus; and they included lung cancer, bronchogenic cancer,
also tobacco. I looked up several different topic entries to get articles.
And I believe that the T was a shorthand that I was making to myself in case I needed to go back to the Index Medicus, that
that article came from articles listed in the Index Medicus under tobacco as opposed to under lung cancer. And it was actually
quite interesting to me as I went through, I was surprised that lung cancer and bronchogenic cancer would in and of itself be
two separate listings. But, in fact, they were, so I had to look under both categories. The T refers to articles that I got under
the tobacco industry.
Perhaps I could also add that, at the time that I was putting together this bibliography, our new library was being built, our
collection was not all together in one place. So some of the articles would be present on the shelves and I could just go to
it, others were in the medical annex, others were in storage at Spruce Street, Spruce Street Storage; they were available upon
request, but you couldn't go there directly, you would get it the next day.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
And there were some articles from journals that our library did not have in its possession and I had to go through interlibrary
loan and those are the ILL. So those various comments just helped me in terms of recalling, if I needed to recall at a later point,
where I might have gotten the article and how I might have come across the citation.
Q. There is also an asterisk in a circle that's placed next to a number of articles. And I see that that is a practice that you've done
in other packets of notes on articles for different time frames. Of what significance is the asterisk?
A. The asterisk was a reminder to myself, a shorthand to myself to indicate in these hundreds and hundreds of articles that, if I
wanted to go back to my notes, some articles would be more important or more significant than others and having an asterisk by
them would help indicate it. For example, No. 5, an article by Miller, American Review of Tuberculosis, I have an asterisk there.
Q. Where is there an asterisk?
A. Right here, No. 5.
Q. Oh. It didn't come out on my copy.
A. You'll see Spruce by that article.
Q. I saw the Spruce, but I didn't see the asterisk.
A. The Spruce is there because we have that in our collection. At the time it was in storage and I had to get it. And the asterisk
is that there were things there that were especially pertinent to the topics. So you'll note in my notes that article stated that it
was unclear in their opinion whether the increase in lung cancer was real or apparent. And they also specified in that article
that the etiology of lung cancer was unknown.
I wrote a quote, many theories have been ascertained to account for the origin of pulmonary cancer, but little is actually known.
That's on page 5 of the article. And I also thought significant in terms of the questions that I was asked to investigate that,
though a number of causes were listed as possible causes in that article, tobacco was not mentioned as one of those causes.
So I thought that those points were pertinent to understanding the literature of 1930. Some articles were not as pertinent. And
the asterisk just was a guideline to me to help refer to articles that might address some issues -- that addressed the issues more
specifically. I would also say that the asterisks were selective and not inclusive of articles that may have had certain points
of view.
Q. What do you mean by that, Doctor?
A. By that I mean that there are many articles that had similar opinions to the one cited in No. 5 that I didn't put an asterisk by.
For example, if you were to look at article No. 6, the Bonner article, from the Journal of the American Medical Association,
the theme of that article was also that the etiology of lung cancer was not known at that time. That article 2 listed a number
of theories that had been advanced as possibilities to explain the rise or perceived rise, but that article 2 did not specifically
mention tobacco as a possibility. So the asterisks were merely a shorthand for selected articles illustrating certain points to
make the notes more manageable in my review of them.
Q. Did you make an assessment or is there a notation in your notes with respect to the -- I don't want to say credibility of the
journal, but the stature in which the particular journal was held during the relevant time period?
A. Those assessments I made, they would not be assessments that I would have specifically annotated on these pages. For
example -- well, that's the answer to your question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
Q. There was I don't want to call it a score sheet, and I'm looking for it now in these many hundreds of pages of paper, but
there was as I recall it a counting, if you will, that was made by you with respect to I think certain articles on a specific subject.
Do you recall that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Can you help me in terms of the maze of documents that we have here in terms of identifying where that is?
A. Offhand I would not be able to tell you where that is. But I can tell you --
Q. Maybe you can tell us what it was.
A. When I began this work as an historian of medicine, I thought it would be instructive as one line of evidence not only to look
at the articles that were being written, the subject matter, what was said, but I also thought it would be instructive to determine
how many articles there were on a given subject.
So I began a preliminary counting of the number of articles dealing with lung cancer, cigarette smoking, I forget exactly what
terms I used, and I stopped. And the reason I stopped was I found that that had already been done for me in one of the secondary
sources, where a graph was published, the year versus the number of articles.
And the graph essentially went like this and then in the early fifties the numbers of articles went straight up, indicating one line
of evidence that something happened in the early 1950's to create a controversy. So I no longer -- I relied on that and I figured
at least there's things I don't have to do, I don't have to count articles myself, it had been done for me.
Q. what was that secondary source?
A. To the best of my recollection, that would have been the Troyner & Markle?
MR. GARNICK: Don't look at me.
THE WITNESS: One of the books listed in the secondary bibliography, but I don't remember which one for sure.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Ludmerer 2?
A. Yes. I really don't remember for sure, but it was one of the --
Q. Maybe you can narrow it down for us a little bit.
A. It was one of the books on the cigarette controversy as opposed to the books on public health or general history of medicine.
It could have been Sobel, it could have been Whelan, it could have been Troyer & Markle, it could have been White, but it
would have been one of those handful of books. But the work that I was setting out to do manually had already been done by
others and I just was content to accept their graph.
Q. Doctor, on --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
A. It's possible it could have been Diehl, Tobacco and Your Health. I really do not remember which of those books it was. It
was one of the books that dealt specifically with the tobacco controversy as opposed to some of the other books in the history
of medicine, public health, American science.
Q. Do you think it was necessary to repeat the process to see whether or not there was some consistency there?
A. Excuse me?
Q. A poor attempt at humor late in the day, pardon me. Take a look at 14, please.
A. What is 14?
Q. That's the report.
A. Okay.
Q. It says, “Dr. Ludmerer is further expected to describe this controversy --
A. What page are you on?
Q. The second page, sir, second to the last line in the first paragraph, “Dr. Ludmerer is further expected to describe this
controversy, including the views of various scientists and scientific organizations and how these views related to one another.”
What scientific organizations are you going to talk about?
A. Well, the primary organizations would include American Cancer Society, National Cancer Institute, the public health
association, I'm blocking out on its precise name --
Q. Public Health Service?
A. No, there's an American public health association and in addition there's the Public Health Service which would be another
pertinent scientific organization. Those would be examples.
Q. What do you know about the view of the American Cancer Society with respect to the controversy during the period 1930
to 1964?
A. Well, I believe that the circumstances relating to the American Cancer Society are very similar to those of other
organizations and they're very consistent with the state of knowledge that has already been discussed this afternoon. Specifically
representatives of the American Cancer Society in the 1930's and 1940's did not have the foggiest idea of what caused cancer in
general, of what caused lung cancer in particular, and they did not know how to go about even trying to answer those questions.
As a result, if you were familiar with the activities of the organization, their emphasis focused not on studying cause but on
diagnosis and treatment. And their definition of prevention at that time is a definition that in the 1950's came to be called
secondary prevention.
The way to control lung cancer in the opinion of the American Cancer Society in the thirties, forties, and early fifties was to
be alerted to the warning symptoms of cancer. If you have those, see your doctor early, have a diagnosis made early, have an
operation done, and with luck you might be cured. Early diagnosis and treatment was the message of the American Cancer
Society for lung cancer and for other cancers in the 1930's, 1940's, and early 1950's.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Antonio CIPOLLONE, individual and as executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685905...
That situation changed as I mentioned already in 1954 when as I recall at this moment the American Cancer Society for the
first time adopted a position of what it began to call primary prevention; that, indeed, instead of approaching lung cancer by
diagnosing it early and doing an operation, it would be prudent to prevent it by decreasing your amount of smoking. So there
was this change in the society's official posture in 1954.
MR. GARNICK: Marc, it's now past 4:30. As agreed we went to 4:30 which I was happy to provide you because we did start
late, but it is tough.
MR. EDELL: Then we'll resolve the further deposition of Dr. Ludmerer I guess with the court.
MR. GARNICK: I think that's right. Our positions are on the record.
MR. EDELL: So then there's no necessity to discuss it any further, I should just make an application? I mean that's fine, I just
don't want to be in a situation -- our local rules require us to discuss it, to meet face to face to discuss it. But, if you say, Marc,
this is it, there's no further need for us to discuss it, I have your direction and I will proceed accordingly.
MR. GARNICK: My opinion on that is that our position is that this is it. But I hate to have this deposition discussion on the
record, this colloquy, and I would invite you before going to court to talk to us about it and it might end up being a very short
discussion, in which case you lose nothing, but I think that would be the proper procedure to follow.
MR. EDELL: Fine. Before we leave let's make sure everything is marked.
(The documents referred to were marked Ludmerer Exhibit Nos. 16 through 18 for identification.)
(Thereupon, at 4:40 p.m., the taking of the instant deposition ceased.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82
