Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Original Image of 1991 WL 11685904 (PDF)
1991 WL 11685904 (D.N.J.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, D. New Jersey.
Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the Estate of Rose D. Cipollone, Plaintiff,
v.
LIGGETT GROUP, INC., a Delaware corporation, Philip Morris, Incorporated, a
Virginia corporation, and Loew's Theaters, Inc., a New York corporation, Defendants.
No. 83-2864 (SA).
March 25, 1991.
(Deposition of Kenneth M. Ludmerer, M.D.)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Jurisdiction: D.N.J.
Name of Expert: Kenneth M. Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances:
On behalf of the Plaintiff, Antonio Cipollone: Marc Z Edell, Esq.
Budd, Larner, Gross, Rosenbaum, Greenberg & Sade
150 John F. Kennedy Parkway, CN 1000
Short Hills, New Jersey 07078-0999.
On behalf of the Defendant, Liggett Group, Inc.: Francis K. Decker Jr., Esq.
Webster & Sheffield
237 Park Avenue
New York, New York 10017.
On behalf of the Defendant, Philip Morris: Murray R. Garnick, Esq.
Peter K. Bleakley, Esq.
Janet L. Johnson, Esq.
Arnold & Porter
1200 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W.
Thurman Arnold Building
Washington, D.C. 20036
and
David K. Hardy, Esq.
William L. Allinder, Esq.
Shook, Hardy & Bacon
One Kansas City Place
1200 Main Street
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Kansas City, Missouri 64105
and
John J. Mulderig, Esq.
Brown & Connery
360 Haddon Avenue
Westmont, New Jersey 08108.
CIVIL ACTION
Deposition of KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., taken on behalf of the Plaintiff, in accordance with the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure, before Jan A. Williams, Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public, at 1200 New Hampshire Avenue,
N.W., 3rd Floor, Washington, D.C., on March 25, 1991, commencing at the hour of 10:20 a.m.
CONTENTS
TABLE
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT NO. ... PAGE NO.
1 ... 25
2 ... 26
3 ... 40
4 ... 60
5 ... 77
6 ... 80
7 ... 65
8 ... 105
9 ... 106
10 ... 107
11 ... 109
12 ... 128
PROCEEDINGS
Whereupon,
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR PLAINTIFF:
BY MR. EDELL
Q. Doctor, my name is Marc Edell, we introduced ourselves before we formally began this proceeding, I'm an attorney and I
represent the plaintiffs in this case. I'm going to ask you some questions here today concerning your general background, your
experience, what you've done in terms of your review of materials in this case, your opinions in this case, and other ancillary
matters. If any of my questions are unclear, you don't understand them, or they just don't make any sense, tell me and I'll try
to rephrase the question, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. If you don't recall a particular fact, please tell us that you don't recall, don't guess; because we're going to presume that, when
you respond to a question, you understood it and you're accurately answering it.
A. (Witness nods head affirmatively.)
Q. you're nodding your head.
A. Yes.
Q. That's another admonition, all of your responses must be verbal. The woman to your left is a certified shorthand reporter, and
whatever you and I and anyone else in this room says will be taken down by her in transcript form; you know about that, right?
A. I do. I'm not an experienced person with deposition. If there are any other rules or guidelines that you feel I should be aware
of, I think it would be helpful for you to review those for me now.
Q. Absolutely. If at any point in time you want to refer to a document, please feel free to do so.
A. Okay.
Q. If at any point in time you want to speak to Mr. Garnick, Mr. Bleakley, or anyone else, please feel free to do so, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. If you have any questions of me and Mr. Garnick says it's okay, ask me the question and I'll be happy to try to clarify whatever
the issue is we're discussing or what I'm attempting to get into, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. If at any point in time you want to take a break for any reason, you don't have to tell us what the reason is, just say I'd like
to take a break and you're out of here, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. Any questions?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Not at the moment.
Q. Okay. Is it Ludmerer, am I pronouncing it correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Doctor, how is it that you became involved in this case?
A. I was contacted by a representative of the Arnold & Porter firm.
Q. And when was that?
A. That would have been November 1990.
Q. And who contacted you?
A. Mr. Garnick.
Q. Had you had any prior contact with Mr. Garnick or anyone from the Arnold & Porter firm?
A. Yes, I had.
Q. And who did you initially have contact with?
A. As I recall my initial contact was also with Mr. Garnick.
Q. And when was that approximately?
A. To my best recollection, that would have been August 1988.
Q. And can you tell us the circumstances under which he contacted you?
A. He contacted me initially by telephone, explained to me that he was with the Arnold & Porter firm, that his firm was interested
in finding someone with unimpeachable historical and medical credentials to undertake a frank, rigorous, meticulous study,
historical study, of the issues of the health hazards of cigarettes and cigarette smoking with particular reference to the question
of lung cancer between 1930 and 1964. And that's what led to our discussions.
Q. Was that in reference to a particular case?
A. No, it was not. It was explained to me that they did not have reference to a particular case, that they were interested in
undertaking such a study, but it was not with regard to a particular case.
Q. Had they advised you that they had spoken with other individuals to perform a similar task?
A. When?
Q. Well, let's talk about August of '88.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. No.
Q. Up until August of '88, had you ever done any research with respect to cigarette smoking and health?
A. Not specifically with regard to that topic.
Q. Had you generally conducted research with respect to cigarette smoking and health?
A. I don't understand what you mean by generally.
Q. That generally flowed from you specifically. You said you didn't specifically do any research with regard to cigarette smoking
and health. Did you do any research that related in any way to cigarette smoking and health prior to your being contacted by
Mr. Garnick in August of '88?
A. Well, all the time I do research using methods that are pertinent to the types of methods I used with regard to smoking and
health. I had not investigated that specific question prior to August 1988.
Q. when you say methods, you're talking about methods of historical analysis?
A. Yes.
Q. So you had done historical analysis with respect to other subjects, but you had not done an historical analysis that related
to cigarette smoking and lung cancer or any other disease; is that correct?
A. I didn't catch the last part of your question.
MR. EDELL: Would you repeat it, please.
THE REPORTER: “Question: So you had done historical analysis with respect to other subjects, but you had not done an
historical analysis that related to cigarette smoking and lung cancer or any other disease; is that correct?”
THE WITNESS: Any other diseases in relation to cigarette smoking, yes.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. All right. Mr. Garnick says we're looking for this person with impeachable --
A. Unimpeachable.
Q. Unimpeachable, I'm sorry, credentials to do this meticulous analysis. What happens next?
A. Well, we discussed the project and I indicated to him the terms with which I would be willing to undertake such a project.
Q. And what were those terms?
A. I indicated to him that I would be willing to investigate the question under the assumption that I proceed in the same fashion
that I do with my own historical scholarship on other topics, that I and only I would be responsible for the nature of the study,
the ways that I would proceed, the questions asked, the methods used, and interpretations drawn.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
I made clear to him that I could not guarantee any answers in advance, though I certainly would share any results or
interpretations that I might have, that I was to be responsible for this work and stand behind the work the same way that I
stand behind any of my published work of which I am very proud. His reply to me was that's exactly what they wanted and
we were in business.
MR. EDELL; Could you just read that back to me please, I just want to make sure I have all the subjects that were covered there.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: I indicated to him that I would be willing to investigate the question under the assumption that I
proceed in the same fashion that I do with my own historical scholarship on other topics, that I and only I would be responsible
for the nature of the study, the ways that I would proceed, the questions asked, the methods used, and interpretations drawn.
I made clear to him that I could not guarantee any answers in advance, though I certainly would share any results or
interpretations that I might have, that I was to be responsible for this work and stand behind the work the same way that I
stand behind any of my published work of which I am very proud. His reply to me was that's exactly what they wanted and
we were in business.”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, when you say responsible for the nature of the study and the way it would proceed, what do you mean?
A. That the approach to investigating the issues would be one that I would determine and that I direct the work.
Q. How is it that different than the methods employed?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: I don't understand the difference of what you're asking.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, you enumerated certain criteria or certain requirements that you gave to Mr. Garnick if you were going to enter into
this arrangement. One of them was that you would have control over the methods used in your study. And I'm trying to find
out the differences between methods used and your statement that you were going to be responsible for the nature of the study
and the way that it would proceed. If there's no difference between the two, that's fine.
A. well, essentially I'm saying that this is a project that I'm responsible for, that the sources used, the interpretations drawn,
are things that I take responsibility for.
Q. Okay. Now, you said that you would be responsible for the questions that were to be asked in conducting this study; is
that correct?
A. Once the terms of the study had been outlined.
Q. And what were the terms of the study as outlined?
A. Well, the scope of the study was to investigate the health hazards of cigarette smoking with particular reference to the issue
of lung cancer and its causation in the time period 1930 to January 1964, which as you know was the date when the report of
the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee was published. So I was given an assignment, but within that assignment it was
my decision as to how to do the study.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Well, what questions was this study supposed to answer? Do you understand the question?
A. It was to investigate the state of medical knowledge on the perceived health hazards of cigarettes, to study the state of medical
knowledge on the cause of lung cancer, and specifically to look at what was perceived to be the state of medical knowledge in
terms of the relationship of cigarette smoking to lung cancer between 1930 and January 1964.
Q. Did you make any inquiry as to why the study was to begin in 1930 and to end in 19647
A. Well, we discussed dates. And I'm glad that you asked that question.
Q. I'm glad I asked it then, thank you.
A. you're welcome. Because one of the important parts of the process of doing historical work is to define the beginnings of a
project and the ends of a project, the standard historical methods to define the scope and time.
And 1930 proved to be a very reasonable starting point, because it was approximately at that time, 1930 as an arbitrary year,
but it was approximately at that time that physicians began to notice lung cancer more frequently than in the past. And January
1964 was a very reasonable stopping point in my judgment because of the appearance that month of the report of the advisory
committee to the Surgeon General.
Q. How did you know that at or about 1930 there was an apparent increase in the incidence of lung cancers?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate your question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sure. You don't understand it?
A. No.
Q. I thought you said that 1930 seemed to be a reasonable date because there was an increase in lung cancer; is that not correct?
A. Physicians began to perceive more lung cancer. Whether there was indeed in reality more cancer was debated.
Q. That's why I used the the word apparent in my prior question. How did you know that, from what prior research had you
determined that 1930 was about the point in time that physicians became aware of this apparent increase in lung cancers?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: Are you talking about when he initiated the study?
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Before you started, when you had this discussion about the time parameters, how did you know that 1930 was about the
point in time that physicians noticed an apparent increase in lung cancers?
A. I've worked in the history of medicine for approximately 20 years, maybe longer. From general reading and general
knowledge, reading secondary sources, I had understood that it was approximately that time that an apparent rise in lung cancer
was seen.
I had read secondary sources that had discussed the subject, though I certainly had not yet begun my own independent inquiry.
And I also indicated to Mr. Garnick that, if I were to find anything in my research that would require a change of dates, I would
certainly relay that to him. But it made good sense to me from general knowledge as an historian of medicine to use that date
as a starting point; and, indeed, as I got into the sources, that impression was confirmed.
Q. What research had you done previously that led you to refer to these secondary sources that in one way or another led you
to believe that 1930 was about the point in time of this apparent increase in lung cancers?
A. Well, conscientious scholars in all fields read. And there have been a number of publications which I had read prior to
contact with Mr. Garnick just as part of my reading as an historian of medicine, secondary sources, books, articles, that dealt
with the history of cancer, there had been articles on the history of lung cancer; and, just as part of my general reading to keep
up with the literature, I had encountered these, not as part of any specifically designed research project, but just keeping up
to date with the field.
Q. And did this general knowledge with respect to the increase of apparent -- I'm sorry, let me rephrase it.
Does this knowledge relating to the apparent increase in the incidence of lung cancer relate also to information pertaining to
cigarette smoking?
A. Could you please read back the question.
Q. I'll try to rephrase it if you don't understand it or if it doesn't make sense maybe is a better way to put it. Did the secondary
sources that you're referring to make reference to the increased incidence of lung cancer being related to cigarette smoking
in the 1930's?
A. No, to the best of my recollection.
Q. Did you do any preliminary work to determine whether 1930 was the appropriate date to use?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And when did you do that preliminary work?
A. Well, that preliminary work was part of the initial work that I did in response to having been contacted. So that would have
been early in the project, August, September 1988.
Q. What did you do specifically?
A. I proceeded on a number of fronts. I began by doing a systematic review of secondary literature pertaining to the topic, all
of which confirmed the reasonableness of 1930 as a starting point. I did some preliminary forays into the primary literature,
published articles of the time which again confirmed the reasonableness of 1930. And I also read Dr. Harris' expert report and
the sources that he cited which also indicated the reasonableness of 1930 as a beginning point.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. What about 1930 made it a reasonable point in time to begin your research?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: I believe I've answered the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Answer it again, please.
A. Could you read back the question, please.
THE REPORTER:. “Question: What about 1930 made it a reasonable point in time to begin your research?”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That is again in the context of your earlier review as distinguished from your earlier statement concerning your general
understanding from being a scholar in the history of the field of medicine.
A. Well, as I said before, before 1930 cancer of the lung was considered to be a very rare disease. And it was approximately
1930 that there was an apparent increase in the incidence of that disease and, hence, the amount of published literature began
on the subject of lung cancer and all aspects of lung cancer, not just hypotheses of cause, but just the whole natural history of
lung cancer began to increase in much greater frequency, there was much more material to look at after than before.
Q. Did any of the material that you reviewed in your preliminary work suggest a relationship between cigarette smoking and
this increased incidence of lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you repeat the question, please.
THE REPORTER: “Question: Did any of the material that you reviewed in your preliminary work suggest a relationship
between cigarette smoking and this increased incidence of lung cancer?”
THE WITNESS: What period of time?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. 1930.
A. No, not to the best of my recollection.
Q. Now, you said you made a systematic review of secondary sources; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. How did you go about conducting a systematic review?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Well, many of the sources I was already familiar with from general knowledge, sources in the history of cancer and the
history of the controversy over cigarette smoking. There were other types of topics that were pertinent, public health, a number
of topics that are important in giving the context of lung cancer.
In addition to that, I did bibliographic searches in the library to come up with major secondary sources that would pertain
to a context to understand the controversy. And the sources themselves would sometimes be helpful in the context of having
additional sources that would be pertinent to look up. So, through those various methods, I developed my bibliography of
secondary sources.
Q. And this was all part of your preliminary review?
A. Well, it was an assignment task that took a considerable length of time, but it was one of the first things that I did in this
project.
Q. Well, what I'm trying to find out, Doctor, is what you did basically. When I say a preliminary review, whether you did a -- I
don't want to call it a pilot study or an initial sampling, however you want to describe it, did you do something right off the bat
to see where you were going, whether this 1930 was a reasonalbe date or not; and, if so, what it was. And, if you're telling me
that the systematic research that you did with respect to secondary sources was all done as part of this preliminary study, fine,
that's your testimony. I'm just trying to find out whether it was or wasn't done in the context of this preliminary review.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you restate the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What don't you understand about the question, Doctor?
A. I'd like the question to be restated.
Q. Just because Mr. Garnick says objection to the form doesn't mean that the form is improper just for your edification.
A. I understand that. It was a fairly long-winded question and I'd like to have it read.
Q. I'll rephrase it. You told us that you did a preliminary review, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You told us that part of the preliminary review was a systematic review of secondary sources?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you went ahead and described the review of secondary sources, okay?
A. All of which confirmed the reasonableness of 1930 as a starting point, to answer your question.
Q. And all I'm trying to do is find out whether that systematic review that you referred to of these secondary sources was done
as part of your preliminary review, yes or no?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. It was one of the first steps that I took and it helped confirm that 1930 was an appropriate beginnig.
Q. Was it part of your preliminary review, sir, yes or no?
A. It was the first stage of the research.
Q. What does that mean, the first stage of the research?
A. It was what I did first.
Q. Well, you already indicated that there was a preliminary review that was made.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did you not say that earlier?
A. In going through the sources, it became clear very early that 1930 was a reasonable starting point. The first thing that I did
as I told you was to begin by reviewing the secondary sources, and it was clear that 1930 was a convenient starting point, I
don't see how I can say that any more clearly than I have.
Q. Maybe it's the way that I ask the questions. Did you review all of the secondary sources that you described before you came
to this conclusion that 1930 was a reasonable point in time to begin the research?
A. It became clear to me early on in the review of the secondary sources that 1930 was a very logical beginning point.
Q. All right.
A. Now, my mind was open, but everything that I read subsequently merely confirmed that.
Q. Okay. And you were not given any reading materials or bibliographies or publications or references by Mr. Garnick or
anyone else from his office, is that correct, prior to your beginning this preliminary review?
A. That's correct. As I indicated one of the criteria that I had or conditions perhaps I should say that I had would be that I would
generate my bibliography, decide what was important to read and not to read, so this was investigator initiated.
Q. Prior to your doing this systematic review of secondary sources, did you read Dr. Harris' reports?
A. No.
Q. At what point in your review did you go over Dr. Harris' reports?
MR. GARNICK: Marc, could you identify the specific reports you're talking about.
MR. EDELL: I could mark it if you like.
Why don't we make this Ludmerer 1.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 1 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Ludmerer 1 is Dr. Harris' August 1, 1985, report with your handwritten notes on it, correct, Doctor?
A. Yes.
Q. That's the original that you were kind enough to provide to me?
A. That's correct.
Q. At what point in your systematic review did you take a look at Dr. Harris' report that we marked as Ludmerer 1?
A. I undertook that after reading the various secondary sources indicated on my bibliography of secondary sources.
Q. All right. Let's just make sure we understand secondary sources and what we're talking about.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 2 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. We have Ludmerer 2 which is a document entitled Bibliography of Secondary Sources, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. November 1988?
A. Yes.
Q. Are these the secondary sources that you were referring to previously?
A. That is correct.
Q. Were there any other secondary sources that you referred to in this systematic review of secondary sources?
A. At what point in time?
Q. Well, during your initial review, let's put it that way.
A. Well, as I indicated the first step that I took after agreeing to undertake the project was to generate a list of pertinent secondary
sources which is Item No. 2. I reviewed them all, that took two or three months. And, as I indicated before, early on in reviewing
those sources, it became very clear that 1930 was a reasonable starting point. As I reviewed more sources, that opinion was
confirmed. And it was upon completing my reading and review of this entire list that I moved to the next step which was to
read Dr. Harris' report and his sources.
Q. Did you do any computer search for these materials or was it a manual search?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. What materials?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. The bibliography of secondary sources.
A. I don't remember. I might have done a computer search, but I just don't remember for sure.
Q. Was it your practice in August through November of '88 to employ a computer to do searches, literature searches?
A. I would sometimes use computers for literature searches, but that would depend upon the topic and it would depend upon
the time frame.
Q. Okay. What subject matters did you research in compiling this bibliography of secondary sources?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean subject matters?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, you went to the library, right?
A. Yes.
Q. What did you do, did you go to a card catalog, did you go to the stacks, did you go to a librarian, what did you do?
A. well, I certainly went to the card catalog.
Q. And what did you look under?
A. Well, I looked under various topics that were pertinent to understanding the issue of the health hazards of cigarette smoking
and the issue of lung cancer. And I think that the types of topics are indicated from the titles of the bibliography.
There are studies in here, general histories of medicine, to give background on some of the important works in that area, there
are published histories of ideas of cancer and cancer causation that are included here, there are histories of chronic disease that
are included in here, there are histories of public health movement in the 20th century that are included in here.
There have been quite a few independent studies of the cigarette controversy and there are a couple of dozen of those studies
that are indicated on here. And there are other topics as well, but this gives an idea of the types of topics that a responsible
historian would be familiar with to have a context to undertake this project.
Q. I think my question wasn't clear, Doctor. I want to know what topics you researched when you went to the card catalog,
what did you go to first?
A. I believe I just answered that.
Q. Well, I don't think you did with all due respect. I'd like to know, when you went to the library that very first day, what
topic did you look at first?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
Doctor, if you have anything to add, please add it.
THE WITNESS: I don't have anything to add.
MR. EDELL: You want to read back his response and see if we can identify what topic he looked at first.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: Well, I looked under various topics that were pertinent to understanding the issue of the health
hazards of cigarette smoking and the issue of lung cancer. And I think that the types of topics are indicated from the titles of
the bibliography.
There are studies in here, general histories of medicine, to give background on some of the important works in that area, there
are published histories of ideas of cancer and cancer causation that are included here, there are histories of chronic disease that
are included in here, there are histories of public health movement in the 20th century that are included in here.
There have been quite a few independent studies of the cigarette controversy and there are a couple of dozen of those studies
that are indicated on here. And there are other topics as well, but this gives an idea of the types of topics that a responsible
historian would be familiar with to have a context to undertake this project.”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Can you answer the question, Doctor, what topic did you look at first?
A. Of those various topics, which one did I look at first, is that the question?
Q. You don't understand the question? When you went to the library that very first day to start your initial research, your
systematic research of independent topics, what did you go to first?
A. The first thing I did was generate a bibliography before exploring any topic.
Q. And how did you go about generating a bibliography before going to the library?
A. I believe I already answered that. Many of the sources I was already familiar with.
Q. Which one of these sources on Ludmerer 2 were you already familiar with?
A. Well, for example, I was familiar with --
Q. I don't want an example, I want you to go through every one of them you were familiar with, not an example, every one
of them.
A. Okay. we'll do that. Ackerknecht, A Short History of Medicine; Allen, Life Sciences in the Twentieth Century; Burnham,
Will Medical History Join the American Mainstream; Castiglioni, A History of Medicine; Coleman, Biology in the Nineteenth
Century; Cowen, Medicine and Health in New Jersey; Pee, Disease and Discovery; Grob, The Social History of Medicine and
Disease; Harden, Inventing the NIH; Hudson, Disease and Its Control; Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics; Kuhn, The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions; Holmes, Claude Bernard and Animal Chemistry; Leavitt, Sickness and Health in America; Lifton,
The Nazi Doctors; Ludmerer, Genetics and American Society; Ludmerer, Learning to Heal; Ludmerer, The Medical Schools of
New York and the National Enterprise of Biomedical Research; Ludmerer, Methodological Issues in the History of Medicine:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Achievements and Challenges; Major, A History of Medicine; Numbers, The Maturation of American Science; Patterson, The
Dread Disease; Proctor, Racial Hygiene; Rather, The Genesis of Cancer; Retting, Cancer Crusade; Reverby and Rosner, Health
Care in America; Robinson, The Story of Medicine; Rosen, A History of Public Health; Rosen, Preventive Medicine in the
United States; Rosenkrantz, Public Health and the State; Ross, Crusade: The Official History of the American Cancer Society;
Shryock, The Development of Modern Medicine; Sigerist, Civilization and Disease; Sigerist, The Great Doctors; Singer, A
Short History of Medicine; Stern, Social Factors in Medical Progress; Stewart, Tragedies from Drug Therapies; Strickland,
Politics, Science, and Dread Disease; Yankaver, The American Journal of Public Health, 1957 to 1973.
Q. So, prior to going to the library, you had already put together a bibliography of those secondary sources that you just identified
for us; is that correct?
A. I was familiar with those sources already and began my bibliography with them.
Q. Did you put together a bibliography before you went to the library?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. You mean physically?
MR. EDELL: As opposed to mentally?
MR. GARNICK: As opposed to mentally.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. We'll do it both ways. At any point did you put together a bibliography either mentally or physically?
A. Of course I put together a bibliography, the final result which is here.
Q. I was talking about before you went to the library. Remember when we were talking about before you went to the library,
Doctor? You said you put together a bibliography before you went to the library. And I'm trying to find out what was on that.
bibliography before you went to the library, whether it was a mental bibliography or a physical bibliography.
MR. GARNICK: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think the best way to answer your question is to describe the process. As the assignment was given to
me, it was clear to me from my general reading on the history of medicine that there were certain sources that I should consult.
In addition I needed to do a search in the library to discover if there were other sources that I should consult. And I did both.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, did you put together a bibliography before you went to the library the first time to do research with respect to this
specific project, did you put together a bibliography in your mind, on a piece of paper, on a personal computer, in a big computer,
did you put it on tissue paper, did you put it anyplace, Doctor?
A. well, that's a creative way of asking the question and I compliment you for that. I believe I've answered that already, that I
had mentally knowledge of sources that would be an appropriate starting point. I started with those sources and I increased the
bibliography as I learned more about the subject, both by reading on those sources and by going to the library and searching
through the reference list.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. So, before you went to the reference list at the library, you went through all of these secondary sources that we've identified
as your having prior knowledge of before you went to that library on the first day?
A. Yeah. you're asking details and minutiae of the project that very frankly I don't remember for certain. I can tell you with all
frankness that, as an historian of medicine, I knew there were certain sources that were pertinent to the subject to be addressed.
Some of those I had at home in my personal library. I also knew that I had to be systematic to go to the library to find additional
sources or to make sure that there were no major oversights.
I also knew that by reading sources I might get ideas into other sources that would be pertinent to read. But exactly in what order
did I read one book and then go to the library, did I read three books and go to the library, you're asking a level of detail that is
irrelevant in my judgment to the conduct of the project in terms of any substantive issue and very candidly I just don't remember.
Q. You don't recall?
A. That's what I just said.
Q. Okay. Now, tell us about the topics that you went to in the card catalog?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
MR. EDELL: He didn't tell us one topic, not one.
MR. GARNICK: He gave you many topics.
MR. EDELL: He didn't give us any topic that he went to and looked at on that very first day, not one.
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, if you could answer the question, please do.
THE WITNESS: As I've already indicated several times and will continue to indicate should you have any desire to ask the
question again, topics that I considered in this subject included important sources in the history of medicine, the history of
ideas of cancer causation, the history of public health, general histories of how scientific ideas evolve, histories of the smoking
controversy. Those were the topics that I investigated both in my home library and in the libraries at the medical school and
university.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So, when you went to the library, you looked in the card catalog for the history of public health in the United States, that
was the topic that you looked at, and the history of cigarette smoking and health, that was another topic?
A. That would be two examples, yes.
Q. And there were no other topics other than those that you've enumerated for us that you looked at; is that correct?
A. Well, I think I just gave you five or six.
Q. I want you to give us all of them.
A. Well, the major ones were the five or six that I gave already, general histories of medicine, histories of cancer, histories of
public health, histories of the smoking controversy, discussions of research funding, the scientific establishment in the United
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
States, that's a topic that I saw that had previously escaped my mind, histories of the nature of scientific inquiry and how ideas
lead to another, how medical knowledge evolves, these are the types of topics.
Q. Any other topics, Doctor?
A. Yes, I do see here that I had done some research in terms of the proper use of science which included forays into the history
of eugenics and into the history of biology in Nazi Germany.
Q. And what library did you use? You told us you used your personal library, but what card catalog did you refer to when
you went to the library?
A. Well, at Washington University we have both a medical school library and a university library in the Faculty of Arts and
Sciences and I used both. The university library is computerized for more recent years and it is possible, though I don't remember
with certainty since this was three years ago, that I used the computer search in addition to the card catalogs.
Q. Now, did you make any notes of your review of these secondary materials that are referred to on Ludmerer 2 for identification?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And can you identify those notes for us?
A. You have them somewhere in one of those piles.
Q. Let's make sure we know what we're talking about here. I think that this is the one, I just want to make sure. As soon as you
tell me whether this is it or not, we will mark it and then continue.
A. Yes, this is it. For your assistance I wrote on the bottom Bibliography of Secondary Sources.
Q. Thank you very much.
A. you're welcome.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 3 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Now, when did you prepare those notes?
A. As I already indicated, these notes were prepared August, September, October, November 1988.
Q. And what do these notes represent?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by represent?
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. In other words do they represent particular pieces of information that you thought were pertinent, all the information that
you thought was pertinent, the most salient points on different subjects, what were you taking notes of?
A. Without going through every page, I would say as a generalization they represent the more salient points from the sources
that I had read.
Q. And the order of the notes, is that the order in which you reviewed the secondary sources?
A. I don't remember for sure, I can't say with absolute certainty, but I would say it is likely that it is in approximate order.
Q. Was there any particular reason why you reviewed the secondary sources in the order in which they appear in the notes?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: He just said he didn't know if they accurately reflected the order in which he looked at the sources.
MR. EDELL: Well, he said to the best of his recollection he thinks that it's --
MR. GARNICK: That it's likely.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Will you answer the question please, sir.
A. Could you please restate the question.
MR. EDELL: Could you please read it back to the witness.
THE REPORTER: “Question: Was there any particular reason why you reviewed the secondary sources in the order in which
they appear in the notes?”
THE WITNESS: As I said before, I'm not absolutely certain that the order that the sources appear in the notes are the order in
which I read the sources. But I can tell you that there was reason to the order that I read the sources.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And what was that reason to the order in which you reviewed these sources?
A. Chance and convenience.
Q. Are those scientific or historical words?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What do you mean by chance, Doctor?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. By chance, if I would go to the library, a book may or may not be in the library, it might be checked out. Obviously a book
that was checked out would be one that I would get to later than one that would be on the shelf at the time that I went to it.
Q. Convenience being those books which were most readily accessible to you?
A. Yes, either by being on the shelf at the time, not having to go through interlibrary loan, or being in my own personal collection
so I could read at night at home rather than have to leave and go to the library.
Q. But there was no formal historical protocol that you used in reviewing these secondary sources; is that correct?
A. No, that's not correct.
Q. All right. Can you tell us what protocol you used?
A. I would like to distinguish between the issue of doing a thorough representative systematic study of the secondary sources
which would be an important part of historical protocol and the separate issue that you raise of the order of which they were
done. It was important in my judgment as an historian of medicine to do a review of these sources. It was not important if I read
book A before book B as long as I was certain to read both and to be objective in my analysis of both book A and book B.
Q. All right. After you reviewed the secondary sources and prepared the notes that appear in Ludmerer 3, you said that you
reviewed Dr. Harris' report that we have marked as Ludmerer 1; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. During the course of your review of the report, you prepared various notes pertaining to that report? Again we're referring
to Ludmerer 1.
A. Excuse me. what do you mean by preparing various notes?
Q. Well, did you make notes as you reviewed Dr. Harris' report which we've marked as Ludmerer 1?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Are all of the notes that appear on Ludmerer 1 for identification notes that you made during your first review of Dr. Harris'
report?
A. What do you mean by my first review?
Q. When you first reviewed Dr. Harris' report, when you first went over it after you finished your research, your systematic
research.
A. After I finished the secondary sources?
Q. That's correct. You told us you went to Dr. Harris' report which we've marked as Ludmerer 1?
A. Yes.
Q. And you reviewed it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Yes, I did.
Q. During the course of that review, did you prepare those notes which appear on Ludmerer 1?
A. You mean the notes on the pages?
Q. That's correct.
A. During the course of my review, I did prepare those notes. But, in the process of reviewing this, I looked at it on more than
one occasion; not all notes were written on the same day.
Excuse me just a moment, I'd like to stretch for a second and I'll be right back.
(Recess.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, did you review any other information prepared by Dr. Harris after you reviewed the secondary sources but before
you began your review of the primary sources that you reviewed in this case?
A. Before answering that question, may I make an addition to an answer to a previous question that you asked?
Q. You certainly may.
A. You asked me what types of topics I considered in reviewing the secondary literature.
Q. No. I didn't ask you that, I asked you specifically what topics you did consider and research.
A. Okay. During the break it occurred to me that there were additional topics that should be added to the list. And my memory
is not complete on what I did three years ago so I can't be certain that I remember every topic, but two others did come to mind.
One, I looked at sources that dealt with historiographic issues; in other words, the proper procedures of doing historical study.
And, secondly, I looked at sources that dealt with the history of American science, particularly American biomedical science.
Q. Are there any secondary sources that are reflected on Ludmerer 2 for identification that deal specifically with the proper
procedures to employ in making sufficient an historical analysis?
A. Yes, there are.
Q. And what are those?
A. Burnham, Will American History join the American Mainstream; Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions; Ludmerer,
Methodological Issues in the History of Medicine: Achievements and Challenges; Numbers and Warner, The Maturation of
American Science, I'm not certain if that dealt specifically with methodological issues or American science or both.
There may be others on this list, those are the ones that on my cursory overview immediately come to mind. I would point out
that one of those references is an article that I myself wrote. So my reading on methodological issues is actually much larger
than the sources represented on this bibliography itself.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Doctor, take your time, I want you to not make a cursory review of this bibliography, I want you to take your time, review
it, and tell us whether any of these secondary sources are sources on the proper procedures to employ in making this historical
analysis of medical issues, if you will.
A. Burnham, Will Medical History Join the American Mainstream, I believe I mentioned that.
Q. Right.
A. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
Q. You mentioned that.
A. Ludmerer, Methodological Issues in the History of Medicine: Achievements and Challenges.
Q. You mentioned that.
A. One of the Shimkin sources, I don't remember which one, though not designed primarily as a discussion of methodological
issues, it does have appropriate words of wisdom that historians would be well-advised to follow. And, as I said before, I do
not remember whether Numbers and Warner, to what degree their study deals with methodological issues, to what degree the
maturation of American science, or to what degree some combination of both. So, in terms of sources on this list, I believe that
would be accurate. As I indicated my reading on that subject has been much wider and for a long period of time as represented
by the fact that I, in fact, wrote on that subject.
Q. Are there any other sources that you consider to be authoritative sources on the procedures, the proper procedures to employ
in conducting the historical analysis on medical issues?
A. Well, there are many such sources.
Q. Tell me which ones you consider to be authoritative?
A. Well, there are a number, it really has been awhile since I've looked at those. And, as I sit here right now, I don't remember
exact names and titles.
Q. Give me the authors.
A. Pardon?
Q. Give me authors.
A. George Rosen has written on the topic, Cronbie has written on the topic.
Q. Georgia Rosen, what's the next one, I'm sorry?
A. Cronbie, C R O N B I E, has written on the topic. Those are two names. Without going back to my notes and my library, it
has been awhile since I looked at those sources and I just don't remember as I sit here right now.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. You don't remember the names of any specific individuals other than Rosen and Cronbie in addition to the people that you've
identified who you consider to be authoritative writers on the subject of the methods that should be employed in conducting
an historical analysis of medical issues?
A. Well, there are many who have written on the subject. It's been approximately three years since I've looked at those and I
am concerned about getting names confused.
Q. Well, I thought this was the body of literature that you're familiar with generally in terms of what you do on a day-to-day
basis; is that not correct, Doctor?
A. Absolutely.
Q. So all I'm asking you is the names of those people whom you consider to be people of some authority on the issue.
A. Well, you must distinguish between --
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: -- recalling the general principles, conclusions, and procedures and being able to generate a specific citation
bibliography off-the-cuff of materials looked at.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I don't want a citation bibliography, Doctor, give me the names of the people. You don't have to tell me what article they
wrote or what book they wrote or where it appears or when it appeared, just the names of the people.
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
Doctor, if you can answer the question more fully, please do so.
THE WITNESS: With the understanding that I would not want to swear to my memory and I've been concerned about answering
your questions accurately and precisely and not loosely, with that understanding, Holmes, Brieger, Bylebyl.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Maybe you could spell it for the court reporter.
A. Holmes, HOLMES; Brieger, BRIEGER; Bylebyl, BYLEBYL; Stevenson, STEVENSON; Wilson, WILSON; Numbers,
NUMBERS; Leavitt, LE
AVITT, Rosner, ROSNER; and I could go on, but these are examples of individuals whose work I have read who deal with
historiographic issues. As I have mentioned, it's not been recently that I have read those and I am unable at this time to give
you exact citations and I can also tell you that it is very likely that there are many, many more that I've read.
Q. Are there any courses that teach these historiographical issues?
A. Historiographic, HISTORIOGRAPHIC.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Are there any courses that teach historiographic procedures?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. Anywhere?
THE WITNESS: ‘What do you mean?
BY MR. EDELL;
Q. You don't understand what I mean?
A. No.
Q. What does historiographic mean, sir?
A. Well, we've defined the term, the techniques of doing history. But your question is unclear and I would appreciate your
clarifying it.
Q. Are there courses that are offered at any teaching institute that you're aware of?
A. At any teaching institute?
Q. That's right.
A. All right. You have clarified the question, it was ambiguous before.
Q. I'm glad.
A. Yes, there are.
Q. Can you tell us where those courses are taught, who teaches those courses?
A. Gladly.
Q. Thank you.
A. These are generally courses that are given as part of study of history, history majors and undergraduates will take lecture or
seminar courses, and certainly that is part of the graduate training of those who receive graduate degrees in history. In addition
to taking courses in specific subject areas, courses are taken in terms of methods and procedures of doing the field.
I would point out to you that this is analogous to graduate work in most fields, certainly the fields I'm aware of, insofar as, when
a person does a Ph.D. in a given discipline, there are usually courses on methods as well as courses on the subject matter.
In addition to formal instruction, there is also a certain amount of informal preparation and instruction that those trained in the
rigor of historical analysis undergo, seminars, critical discussions with colleagues, going to meetings, presenting your findings,
having the findings analyzed, debated, critiqued. There is a certain lesson in rigor that one acquires going through the informal
process as well as the formal courses. And, indeed, perhaps the informal is even more important than the formal courses.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Well, let's restrict ourselves then to the formal courses. Have you ever taught such a course?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Where and when?
A. I have participated in teaching of historical techniques in seminars at Georgetown University sometime in the mid-1980's.
When I did my fellowship at Harvard University, I was involved as I remember with some instruction at that level. I can tell
you that I certainly discuss historical methods in the courses that I teach in the history department at Washington University
and, indeed, I've been asked to write about the subject.
Q. The seminar that you just discussed in Georgetown in the mid-eighties, can you give us some more specifics, what was the
specific topic, where was it given, to whom was it given, how much did you participate, what did you do?
A. My recollection on that is not as precise as my recollection on some of the other issues you have asked me since I really
hadn't thought about that for years until now. That would have been the mid-1980's, it was a summer program sponsored by
the medical school, the students were medical students interested in medical humanities, the course itself went on for a couple
of months or so, the program I should say.
My recollection is that I was a visitor for somewhere between a few days and a week in that particular instance. And my
recollection is that I did that for two summers, but again that's a recollection as I sit here right now.
Q. And you specifically gave instruction with respect to historiographic procedures?
A. That was part of what I did, yes.
Q. Well, was that the basic area that you covered or was it related in some way?
A. I covered both subject matter and approach.
Q. What subject matter were you talking about?
A. Medical education.
Q. Well, what I'm trying to do is find out whether or not you had specific discussion, whether there was a specific discussion
with respect to the historiographic procedures to be employed in conducting studies?
A. I believe I answered that yes.
Q. And what course material did you hand out to the students on that issue?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did you give them a reading list on the subject, did you give them your own outline, what did you do, if anything?
A. My recollection is that was primarily discussion, I do not remember if there was a reading list or not, I don't remember.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Doctor, what I'm trying to find out is whether or not you specifically taught a course on historiographic procedures or whether
or not you just discussed historiographic procedures tangential to your discussion on the history of medical education in the
United States?
A. As I already answered, the two were integrated. As we discussed medical education, an important aspect of the discussion
was how one approaches history, what sources one uses, what conclusions can be drawn. But, now that you mention it, I
remember that I was asked specifically to give a course on historiographic techniques by the American Association for the
History of Medicine.
Q. And when was that?
A. That was May 1988.
Q. And where was that given?
A. Where?
Q. Where.
A. New Orleans.
Q. Was it a one-day talk, was it a seminar?
A. I don't remember for sure, it was either a one-or two-day course.
Q. Did you have any handouts for the people who came to listen to you?
A. I don't remember.
Q. Did you have any prepared notes?
A. I had at that time because I was the principal speaker and discussant..
Q. Do you know whether you still have the notes?
A. No, I don't.
Q. No, you don't have the notes or you don't know whether you have them?
A. I don't know whether I have the notes.
Q. Was it your practice to retain notes from lectures that you've given?
A. Ordinarily, yes, I hope I have the notes. I've moved twice since that time and some things have been lost. I hope I have
the notes, but I don't know if I do.
Q. Was there any transcription made of this talk that you gave?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. To the best of my recollection, there was not.
Q. Were there any other courses or seminars that you taught with respect to historiographic procedures alone as opposed to
tangential to your discussion on some other issue?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Could you please repeat that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sure. I'm not trying to make it very difficult, Doctor. It's my understanding from your testimony that historiographic
procedures are taught in relationship to substantive issues or subjects, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Are historiographic procedures also taught by themselves?
A. They can be.
Q. Are there courses that are offered in that regard?
A. Yes, there are, I've taken such courses.
Q. Have you ever taught such courses?
A. I have never taught a course exclusively devoted to historiographic techniques. I have taught historiographic techniques and
incorporated those as integral parts of other historical seminars that I have offered. And, as I have mentioned, I have been asked
to speak on this subject and write on this subject.
Q. Have you ever written a paper on this subject?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. The one that you've identified in your secondary sources?
A. That is correct.
Q. Any other papers?
A. That is the -- let me think. Do you have a copy of my CV?
Q. Sure. Are we working from the revised CV?
MR. GARNICK: I gave him a copy.
MR. EDELL: Why don't we mark this as Ludmerer 4.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 4 for identification.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
THE WITNESS: Yes, there are other papers.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Can we identify them?
A. Writing the History of Hospitals, Bulletin of the History of Medicine, discusses ways and approaches to the proper writing
of hospital histories. But I do think it would be useful to point out the relative importance of the paper for the Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society which was a major paper in a journal of paramount importance in which I was asked to be
the official representative of the history of medicine on methodological issues. So I would wish to give greater emphasis to the
importance of that paper than to other writings that I might have done.
Q. I'm not sure I understand, greater importance because you worked harder, because it's more accurate, it's more up to date,
it's more complete?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Why would you give it greater importance?
A. A more important paper in view of my being asked to be an official representative of the history of medicine on this very
important topic by arguably the country's most important scholarly organization, the American Philosophical Society, and asked
to go into both a great deal of depth and breadth. It was asked to be an important major piece in an official capacity.
Q. Has that been published?
A. Yes, it has.
Q. Is the citation on your revised CV?
A. That is correct.
Q. Where is that, where is the citation?
A. Here we go.
Q. Which page is it, sir?
A. Page 8, third item.
Q. Okay. Getting back to the original question, have you ever taught a course on historiographic techniques?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
BY MR. EDELL: No, exclusively, I'm not talking about in relationship to another substantive answer.
MR. GARNICK: I understand that. I think he's already answered.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: I don't think he has.
MR. GARNICK: Well, I disagree.
THE WITNESS: Well, as I have said several times and continue to say, the specific course teaching that I have done on that
topic has been integrated with history courses that I have taught or has been part of special symposia that I've been asked to
give as opposed to a university course exclusively on that subject.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So, is the answer no, Doctor, that you have never taught a course exclusively dealing with historiographic techniques; is
that correct?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Answer the question, Doctor, please.
A. As I have mentioned, if you are asking have I taught any courses exclusively, the answer is no. Has it been part of my
teaching in many settings, the answer is yes.
Q. Do you know the names of any individuals who teach historiographic techniques as a course standing alone as opposed to
part of a discussion of a substantive historical area?
A. Well, that is frequently done in -- or occasionally done in history of medicine training programs, masters and Ph.D. programs.
And the programs I am familiar with generally do include courses on methodology in addition to courses on subject matter.
Q. Do you remember the question, sir? Do you know the names of any individuals who teach that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. What are those names and where do they teach?
A. The teaching changes from year to year. So, in all honesty, without looking at a course catalog, I could not tell you who is
teaching Harvard's course right now or Johns Hopkins' course right now, different people in different years will rotate through
this assignment.
I can tell you the individuals who taught when I took it and I think it is highly likely that I would be familiar with individuals
who are presently teaching it. But, if you were to ask me at this moment in time who is teaching the methods course at Harvard
or Yale or Johns Hopkins, without reference to a course catalog, I would not be able to answer your question.
Q. I'm not asking for that, I'm asking for the names of individuals who you are aware of who teach or taught courses on
historiographic techniques?
A. Well, a few would be Stevenson.
Q. Can you give us first names, if possible?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Lloyd.
Q. And where is he located?
A. Johns Hopkins. Gert, G E R T; Brieger, B R I E G E R, Johns Hopkins; Donald Fleming, Harvard; those would be a few.
Q. I want all the names that you can think of, sir.
A. I'm unable to answer that question accurately as I sit here right now.
Q. You can't think of anybody else, is that what you're saying?
A. No, I'm saying that I don't want to take someone's name in vain. And, without reference to course catalogs past or present,
I would be vulnerable to giving you an inaccurate answer. So my answer is I don't remember as I sit here right now.
Q. Are there books published on this subject, historiographic techniques?
A. Yes, there are.
Q. Can you name some of the books for us?
A. Well, for example, Jack Hexter on History, that would be one.
Q. Any books that you consider to be particularly good on the subject?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: Good, I don't know exactly what you mean by good. Do you mean good reading?
MR. EDELL: Entertaining.
MR. GARNICK: Entertaining, is that what you mean?
MR. EDELL: If that's what you thought, Mr. Garnick, there's nothing I can do about rephrasing the question for you.
THE WITNESS: Well, there's a very large literature. Hexter is a book that I have used. But, as I sit here right now, I would
need to check precise authors and titles.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You can't think of any other authors as you sit here today of books specifically on historiographic techniques?
A. I can tell you that I have read a number of such books, but it's been a little while. I remember the principles and conclusions
more accurately than I remember the specific authors and titles. And, as I sit here today, I would just have to go back and
check my library.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Do you have a library?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Is it a library that you have index cards to or some way to find out what's in inventory so that you know what's in the library
and what's not?
A. I do not have index cards.
Q. Do you have any writing that memorializes what's contained in your library?
A. No.
Q. Who taught you historiographic techniques, at Johns Hopkins was it?
A. My historical training was a combination of Johns Hopkins and Harvard.
Q. Well, let's stick to Johns Hopkins. Who taught you historiographic techniques?
A. I learned from many people at Johns Hopkins.
Q. Did you have a formal course in that subject at Johns Hopkins?
A. I had teaching on that subject at Johns Hopkins, but quite frankly it was so long ago I do not remember the precise nature
of the courses.
Q. Do you know whether or not you had a formal course on that subject alone, yes or no?
A. I'm telling you that I don't remember,
Q. Did you have any formal course at Harvard on historiographic techniques?
A. Yes.
Q. And who taught that?
A. Well, there are a number. I took courses for two summers. The first summer was taught by I believe Judith Grabiner and
Harold Fruchtbaum.
Q. Can you give the spelling for the court reporter, please.
A. GRABINER I think, I'm not certain of the spelling, I don't remember. Similarly I took a seminar the next summer, but I
do not remember who was responsible for the instruction. I had tutorial my sophomore, junior, and senior years dealing with
historiographic methods.
Q. Taught by whom?
A. To the best of my recollection, the sophomore course was taught by Way Chambers, the junior course by Bob Frank, the
senior course by Huda Elkanaye, but as I say that's to the best of my recollection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Can you help the court reporter out on spelling of that last name.
A. I believe it is ELKANAYE HUDA. In each of those three tutorials, I learned an enormous amount about the process of
doing history. And these courses I would like to add are independent of informal instruction that I had along the way; indeed,
my own personal gratitude are to mentors I had who would read, evaluate, offer constructive criticisms on projects I would be
working on as friends or as doing a project with someone.
And in that fashion I learned an enormous amount about the process of doing history and also through just informal conversation
with other graduate students and faculty. I'm sure you're aware that much of the learning process in any educational setting,
particularly graduate training, is an informal one as well as a strictly formal one.
Q. Who are the mentors you were referring to?
A. I've been very fortunate in this regard because I have many people that I'm indebted to for what they have taught me about
history.
Q. I'm waiting, I don't know the names.
MR. GARNICK: Objection, form.
If you can identify their names, please do so.
THE WITNESS: This is by no means exclusive, but the two individuals who have taught me more than any others are Lloyd
Stevenson from Johns Hopkins and Donald Fleming from Harvard.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, I asked you, before we got off on the historiographic techniques issue, about which Harris report or Harris reports
you reviewed after you reviewed your secondary sources; do you remember that, we were talking about that, do you recall that?
A. Yes.
Q. And we've already identified as Ludmerer 1 Dr. Harris' August 1, 1985, report?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you review any other reports prepared by Dr. Harris at that stage of your investigation?
A. I don't remember.
Q. You don't know whether or not you reviewed any other materials prepared by Dr. Harris prior to initiating your investigation
into the primary sources?
MR. GARNICK: Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Prior to initiating?
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I don't remember.
Q. How did you go about review of the primary sources that you've reviewed in this matter?
A. You mean the bibliographies?
Q. The primary sources.
A. Well, I spent a lot of time and it was hard work. First I read every article cited by Dr. Harris in his bibliography.
Q. where did you get the articles from?
A. They were supplied to me.
Q. By whom?
A. They were supplied to me by the Arnold & Porter law firm.
Q. You asked them for those materials?
A. Yes.
Q. Why did you start your review of primary sources with the references referred to in Dr. Harris' report which we've marked
as Ludmerer 1?
A. It was a transition to the primary literature insofar as Dr. Harris did cite sources published from earlier periods of time which
as you know would be the definition of a primary source rather than a secondary source. Insofar as he did cite such materials,
it was an introduction to the primary literature. At the same time, it was continuity with the step before which was appraising
the Harris document, so it was a convenient place to begin before going further.
Q. Was that part of your undertaking, to appraise the Harris document as you've described it?
A. I was asked to render an opinion on the Harris document.
Q. With regard to what subject?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
MR. EDELL: What's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: I don't understand the question.
MR. EDELL: What don't you understand?
MR. GARNICK: As regard to what subject, I don't understand.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: Well, there are a number of subjects that are covered in the report. He was asked to render an opinion and I'm
asking him about what subject.
MR. GARNICK: Thank you, that clarifies it.
MR. EDELL: I'm happy to do so.
THE WITNESS: Quite honestly I don't remember the initial discussion of that. I was asked to incorporate the Harris report as
part of my study. I don't remember that I was asked to comment on any specific subject by name.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Well, what was your understanding as to the opinions that you were supposed to provide Mr. Garnick with regard to Dr.
Harris' report?
A. I was given no assignment to provide opinions, any specific opinions. I was asked to incorporate the Harris document into
my own understanding of the issues, I was prepared to answer questions about it.
Q. I thought you had said previously that you were asked to provide opinions with respect to the Harris document; is that not
right?
A. Well, let me clarify. Thank you. I was asked to incorporate it into my understanding of medical knowledge and I was informed
that I may be asked questions about it, but I was not given any more specific assignment than that.
Q. Okay. Did Mr. Garnick send you all of the documents enumerated in -- all the publications rather enumerated in Ludmerer
1 or did he send them to you in some piecemeal fashion? In other words did they arrive in one big box or in a number of big
boxes at the same time?
A. A number of big boxes at the same time.
Q. And how did you decide which article to review first, chance and convenience again or was there a systematic method that
you employed?
A. There was a systematic method.
Q. And what was that, sir?
A. I went through numerically, alphabetically, which is how he had his bibliography arranged.
Q. When you say numerically, alphabetically, I'm somewhat confused.
A. Well, please let me unconfuse you. You'll know, I'm sure you'll be familiar --
Q. Are you telling me that you reviewed them in the numerical order that they appear in Dr. Harris' report?
A. That's correct, which also is alphabetical.
Q. Why did you employ that method, sir?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. It was the easiest, easiest to keep track of, make sure I didn't forget something, I wanted to be complete, that was my job.
Q. So am I correct that you did not review these in chronological order; is that correct, Doctor?
A. That is correct, I already explained that I reviewed those in alphabetical order in the process of reviewing everything that
he had written -- excuse me, everything that he had reviewed.
MR. EDELL: We can stop here.
(Whereupon, at 12:35 p.m., the deposition in the above-entitled case was recessed, to reconvene at 1:35 p.m. this same day.)
AFTERNOON SESSION
(1:40 p.m.)
Whereupon,
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., the witness on the stand at the time of recess, having been previously duly sworn, was
further examined and testifed as follows:
EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR PLAINTIFF-Resumed
BY MR. EDELL
Q. After you reviewed the references contained in Dr. Harris' report which we've marked as Ludmerer 1, what did you do next?
A. At that time I undertook my own independent survey of the medical literature from the period 1930 to 1964.
Q. Was that prior to your review of Dr. Harris' subsequent report of July 28, 19877
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: I've got to ask you, what's wrong with the form?
MR. GARNICK: Prior to the time that he read it or prior to the time that report was issued?
MR. EDELL: I thought I said prior to the time he reviewed it.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Prior to the time you reviewed the July 1987 report of Dr. Harris.
A. I do not remember precisely when I reviewed the supplementary report. My recollection of the expert's report is firm in
terms of when I reviewed it. I do not remember precisely when I examined his supplementary report. Clearly I did examine it
as part of this process, but I could not tell you the exact point in time.
MR. EDELL: Let's mark as Plaintiff's Exhibit Ludmerer 5 the copy of Dr. Harris' supplemental report of July 28, 1987, that
contains your handwritten notations.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 5 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Looking at your notations, will that refresh your recollection with respect to when you reviewed Dr. Harris' supplemental
report insofar as your independent review of the literature is concerned?
A. Looking at the report does not help me answer that question, there are no dates, I cannot tell you precisely when I reviewed it.
Q. I'm not asking you for the specific date, but what I'm trying to find out is whether or not you reviewed it -- now that you've
had the opportunity to look at your notes, whether you can tell us now whether you reviewed Dr. Harris' supplemental report
which we've marked as Ludmerer 5 prior to your independent review of the primary sources?
A. I told you that I do not remember if I read this before I began the independent review or if I had begun the independent
review and read it at that time.
Q. And how did you go about conducting your independent review?
A. Well, I did what I believe any self-respecting historian of medicine would do and made the important observation, if you
will, that is essential to understand the past in its own terms. And that meant evaluating the state of medical knowledge as it
existed during the 34 year period that we have been alluding to. And I did that in three parts. The first part I examined literature
from 1930 to 1950, the second part of the study was 1950 to '59, the third part of the study was 1960 to 1964.
I went to the library for each of these and went to a major bibliographic instrument called the Index Medicus which contains
an encyclopedic listing year by year, it's published yearly, available to workers at the time, an encyclopedic listing of the
world's literature. And, from the Index Medicus, I generated a handwritten bibliography that you have seen on articles that
were pertinent to the subject.
To generate that bibliography, I had to look under four categories because articles might be indexed under one and not under
another. I looked under lung cancer, I looked under bronchogenic cancer or carcinoma, one of the two, I don't remember which,
because those were separate items in the Index Medicus in those years. To make sure I was comprehensive, I looked at articles
under both listings.
In addition I looked under tobacco and under cigarette smoking. And I went through the rather laborious process of examining
the yearly volumes of the Index Medicus, generating a bibliography by hand since our computer searches do not go back that
far in time. And, from this bibliographic work, I generated the three bibliographies that we have provided you. For the sake
of simplicity, I did the best I could not to double book.
If I came across an article in the Index Medicus that I had already seen from having examined Dr. Harris' work, then I did
not put it in. So the articles were new articles in addition to those that were cited by Dr. Harris. And, after generating the
bibliography which comes to something like -- oh, I'd have to add them up, you've seen them more recently than I, probably
1,200 titles, I read every article.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 6 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Let me show you what I've marked as Ludmerer 6. Can you tell us what that is?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. This is the bibliography of pertinent articles that I examined during my study of medical knowledge on these subjects from
the period 1930 to 1950. As you can see, it's an annotated bibliography.
Q. When did you do the annotations?
A. I did the annotations at the time that I read the articles.
Q. So initially you prepared the bibliography and then you went back and filled in some notes; is that correct?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No, that's not correct.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did you prepare the bibliography and prepare the notes at the same time?
A. As I stated my first step was to prepare the bibliography. As I also stated, I read every article and would write pertinent
comments about the article by the entry in the bibliography. It was not merely a matter of writing a few notes, these notes
reflect a reading of the article.
Q. I didn't mean to make it sound derogatory, Doctor, I was just trying to find out whether or not you had first established a
bibiography and then, as you went through the articles, whether you made notes on your handwritten bibliography from the
articles, that's all I was trying to find out.
A. And I replied that the answer to that question was yes, I did it in that fashion. I did not interpret your remarks in a derogatory
fashion.
Q. I'm glad, they weren't meant in that way.
A. I understand.
Q. The notes that you've made, are those the salient points from each one of these articles?
A. At the time I was doing the study, they struck me as a balanced summary of the article and, yes, the salient points. That is not
to say that I couldn't look at any given article through years later having done much more work and have additional comments
on it, I am not suggesting that these would be my sole comments about the articles; but I am indicating that, at the time I read
them originally, I considered those the most salient points to keep in my shorthand to the literature.
Q. Did you rereview these articles in conjunction with your work for Mr. Garnick?
A. I had occasion at that time to look again at certain articles.
Q. Did you make additional notes?
A. I really don't remember.
Q. Now, the bibliography may also include the articles that are set forth in the references to Dr. Harris' report, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Incorrect.
Q. I'm sorry?
A. Incorrect.
Q. They're not, these bibliographies do not contain the articles referenced in Dr. Harris' report?
A. I have already said that. If they are contained, it was purely by accident. That is not to say that inadvertently one or two or
three articles that he had examined got in here. But, at the time I compiled the bibliography, I had a copy of this report with
me. So, if I would come across --
Q. I think you've got the wrong report there.
A. I have the wrong report. If I would come across an Arkin and Wagner from 1935 or '36 in the Index Medicus, I would look
to Dr. Harris' bibliography to see if that's an article that he had included that I had read. If it was, as that particular example
would be an example of, then I would not reenter it.
Q. I understand.
A. Okay.
Q. Thank you. Did you make any notations with respect to your review of the articles referenced in Dr. Harris' report?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Where are those notes?
A. You have them.
Q. I have a lot of notes and I'm not sure which ones pertain to what.
A. You have or you should have, since I understand it was delivered to you by courier, the original copy of the bibliography to
Dr. Harris' work which I used in reviewing the articles. I think you have the original that I wrote on as well as a copy of that.
And as you'll notice I followed the same procedure with Dr. Harris' articles as I did with the articles that I generated in my own
bibliography. In other words I would make comments, this is an annotated bibliography, and I would make comments by the
entries. You'll see that basic similarity and approach between this bibliography and the three bibliographies that I generated
on my own subsequently.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 7 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And your notations with respect to the articles enumerated in the references which we've marked as Ludmerer 7 are what
you consider to be a balanced description of the article?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: what's the objection?
MR. GARNICK: The word balance is undefined and vague.
MR. EDELL: I thought he used balance before in response to the other bibliographies.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did you not, Doctor?
A. I don't remember.
Q. Shall we read back through to refresh your recollection and we can find out what you meant by balanced? Would you feel
better about that?
Why don't we do that.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: At the time I was doing the study, they struck me as a balanced summary of the article and, yes,
the salient points. That is not to say that I couldn't look at any given article through years later having done much more work and
have additional comments on it, I am not suggesting that these would be my sole comments about the articles; but I am indicating
that, at the time I read them originally, I considered those the most salient points to keep in my shorthand to the literature.”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, in the context of your answer that was just read back by the court reporter, will you please tell us what you meant
by balanced?
A. I mean an objective and accurate description of the contents of the article in particular reference to the issues under
consideration.
Q. Using that definition, were the notations that you made on Ludmerer 7; that is, the references to Dr. Harris' report of August
1, 1985, similarly balanced?
A. I believe that my summary of the content of the articles in the Harris bibliography is similar in nature to the summary of
the articles that I read from my own bibliographies, yes.
Q. Does that mean that, in fact, the comments with respect to these references are balanced?
A. I believe that the comments in respect to those references are accurate.
Q. Balanced, Doctor, balanced, using your definition of balanced?
A. I believe that they are accurate, that they represent an accurate reflection of the content of those articles.
Q. Are they balanced, Doctor?
A. I'm answering the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. No, you're not, you're not answering the question. I didn't ask ask you whether they were accurate.
MR. GARNICK: Objection. Let him finish his statement.
MR. EDELL: I let him finish twice and all I wanted was an answer to the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you consider the notations with respect to the specific references on Ludmerer 7 in your handwriting to be a balanced
summary of the content of the referenced articles?
A. Please define to me how you mean balanced.
Q. As you defined it previously, sir.
A. What I'm telling you is that I consider them to be an accurate reflection of the content of the article.
Q. I asked whether or not using your definition of balanced -- is that your definition, sir, if it's an accurate reflection of the
contents of the articles, then it's balanced, is that your definition of balanced?
A we're getting quite semantic, but I think that an accurate representation and balanced representation can be used
interchangeably.
Q. I want to know how you're using it?
A. I just told you.
Q. you're using it interchangeably?
A. Yes.
Q. So that these notations on Ludmerer 7 are a balanced recitation of what's in the article, correct?
A. I've told you before and I've told you again that they represent an accurate reflection of what I interpreted at the time to be
the salient points of those articles.
Q. Does that mean it's balanced, Doctor, yes or no, are you using it synonymously in the context of your answer to that question?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
MR. EDELL: He didn't answer it and you know it.
MR. GARNICR: He gave the best answer he could.
MR. EDELL: He has not given close to the best answer he could give.
MR. GARNICK; If you can give a better answer, please do so.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
THE WITNESS: Well, the semantics of this discussion are interesting. I think I answered it the best I can, that those are an
accurate reflection of the content of the articles, that's what the contents mean. And you can ask me the question as many times
as you wish, but I suspect that this answer will be the same.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. All I'm asking you, Doctor, is whether or not you mean by using that description that these notations are a balanced recitation
of what's reflected in the articles?
A. Well, you're asking the question balanced and I'm not sure what you mean by that.
Q. I'm using the definition that you were kind enough to give us no longer than three minutes ago, Doctor. Do you want to
hear it again?
A. Sure.
MR. EDELL: Would you find it for the doctor, please.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: we're getting quite semantic, but I think that an accurate representation and balanced representation
can be used interchangeably.”
THE WITNESS: I believe that's what I've said half a dozen times or so, an accurate and fair representation of the content of
the articles.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So that you consider the notations with respect to these articles on Ludmerer 7 to be a balanced description of the contents
of the article?
MR. GARNICK: Objection. He's answered the question several times.
MR. EDELL: He hasn't said yes or no.
MR. GARNICK: He's answered the question, he might not have used those words.
MR. EDELL: I'm asking him to answer a question, period. He didn't understand it, we gave him his definition back.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You want it read back again? I'd be happy to read it back to you again. All I want is a simple answer to the question, sir.
A. I'm answering the question to the best of my ability and you can ask the question again and I'll answer it the same way.
Q. You can't tell me whether or not, using your definition of balanced, these notations with regard to the articles on Ludmerer
7 are a balanced recitation of articles?
A. I think that, if you had listened carefully to the answer, that I said balanced is an accurate and fair representation. And those
are words I'm more comfortable using, an accurate and fair representation, and those are the words I'm going to use.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. You used the word balanced initially, sir, and you used it in the context of your testimony in the Kotler case. And I'm asking
you, in the context of your definition of balanced as you just gave it to us here today, whether you consider the notations with
respect to the specific articles on Ludmerer 7 to be a balanced recitation of the contents of the articles, yes or no?
A. I believe, if you go and read the articles, you will find that the comments by them accurately reflect the content of the articles.
Q. Is it balanced, sir, or not?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
MR. EDELL: He hasn't answered it yet. If you want to get the magistrate, I'll be happy to do that.
MR. BLEAKLEY: If you want to call the magistrate, call the magistrate.
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, if you can provide a better answer, answer the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I want to know whether it's balanced or not, yes or no, Doctor, simple, yes or no, using your definition of balanced?
A. I believe it's an accurate and fair representation of the content of the articles.
Q. Is it balanced, though?
A. What do you mean by balanced?
MR. EDELL: Would you read back balanced to the witness again, please.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: we're getting quite semantic, but I think that an accurate representation and balanced representation
can be used interchangeably.”
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, do you have your definition now in mind of the word balanced as you used it in response to one of the earlier
questions?
A. As I said before --
Q. Doctor, just answer the question, do you have it in mind, yes or no?
A. I find the term balanced a little bit confusing and I don't know how you are using that term. And for that reason I am rephrasing
my answer to your earlier question as to the nature of these comments to say that a better way of describing the comments is
that they are a fair and accurate description of the content of those articles. Now, I may or may have not -- I probably did use
the word balanced and I prefer to describe these comments in answer to your original question as I have now done so.
Q. So you wouldn't want to use the term balanced in the context of your testimony in court?
A. I'm not saying that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. You would feel comfortable in court describing whether or not Dr. Harris' report, for example, gives a balanced recitation
of what's reflected in the particular article that he might summarize, you would feel comfortable doing that?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I'm not -- I don't have any idea what, if anything, I'll be asked to testify on in court.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I'm just asking you whether you would be comfortable using that term in the courtroom, sir?
A. In certain contexts and in certain ways, I would.
Q. In what contexts and what ways?
MR. BLEAKLEY: I want the record to reflect that I regard this testimony as harassing and abusive.
MR. EDELL: Well, I woke you up, Mr. Bleakley.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Answer the question, please.
A. Would you repeat the question.
MR. EDELL: Would you do that, please.
THE REPORTER: “Question: I'm just asking you whether you would be comfortable using that term in the courtroom, sir?
“Answer: In certain contexts and in certain ways, I would.
“Question: In what contexts and what ways?”
THE WITNESS: That's a vague question that I'm unable to answer. I believe I can tell you that, given an article to read and
given a representation of that article by any individual, I would be able to relate whether in my judgment that representation
reflected an accurate, fair, objective, and, indeed, balanced portrayal of the article in question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Okay, Now, tell me whether or not the notations with respect to the articles in Ludmerer 7 represent a balanced recitation
of what's in the article?
A. They represent a fair and accurate reflection of information from the article. Whether I summarized every aspect of the
article I could not tell you without going through it one by one.
Q. Let's do it, let's find out whether or not it's balanced, each and every one of them, let's start with Abbe.
MR. BLEAKLEY: what is the point of this?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: If you have an objection, Mr. Bleakley, make it.
MR. BLEAKLEY: I do have an objection. If you're not going to explain what the point is, then you can say that on the record.
Do you have a point? you're being abusive and harassing and you know it and this is wasting time for all of us. Why are you
doing this?
MR. EDELL: I think it's clear why I'm doing it. What is a waste of time is this witness' intentional evasiveness to my questions.
MR. BLEAKLEY: If you don't like his answer to the question, then pursue it with the magistrate.
MR. EDELL: I can pursue it to try to again get an answer to my question out of this witness.
MR. BLEAKLEY: You can waste a little more time, but not much. And we'll instruct the witness not to answer the question
and you can take it up with the magistrate.
I'm just telling you, if you continue to waste our time with this abusive, harassing questioning, we're going to instruct him not
to answer and then you do what you want to. So, if you want to sit here and take him through every single one of these articles
and ask him whether they are balanced within your definition, you go right ahead.
MR. EDELL: I will, indeed. I'm sure it won't take a week like you did with Dr. Harris, though.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, your comments with respect to Abbe as they are contained on Ludmerer 7, are they a balanced recitation of what's
in the article?
A. I think that they are a fair and accurate representation of what's in the article.
Q. Balanced, sir?
A. I think it's a fair and accurate representation.
Q. And balanced?
A. I think it's a fair and accurate representation.
Q. I heard that, but is it also balanced?
MR. BLEAKLEY: Objection. I instruct the witness not to answer any further questions on those articles.
MR. EDELL: On what basis?
MR. BLEAKLEY: I've already stated my basis. If you don't like it, take it up with the magistrate.
MR. EDELL: Look, if this witness is not going to comment with respect to anybody else's comments with regard to an article
as to whether they were balanced or not, that's fine with me, Mr. Bleakley, we'll move on. But, if he's going to sit here and
go through Dr. Harris' report or on the stand and he's going to say Dr. Harris didn't present a balanced view of this and didn't
present a balanced view of that and didn't present a balanced view of this, I'm entitled to go through this examination.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
If you want to direct him, you direct him. But I'm specifically putting you on notice that I will ask the court to instruct you
and instruct this witness not to give any testimony with respect to whether or not anybody else's opinions or descriptions are
balanced of these specific articles or the articles that are contained in his bibliography. So, if you choose to make your direction,
make your direction.
MR. BLEAKLEY: My direction was that the witness not answer any further repeated abusive and harassing questions about
whether or not that particular article was balanced. You asked him three times, he gave you his answer three times, and you
went on. I instructed him not to answer that question with respect to that article.
MR. EDELL: It wasn't the article I asked him whether it was balanced or not.
MR. BLEAKLEY: Whether the comments he made with respect to the article were balanced.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Let's talk about Ahlbom. Are your notations with respect to the Ahlbom reference balanced, Doctor?
A. I think they are a fair and accurate reflection of the material in the article.
Q. You can't tell us whether or not They're balanced?
A. I think They're a fair and accurate reflection.
MR. EDELL: Mr. Bleakley, do you think that's an answer to my question as to whether or not the notes are balanced?
MR. BLEAKLEY: you're quibbling. Proceed.
MR. EDELL: The witness is being evasive and you 100 know it, Mr. Bleakley.
MR. BLEAKLEY: No, I don't know it. Would you proceed.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Thank you. With regard to the Abbe article, could you read to us what your comments were?
A. 100 cases of oral cancer from private practice, 90 percent were smokers, usually pipes and cigars, he espoused the irritation
theory, it was an uncontrolled study.
Q. Those are the only comments with regard to that article?
A. Those were the comments that I had written here. Perhaps some of the confusion is that I have written salient points.
Q. I'm not confused. What confusion are you referring to, Doctor, what confusion are you referring to?
A. Well, if you're not confused, then --
Q. Apparently you think there's some confusion. What confusion are you referring to?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form. He's already expressed the view that he thought you were confused. If you're not
confused --
MR. EDELL: Are you going to direct him not to answer the question?
MR. GARNICK: I thought he already answered the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor?
A. I thought I had answered the question.
Q. What do you think there was some confusion on? I want to make sure there's no confusion on your part.
A. There's no confusion on my part.
Q. You don't have any questions with respect to any of the questions or answers?
MR. GARNICK: At all?
MR. EDELL: At all.
MR. GARNICK: In this deposition?
MR. EDELL: That's right, at all.
MR. GARNICK: I think that's an unfair question.
MR. EDELL: I want to find out whether or not there's confusion going on.
MR. GARNICK: That's an unfair question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Any confusion, Doctor?
A. Well, I think that a semantic discussion is ensuing which, as Mr. Garnick stated and Mr. Bleakley stated, is not entirely
clear to me. But this is your deposition.
Q. What is not clear to you?
A. I'm going to stretch for a second.
Q. What is semantic --
A. No, I'm going to stretch for a second.
(Recess.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What is not entirely clear to you, sir?
A. Well, perhaps I could clarify by pointing out the ambiguities in the meaning of balance. While I'm comfortable using the
term, at the same time it has different meanings. And I wanted to be certain you understood the nature of the comments.
Q. I thought I was using your definition. If you would like to give is a new definition that you would be comfortable with,
I'll be happy to do that.
A. That's exactly what I'm doing.
Q. Give us your new definition of balanced that you would be comfortable with?
A. As you will see, my new definition of balanced incorporates what I said before but with appropriate qualification so that there
be no misunderstanding. Part of balanced would have to be a fair and accurate representation of the material. And, indeed, as I
have said quite a few times, the comments that I have made for all the articles are in my judgment fair and accurate reflections
of the content within.
But, at the same time, you'll also remember that I used the term salient. And it could be for any particular article that some
aspects of the article might not be pertinent to the subjects which I was reading the article for. So comments would be pertinent
to those salient sections. There might be other sections of an article on other subjects.
Q. Why don't you just give me your definition of balanced?
A. I just did.
Q. I didn't hear a definition, sir. It will be subject to question later on as to what you really meant to say. In terms of your
definition of balanced, why don't you give us a nice, succinct definition of balanced that you would like to employ in answering
the questions.
MR. GARNICK: Objection, asked and answered.
But, Dr. Ludmerer, if you can clarify your definition of balanced any more, please do so.
THE WITNESS: I think I have clarified it as well as I can.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So is it fair then to say that with those qualifications all of your notations with respect to the articles on Ludmerer 7 are a
balanced recitation of the contents of the articles?
A. I believe that all the annotations on Ludmerer 7 are a fair and accurate representation of the material in the article, recognizing
that the comments may pertain to certain parts of the article, that other parts of the article that might have been not pertinent
to the subject might not have been commented on.
Q. So, with respect to the subject matter at issue, as these articles may bear upon it, you believe that your notations are balanced
with respect to the contents of the article; is that fair?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And that would be true with respect to all of these notations? I'm sorry, with respect to the notations for all of these
articles; is that correct?
A. Within the best of my capability, I wrote fair and accurate and balanced representations. Now, that's not to say that I couldn't
reread a certain article and perceive something, now that I'm more familiar with the topic, that I hadn't perceived at the time
or see something differently. So I'm not saying that I'm exclusively bound to the comments that I might have made about
any article. On the other hand, I'm saying that a good conscience, intensely good conscience effort was made to read them
objectively and fairly.
Q. Just so I'm clear on the chronology of events, the notations on Plaintiff's Exhibit Ludmerer 7 were made prior to your
notations reflected in Ludmerer 6, correct?
A. That is correct.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 8 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, what I'm going to do is put the Ludmerer 8 sticker on the reverse side of the first page of the notes entitled Post-1950
(1950-1959).
A. Okay.
Q. Likewise those notes were prepared subsequent to the notes on Ludmerer 7; is that correct?
A. Subsequent?
Q. Yes.
A. Correct.
Q. Do we have the other notes for '60 to '64?
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 9 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Again I'm going put it on the reverse side so I don't interfere with your writing.
This I believe reflects your notes on the articles from '60 to '64; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And again those notations were made subsequent to your notations on Ludmerer 7?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Now, you have another pad of notes or series of notes entitled Paradigm?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Where were these notes prepared?
A. Those notes were prepared either upon the completion of Exhibit 9 or on the completion of Exhibit 8.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 10 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And I've marked these notations as Ludmerer 10 for identification.
Can you tell us how it came about that you made those notes on Ludmerer 107
A. In examining events of the 1950's, it became apparent that part of the story of lung cancer was related to the emergence
of a new scientific discipline called clinical epidemiology, a discipline that really had not existed before, a new science was
created. So, to understand the events of the 1950's and 1960's more clearly, it was important to understand how this new science
was created and how it evolved.
Q. what specifically led you to make that inquiry, as to how clinical epidemiology evolved, at what juncture in your research
did you say to yourself maybe I should be doing this, maybe I should be looking into clinical epidemiology and the history
of clinical epidemiology?
A. It was suggested to me both from my reading of secondary sources and from primary sources.
Q. And how did you go about gathering the materials that are summarized or the notes referencing the materials on Ludmerer 10?
A. Well, a variety of ways. There was some information in the secondary literature which appears on that bibliography that
helped suggest an outline of events and what scientific developments were critical to the appearance of a new science.
So I scurried the literature, the secondary literature, looking for histories of epidemiology, histories of clinical epidemiology,
histories of chronic disease. I looked at the references they cited and I also examined the discussion of the state of the field from
the primary sources that I reviewed in the 1950 to '64 period, it came through a variety of sources.
Q. The typed document entitled Paradigm, what does that reflect?
A. Paradigm was a shorthand term familiar to historians of medicine essentially reflecting as we used it the creation of a new
discipline, in this case clinical epidemiology, and new ways to study causes of disease; in other words, the problems posed
by chronic diseases were much different from those imposed by acute illnesses and infectious illnesses, new techniques were
needed to address the issue of causation and chronic disease. Historians would use the term paradigm, new forms of explanation
and inquiry were involved to study chronic disease. So it's a shorthand term for this line of inquiry.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 11 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. The typed bibliography entitled Paradigm is dated April 1989, we've marked it as Ludmerer 11.
Was that prepared before or after Ludmerer 10?
A. These were done at approximately the same time. What you have identified as Exhibit 11 is the bibliography sources I looked
at in coming to a better understanding of how this new science was created and of how explanations of chronic disease were
formed. What you have entered as Exhibit 10 reflects notes that I made for myself from reading these various sources in a
similar fashion that Exhibit 3 reflects notes taken on my reading of the items on Exhibit 2.
Q. Doctor, after you went through the process of preparing all these notes and these bibliographies, what did you do next?
A. Could you please specify which notes and which bibliographies?
Q. Well, if you don't mind, I'll come over here and read them into the record.
A. we're a bit out of order and that's why I asked for your clarification.
Q. Let's see if I can get it in chronological order here. Ludmerer 6, Ludmerer 3, Ludmerer 10, Ludmerer 2 --
A. Now, these are not in chronological order. Would it help you if I put these in chronological order?
Q. Well, I don't think it makes much of a difference. Ludmerer 8, Ludmerer 9, Ludmerer 11, Ludmerer 7, Ludmerer 1, and
Ludmerer 5.
A. All that work was done and we're talking, if I understand you correctly, about the totality of the work and not trying to dissect
out which did I do, 8 or 9 first; do I understand you correctly?
Q. Correct, I want to know what you did next after you completed all those items and made your reviews?
A. I stopped.
Q. Your research was over?
A. As far as that specific project.
Q. Were you going to prepare a paper on this subject?
A. No.
Q. was there any understanding when you began this research as to whether you would or would not prepare a paper on the
subject?
A. What do you mean by understanding?
Q. Was there any discussion with Mr. Garnick or anybody else with respect to whether you would or would not prepare a paper
on the subject that you spent these many hours researching?
A. Well, we did discuss the nature of how my findings and interpretations should be communicated.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. No. Just so we understand each other, if you do research work through a grant or otherwise, you're usually doing it with a
view of ultimately publishing your work, are you not, sir?
A. That's correct.
Q. Did you have an understanding when you began your work for Mr. Garnick as to whether or not you would be eventually
publishing the findings that you made in the context of all this research?
A. There was no intention at any time that I would publish on this subject.
Q. Was there an understanding as to whether you would or you wouldn't, sir?
A. I had no intention of publishing this subject and communicated that to them. This was done for their internal purposes, it
was not a project for publication.
Q. Did you assure them that you would not publish on the subject?
A. Oh, I don't remember what words I used.
Q. Well, the substance of your communications are, sir --
MR. GARNICK: Let him finish.
Q. Apologies.
A. As I said I don't remember the precise words, but I believe it is accurate to say that there is no wish or intention on their part
or on my part to publish, it was not the purpose of the project.
Q. Were there any discussions in that regard?
A. We had a conversation on that regard.
Q. When you say we had a conversation, who are you referring to?
A. I'm referring to representatives of the Arnold & Porter firm.
Q. Who is that?
A. Well, I'm not precisely sure.
Q. Can you give us the names of any of the people that you recall being present during those discussions or that discussion?
A. This is purely a guess, so I would like to say for the record I do not remember precisely who was at that particular discussion.
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, let me interrupt here. If it's a pure guess, then I object to that and ask you not to guess. If you have a
reason to believe you know who it is, even though you're not sure, then please supply that to Mr. Edell.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
THE WITNESS: Thank you. I have a reason to believe, though I cannot say with absolute certainty, I believe that Beth Cook
was present, a former associate of the firm, I'm quite certain that Mr. Garnick was present, and it is possible that other members
of the firm were present at that discussion.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Can you tell us what you recall of that discussion and when it occurred?
A. I'm giving you my best recollections. Qualitatively I am confident that what I am going to relate to you reflects the substance,
though the details probably will escape me. In essence the discussion was sometime early in this project. This project went as
you'll remember from August of 1988 to June of 1989. So this would have been a discussion in August, September, October at
latest, early on, when I'm still reading secondary sources, when it's clear that there is much to do but in the early stage of it.
And I was asked if I had any particular preference as to how I would communicate my results and I said that I really didn't.
I said I feel that, since this is a project done for your use and not for publication, that I am perfectly content to communicate
my findings to you in conversation, I don't feel any particular need to write, I'm busy enough; on the other hand, if you feel it
would be helpful to you to have a written report, I would be glad to do that.
It was explained to me that, from their perspective, since it was not for publication, that conversation sufficed, they did not need
a report. I was happy not to write a report so we talked and no report was written.
Q. Did you have any written communications with Mr. Garnick or any representative of Arnold & Porter with respect to your
work on the project that they first discussed with you back in August of '887
A. Any written?
Q. Any written communications.
A. As I sit here right now, yes.
Q. Can you tell us what they were?
A. I remember at this time one communication.
Q. Can you tell us what it was?
A. Yes, gladly. Sometime, and it would have been January, February, March 1989 -- I'm trying to explain to you as full and as
accurately as I can the nature of this process. When I was working on the published medical literature for the 1930 to the 1950
period, I completed the Harris review, somewhere in there I did the supplemental report, though as I indicated I really don't
remember when, now I'm working on the 1930 to the 1950 literature. And as I explained I generated my own bibliography from
the Index Medicus laboriously, since it was a hand job, the computerized searches of today do not go back that far.
And the Index Medicus is an index to the international medical literature. And there were six or seven or eight articles that
by their title sounded that they might be pertinent to the questions I was investigating. They were in foreign languages. Mr.
Garnick I knew through his law firm had access to translating services. And I did write him a request listing the articles that
I would appreciate having a translation made into English.
Q. That's the only written communication you had with him. Did you send him any bills?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. To the best of my recollection, that was my only substantive communication.
Q. Did you ever send him any bills?
A. I just sent invoices.
Q. And do you have copies of those invoices?
A. I don't know.
Q. Was it your practice to retain copies of invoices?
A. If you were to see my office, you would see that it is not the neatest office in the world and I have moved twice and I
just don't know if I have those or not. It was not pertinent to that subject and I don't remember if I would retain invoices after
receiving bills or not, I just don't remember.
Q. Did you incur any expenses to meet with Mr. Garnick or any representative of the Arnold & Porter firm other than xeroxing,
did you do any travel?
A. Well, I had a number of expenses.
Q. Expenses for what?
A. The major expenses were for travel.
Q. Did you seek reimbursement for travel expenses?
A. I was reimbursed for travel.
Q. Do you have records for that?
A. Well, I had at the time. I don't know if I have those records now or not.
Q. How many times did you meet with Mr. Garnick over the period of, what, August of ‘88 to March of '91?
A. Well, this project was August of 1988 to June of 1989. To answer your question fully, perhaps we could point out for the
record that there were additional expenses that I paid for myself.
Q. Okay. Now, how many times did you meet with Mr. Garnick or a representative of Arnold & Porter from August of ‘88
until now?
A. From August of 1988 to when?
Q. Today.
A. To today?
Q. Today.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. GARNICK: On any matter?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. On any matter relating to cigarette smoking and health.
A. Well, this went through three stages. I would say that, to my best recollection, from August of ‘88 to June of ‘89, I probably
met with representatives approximately half a dozen times, something of that sort, that order of magnitude; maybe it was eight
rather than six, call it half a dozen times.
Then, as I indicated in answer to an earlier question, I stopped. I was informed that from their standpoint the project was
completed and I heard nothing from them for about six months. Then I was contacted for a second project in November of 1989
-- excuse me, November of 1990. So we're talking about six months -- excuse me. It was December, it was 1990, it was six
months without contact. And, over the period of time from December 19 --
Q. Are you sure about the dates?
MR. GARNICK: 1989.
MR. EDELL: That's okay.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Maybe you should speak with Mr. Garnick. August of '88 to June of '89, that's easy, we've got that down.
A. It was December of 1989. So we have that. But the fact that I slipped up in terms of remembering such a simple thing as
a date --
Q. We won't hold it against you.
A. You won't hold it against me. I'm going to take a stretch.
(Recess.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Okay. We were at December of '89.
A. Right. Thank you for that break, I think I've got my numbers back together. No contact June to December of '89. So I had
contact with various firms from December of '89 to February of 1990, three or four meetings during that time with attorneys.
Q. You said various firms, who did you meet with?
A. I can't recall everyone.
Q. Let's start with the firms, then we can proceed to the individuals.
A. Well, there was the Arnold & Porter firm and various representatives of Arnold & Porter; there was a Boston firm, the name
of which I don't remember, various attorneys from that firm, but the attorney whom I do remember is Andy Lane; and there
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
was the Chadbourne & Parke firm of New York City, and I met various individuals from Chadbourne & Parke, but the primary
person whom I saw during that period and had conversations with during that period was Andrew Mein, M E I N.
Q. I guess that moves us to the third stage.
A. The third stage is now. I had heard nothing from anyone from February through November of 1990. Subsequent to November,
from November of 1990 to the present, I've had another three or four or five meetings with attorneys. That would probably
make the total 12 to 15, somewhere in that ballpark.
Q. You testified in Kotler that you spent about 400 hours?
A. No.
Q. I thought it was 400 hours. Maybe it was 200 hours, I'm sorry.
A. 200 hours.
Q. It was $40,000, correct?
A. That's correct.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You spent approximately 200 hours. I guess what you're talking about is on the first days of the project, August of ‘88 to
June of '89; is that correct?
A. No, I'm actually referring to the second project, which was eventually to appear as a witness in the Kotler case which
involved going back to the literature, rereading sources, rereading notes, rethinking materials, reading a few additional things,
the discussions with the attorneys, the testimony in court; that project was approximately 200 hours.
Q. Okay. Let's go to the first project, that is the August ‘88 to June of '89 project, if you will. How much time did we spend
on that project?
A. Did we spend?
Q. Did you spend, excuse me.
A. I spent approximately 1,000 hours total which includes the meeting time, the travel time.
Q. At how much an hour?
A. $200 an hour.
Q. That's $200,000?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. And how much time have you spent on the third phase of this project?
A. Oh, from the time that they contacted me until now which again involved rereading materials that I hadn't seen for a
considerable length of time, reading a fair number of new materials, discussions, rethinking issues, et cetera, et cetera, the
meetings with attorneys that we've had, through our deposition today and tomorrow, if it goes through tomorrow, approximately
300 hours.
Q. Is that again at $200 an hour?
A. That's correct.
Q. Now, you say you reviewed new materials, what new materials have you reviewed?
A. You should have received an item entitled Supplemental Bibliography.
Q. Those are all the new materials?
A. That's correct, those are new materials.
Q. Did someone furnish you those new materials or did you go out and get them yourself or both?
A. Both.
Q. Let me see if I can find our supplemental bibliography here.
Do you have a copy?
MR. GARNICK: Not with me, I can get one.
MR. EDELL: Would you do that?
MR. GARNICK: Sure.
(Discussion off the record.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, did you review any of Philip Morris' or any other defendants' in this case documents in your evaluating the state
of the art in this case?
A. Not in the systematic way that I examined the published medical literature. As my secondary bibliography will indicate, I
did examine the testimony that Dr. Harris gave during the Cipollone case. There were some exhibits with that that included
some internal company documents which I had occasion to glance at in reviewing his testimony. That would be the extent of
my examination of company documents.
Q. Did you not ask to see company documents that might be relevant to the issue of the state of the art with respect to cigarette
smoking and health?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
THE WITNESS: Could you restate the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Okay. Just for your edification, every time he says objection to the form doesn't mean I have to repeat it or restate it. If you
understand it, that's the test. But, if you want me to restate it, I will.
A. I'd appreciate that.
Q. There are certain subjects that you researched at the library, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Those were subject areas that you thought were important?
A. Yes.
Q. They included cigarette smoking and health, cigarette smoking and lung cancer, bronchogenic carcinoma or cancer, some
of the other areas that you've enumerated for us previously. Did you turn to the defendants in this case and say do you have any
internal documents, any internal research, any studies that you performed dating back to the 1930's, forties, fifties, or sixties
that bear upon this subject, did you say that to them or the substance of what I said, not those very words, Doctor?
A. Well, it was my decision to follow standard procedures in the history of medicine. And almost entirely the history of medical
ideas, if that is the question one is focusing on and that is certainly the question I was focusing on, generally the standard of
reference is the published material. So, by doing my work from published available scientific sources, I was following standard
procedures.
Now, in the process of doing this work, I did have occasion to see the documents that Dr. Harris cited. And there was nothing
that he put forth in evidence that changed my views in any way about the condition of medical knowledge. So I thought it
sufficient to put some borders on the project and conclude at that point.
Q. I thought you said, though, that you didn't review Dr. Harris' testimony and whatever exhibits you are referencing until the
third stage of this project; am I wrong?
A. No, that's what I said.
Q. When you were conducting the first stage of this project, before you read Dr. Harris' report, before you saw any reference to
what Dr. Harris thought was relevant on the issue of state of the art insofar as the defendants' internal documents are concerned,
did you not have a question in your mind as to what these particular defendants had in their files that might bear upon the issue
of what was known or knowable at the time?
A. Well, that was not a primary concern at that time. In examining the state of medical knowledge, it is customary in the history
of medicine to examine the published sources, which I did. In addition I examined at that time or I was shown Dr. Harris' report
which was confined to published sources. So I thought that was an appropriate border for what was already a huge project.
Somewhere in the history you have to draw borders. That was the assignment at that time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Doctor, is it fair to say that your understanding of your assignment was not to make a determination of the state of knowledge
on the part of the tobacco industry or manufacturers, but rather to make an evaluation of the state of the art of the medical
profession with respect to cigarette smoking and health?
A. That's correct, that my assignment was the state of scientific knowledge, medical knowledge, as ascertained by published
scientific and medical sources. And that certainly was what I focused upon during project one and also project two which
ultimately resulted in my appearance in the Kotler case.
During this present project, a year later I did have occasion as I mentioned at this time to see Dr. Harris' testimony and his
documents. Nothing that I saw in the documents that he brought forth changed my opinion as to what scientific and medical
knowledge had to say at that period of time.
Q. Did you review all of Dr. Harris' testimony?
A. In the Cipollone case?
Q. Yes.
A. I think I did. I had hundreds of pages of testimony, there was direct examination, cross, redirect, recross early, and then a
few months later he appeared again. I believe that was all of his testimony. It's my understanding that I was shown his entire
testimony, though I cannot reply with absolute certainty.
(The document referred to was marked as Ludmerer Exhibit No. 12 for identification.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Mr. Garnick was kind enough to furnish a copy of your Supplemental Bibliography which I've marked as Ludmerer 12.
This refers to Dr. Harris' report. It was my understanding that you had seen Dr. Harris' report earlier, and I'm again referring
to the August 1 report.
A. That's correct. But it was not on the original bibliography that I prepared at that time. We wanted to be scrupulous in advising
you of everything that I looked at throughout these three projects. So for that reason we included it, but we were preparing a
supplemental bibliography of anything that I had examined that had not been on previous bibliographies. Almost all of these
sources have been examined more recently. But you are correct, that that particular report, in fact, was initially examined at an
earlier point in time, though I have had occasion to look at it again.
Q. The documents that are referred to on the Supplemental Bibliography, specifically Item No. 12, do you have an inventory
of the documents that you were furnished?
A. Could you please explain to me what you mean by an inventory of documents?
Q. A listing, a listing of the documents, sir.
A. No, I do not.
Q. Did you make any notes with respect to the documents?
A. No, I did not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Did you review each and every document?
A. I read through the documents.
Q. Does that mean you reviewed each and every document that you were provided by Mr. Garnick?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. With respect to your testimony in the Kotler case, did you have an understanding that your testimony would be offered on
the state of the art insofar as it related to what information should have been conveyed to consumers at various points in time?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You can answer it, sir.
A. To be very truthful, I did not understand then and I don't understand now what the legal issues being judged in that case
were. I was there to give testimony in a specific area that I had expertise in, the state of medical knowledge, et cetera, et cetera,
1930 to 1964. How that fit into the case, to other arguments, what the issues of the case were I'm unable to comment.
Q. And to this day you don't know what your testimony related to, whether it related to a warning issue or whether it related
to any other issue?
A. To this date I do not understand the legal issues of that case.
Q. But it was clearly your understanding that you weren't testifying with respect to the knowledge of the tobacco industry during
the period 1930 through 1964; is that correct?
A. That is correct. My assignment was the state of knowledge among the biomedical community, medical researchers of medical
schools, at the foundations, the National Institutes of Health, and other such institutions as ascertainable from the published
literature that scientists in the field would rely upon, that is correct.
Q. Now, on this list of the Supplemental Bibliography, which items were furnished to you and which items did you independently
obtain? You can just refer to the numbers.
A. I'd like to point out that every item that was furnished to me was at my request.
Q. In other words you said please, Murray, get me a copy of X, Y, and Z?
A. Yes.
Q. So in other words he didn't say, Dr. Ludmerer, I just saw this book entitled X, Y, and Z, I think you might find it of some
interest, that never happened?
A. That happened on one occasion.
Q. And what was the book or the article or the documents or the testimony or whatever?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. It was Item No. 1. This, to the best of my recollection, was the one instance in which Mr. Garnick happened to have something
that for curiosity and interest he sent me. That was the article entitled Vandenbroucke, Those Who Were Wrong. I don't know
how he came across it, but somehow or other he had it in his possession. It was a three page article, he thought it would be
of interest to me.
He sent this to me, and I do remember this very clearly, between assignments, it was summer or early fall of 1989, after I had
completed my initial look into the subject but months before I had even heard the name Kotler or knew I would be involved,
he happened to send me that one article in the mail. Other articles or journals either I requested or just discovered myself.
Q. When you sat down to begin the project, did you limit yourself to any type of article; in other words, did it have to be a
medical article to begin with?
MR. GARNICK: Objection. Which project are you talking about?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Project one.
A. As opposed to?
Q. As opposed to going to the index or chemical abstracts, for example? Would you consider chemical abstracts to be a source
that's readily used by physicians and, therefore, falls within the parameters of your description of the state of medical art, if
you will?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: The primary bibliographical tool for physicians and biomedical scientists is the Index Medicus, that's what
I relied upon. I did not look at chemical abstracts and I concentrated as I believe I indicated on scientific literature. Chemical
abstracts would be -- would not be a very common source for biomedical investigators to use.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. How do you know that?
A. Well, both as a physician and as an historian, I'm aware that subject matters, though there is overlap and I'm not describing
this in all or none terms, they, nonetheless, diverge in different directions. And everything that I've been taught in medicine
from my first day of medical school was that our standard reference was Index Medicus, that one could get a complete and
comprehensive view of the biomedical literature from Index Medicus. So I used that as my primary bibliographical tool in
assembling articles representing the biomedical literature.
Q. What do you mean by biomedical literature, what's your definition of biomedical literature?
A. The types of studies that both clinicians and those engaged in medical research would use. This represents both medical
journals, very clinically oriented journals, to journals that would report results of investigations as opposed to clinical
descriptions or clinical observations, experimental medicine as opposed to descriptive medicine.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
And this is a literature that over time has become increasingly sophisticated, particularly with the emergence of molecular
biology in the 1950's and the increasing sophistication of laboratory work in experimental medicine. A reflection of the titles
which represent this range of subjects would be the titles in Index Medicus.
Q. Did you go back to 1930 and take a look at Index Medicus for that year?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. - And you went forward in time up to 1964?
A. January of 1964.
Q. Now, your understanding was that you were going to evaluate the biomedical literature to determine what was known with
respect to the potential health hazards of cigarette smoking at various points in time up to 1964; is that correct?
A. From 1930 to January of 1964, with particular reference to any possible relationship with lung cancer.
Q. And, for the purpose of that analysis, how did you define causation?
A. Well, I looked at how investigators at the time discussed the subject.
Q. I want to know what criteria you employed for making the assessment of causation in the context of your review in this
matter?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: I did not have an independent definition of causation that I applied, rather I looked at the literature at the
time to examine what investigators at the time thought was going on with lung cancer and if they had a handle on possible
associations, causes, risk factors.
MR. EDELL: Could you read that back to me, please.
(Whereupon, the court reporter read back the following answer:
THE WITNESS: I did not have an independent definition of causation that I applied, rather I looked at the literature at the
time to examine what investigators at the time thought was going on with lung cancer and if they had a handle on possible
associations, causes, risk factors.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did the criteria used to identify possible associations, causes, or risk factors change from 1930 to 1964?
MR. GARNICK: For any of those things?
MR. EDELL: For any and all of those things.
THE WITNESS: Yes, it did.
BY MR. EDELL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Okay. Can you tell us in what way?
A. The primary change began in the 1950's. It had to do with the recognition that the problems of understanding the pathogenesis,
if you will, of chronic diseases were much different from those of understanding the pathogenesis and development of acute
illnesses. To help come to grips with the problem of chronic diseases, a new science was created, that of a clinical epidemiology.
New tools were developed that ultimately found a role in ascribing risks to various factors as risk factors in lung cancer and
many other chronic diseases as well, new tools were developed that were useful to understanding risk factors in a host of chronic
diseases. And the nature of this evidence, the nature of these tools, relied much more on statistical methods of inference than
did the earlier work on acute diseases and infectious diseases that relied more on experimental evidence.
Q. How did biomedical investigators determine in the 1930 to 1940 time period as to whether or not something was a potential
cause of a chronic disease in human beings, what criteria did they employ during that decade? If you want to break it up finer,
Doctor, I don't know whether there's a difference between the first half of the decade and the second half, however you feel
most comfortable in describing it.
A. In the 1930's they really didn't have any techniques to do so.
Q. I'm not asking whether they had any techniques but whether they employed any criteria?
A. They didn't have any criteria. The point I'm emphasizing is that the problems of chronic disease in the context of the 1930's
and 1940's, chronic disease in general and cancer in particular, represented quite a mystery to investigators. And they did not
know how to address those issues.
Q. In other words there was nothing that biomedical investigators -- there was no criteria rather that biomedical investigators
used during the 1930 to '40 time frame to assess whether or not a particular substance might be the cause of some chronic
disease in human beings?
A. That's an excellent question and I'm glad to have the opportunity to respond to that.
Q. I should be careful then.
A. No, it offers the opportunity to answer your questions fully and to place this issue in proper context. And to do so it's
important to avoid hindsight which is the first goal of the historian. Techniques that are commonplace today were not existent
in the 1930's. And as a result, as a reading of both the primary and secondary literature of the 1930's indicates, there was
extraordinary despair among the scientific community at their inability to investigate the causes of chronic disease and the
causes of cancer in particular.
It's difficult to appreciate today the frustration and despair that scientific workers in this area had. In fact, it was felt at the
time that the quickest way to have your scientific career become a graveyard was to get involved into research in the causes
of chronic disease, the causes of cancer in distinction to infectious diseases; for example, for Koch's postulates, bacteriology
clearly gave tools decades before tools that had yielded positive results.
Q. Let me see if I understand. What you're saying is there was a frustration among biomedical investigators in terms of
identifying the cause of various chronic diseases in human beings during the 1930 to '40 time frame?
A. Yes. And even more so the area of cancer was probably the most frustrating area of all, it was just a mystery to the people
at the time, they hardly had the idea of where to begin. They certainly didn't know how to go about doing it. And it took new
techniques, new sciences, it took developments later to occur to give them some tools.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. I don't want to talk about hindsight in terms of later tools that were available in the 1940's or 1950's or 1960's, I'm talking
specifically 1930 to 1940. What were they doing, albeit maybe wrong or inadequate or misdirected, to try to assess whether a
particular substance or exposure might result in cancer in people?
A. Close to nothing. Again it's important to put your question in the proper context. That context is that cancer research has a
number of different avenues. And I do not want my remarks to be misconstrued. There was research into cancer in the 1930's
and 1940's and into lung cancer specifically, but scientists are making investments of their time, money, facilities, and as a
result tackled questions in which there is a possibility of a payoff or a return in terms of finding answers.
So the overwhelming majority of literature on lung cancer in the 1930's and forties had to do with questions other than cause.
People were-investigating the issue of the incidence of the disease, is it rising in frequency, is it real, is that really apparent.
They were investigating issues of how you make a new diagnosis, the natural history, the behavior of cancer, how to treat it,
et cetera, et cetera.
So the amount of research into etiology was a very, very tiny percentage, the total amount of research in cancer, for these
reasons. Of the research, the small amount of research that was done, if you can call it research, it ranged from anecdotal clinical
impressions to a few attempts at skin painting experiments of various laboratory animals, but results that were very inconclusive
and that were not taken very seriously by contemporaries of the period.
In addition, to answer your question fully and to put this in the proper context, so unknown was the cause that there must have
been 25 possible etiologies bandied about in a speculative way, one of which was tobacco. But the same type of anecdotal
impressions would be given about other possible causes as well. And, as I'm sure your aware and as scientists know, the more
possible explanations that are there, that's indicative of how little is known. So I think that this is the best way to answer your
question and to put it in appropriate context.
Q. Just so I understand, the two tools employed by researchers in the period 1930 to 1940 to identify substances or factors
that might possibly be a cause in the development of lung cancer in human beings were these clinical impressions and animal
painting studies; is that correct?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to form.
THE WITNESS: Are you talking about cancer research or are you talking about lung cancer research?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Lung cancer.
A. Well, there were other types of studies as well, clinical impressions, uncontrolled clinical series of various physicians, there
were a few attempts at analyzing the constituents of cigarette smoke to see if there might be carcinogenic substances. So there
were a few additional areas as well.
Q. So we got the anecdotal clinical impressions, we have the animal painting experiments -- you're nodding your head.
A. Yes.
Q. We have the uncontrolled clinical studies?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. And we have a few attempts to identify the constituents of smoke or tobacco?
A. There may be others. But, as I sit here now, those are the ones that I remember most clearly.
MR. GARNICK: Just so the question is clear, when I objected to form, it's not clear to me whether we're talking about cancer
research in general or lung cancer and smoking.
MR. EDELL: Lung cancer. I thought that's what we were discussing.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Was that your understanding, Doctor?
A. If we're discussing lung cancer, I would say, yes, with an additional qualification, that these same types of studies were done
-- or same types of armchair speculation were done with 20 or 25 possible causes. It would be a major misrepresentation of the
literature to focus the concentration of effort on tobacco smoking and lung cancer during this time. More accurately, tobacco
was one of 20 or 25 purported causes, usually in a speculative, armchair type of fashion.
Q. I'm not trying to find out anything specific, Doctor, with regard to smoking and lung cancer. What I'm trying to find out is
generally what were the tools that were available to biomedical investigators in terms of assessing whether a substance or a risk
factor, if you will, was a possible cause of lung cancer in human beings. I thought that's what we were talking about.
A. And I believe I described to you the major types of studies that were done in those periods.
Q. Anecdotal clinical impressions?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Animal painting?
A. Correct.
Q. Uncontrolled clinical studies?
A. That's correct.
Q. And a few attempts to identify the constituents of I guess substances such as tobacco and smoke?
A. Right.
Q. Were there any other tools that were employed to determine whether or not a substance or a risk factor might be a potential
cause of lung cancer in human beings again during the period 1930 to 1940?
A. Well, there may have been. But, as I sit here right now, those are the major ones that I remember.
Q. Now, you said that there were approximately 20 to 25 possible causes of lung cancer in human beings identified during the
period of 1930 to 1940; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Basically, yes, though please let me clarify language. Identified is too strong a word, there were no factors identified. There
were perhaps 20 or 25 causes speculated or factors speculated in some way to be related. Nothing had been identified or
established is the point that I'm making.
Q. There were 20 to 25 --
A. Approximately.
Q. I'm trying get the right phraseology that you'll be comfortable with. -- possible causes that investigators were speculating
about with respect to lung cancer during the period 1930 to 1940?
A. I'11 help you, I'll phrase it again. There were approximately 20, two dozen, 25 factors that someone or another suggested,
usually without any evidence other than a hunch or speculation, might be related to the perceived increase in lung cancer that
was being observed.
Q. And what were those 20 to 25 factors?
A. Well, they had a whole range of things, they included trauma to the lung, accidents, falls, rib fractures.
Q. That's all included within trauma I assume?
A. Different types of trauma.
Q. Are you identifying each of those as being a factor, trauma, an accident, and fracture of the ribs; isn't that all subsumed
within the category of trauma, sir?
A. I think it's fair to subsume them within the category of trauma.
Q. Let's limit ourselves to trauma.
A. The influence of pandemics of 1819 was alleged to be a possible cause, scars from any type of cause, previous tuberculosis,
previous pneumonia, previous bronchitis, previous bronchiectasis, dusts of various sorts, and then a number of dusts and
environmental agents would be given, all of which was considered separately in the minds of workers at the time; so what I am
saying under dusts would actually be a number of different causes, heredity, eye color, dietary factors.
In the thirties it was thought for awhile or alleged that tomato juice, for example, might be a cause of lung cancer. I mentioned
genetics, radiation, pollution, tarring of the roads, increased use of automobiles, gasoline fumes; these would be examples of the
suggestions that were made to account for the increased amount of lung cancer that was being detected in the thirties and 1940's.
Q. Is that the complete list that you can think of?
A. Well, as I sit here at the moment, I think that's a representative list, I think it is. Without referring to notes or original articles,
I could not say with certainty that that's --
Q. Refer to your notes, sir.
A. I would have to refer to individual articles. My notes rarely would list every cause. I would have to go back to the original
articles for that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Are these the predominant speculated causes during that decade, 1930 to 1940?
A. Yes.
Q. Tobacco wasn't included, cigarettes wasn't included?
A. No, that's not correct, I mentioned that.
Q. I didn't hear you mention that.
A. I mentioned that among these causes cigarette smoking was purported by some to be a cause. No, I am very definitely
including cigarette smoking as one of the purported causes during this period, though I'm also pointing out that it was one of 20
or 25. And I'm sure you appreciate, without going back to the original papers, I'm approximating to the best of my recollection
the number of alleged offenders.
Q. Doctor, is trauma still considered to be a contributing factor to the development of lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: You mean today?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Today.
A. I have no comment on the inquiry into causes of lung cancer beyond January 1964. I do think that it is fair to say that, by
the 1950's, previous trauma was certainly reduced as an important component as the cause of lung cancer, though even in the
1950's you can find individual case reports of so-called scar carcinoma of the lung. On the other hand, the importance relative
to possible other causes was much less by the 1950's than it was in the 1930's. I cannot comment after January 1964.
Q. Well, up to January of 1964, was trauma considered to be a contributing factor to the development of lung cancer?
A. Trauma had an evolution, if you will, in terms of its popularity. It gradually declined in popularity over the thirties, the
forties, the fifties, and the sixties; so that, by the fifties and the sixties, it is considered at most an unimportant risk factor, if you
will. Though, as I also indicated, you can find even in the fifties and sixties, I would have to check my notes, a few reports of
scar carcinoma. So I don't think we can say that it totally vanished from thought or consideration, but it certainly was relatively
unimportant by that time.
Q. Doctor, is it your testimony that by 1964 the general consensus of the biomedical investigators in the area of lung cancer
concluded that trauma was not a contributing factor in the development of lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you please restate the question.
MR. EDELL: Could you read it back, please.
THE REPORTER: “Question: Doctor, is it your testimony that by 1964 the general consensus of the biomedical investigators
in the area of lung cancer concluded that trauma was not a contributing factor in the development of lung cancer?”
MR. GARNICK: My objection stands.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: It always does when she reads it back.
THE WITNESS: I would phrase it slightly differently. I would say that, by the 1950's and 1960's, the majority of investigators
considered trauma to be an unimportant cause of lung cancer, if it was related at all.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What do you mean by unimportant cause of lung cancer?
A. Perhaps I should more accurately say risk factor or associated factor. By unimportant I mean that, in the minds of most
investigators of that period, the total burden of lung cancer, if you will, that could in some way be associated with previous
trauma was but a very tiny fraction of the total amount of lung cancer that was seen.
Q. I understand that, Doctor. I'm asking you a totally different question. The question that I asked you is, by January of 1964,
whether the consensus was within the biomedical investigating community dealing with lung cancer that trauma was not a
contributing factor to the development of lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. Also asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Well, I think in all fairness the best answer that I can give you is the answer that I gave already, that by the
1960's the great majority of investigators considered trauma to be associated with no more than a tiny amount of the lung cancer
that was seen, if they accepted the thesis at all that it was associated.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Are you familiar at all with BCME, the chemical?
A. Could you give me the chemical name?
Q. I couldn't do it in a thousand years. At the next deposition I maybe could do that. But Dr. Sivak and quite frankly Dr. Gori
identified BCME as a cause of lung cancer in human beings. Now, we know that the general consensus is that BCME is not a
significant contributing factor to the overall numbers of lung cancer in the United States. Nevertheless, it may be a contributing
factor to the developments of lung cancer, albeit only in those people who are exposed to it; do you follow me, Doctor?
A. I believe so.
Q. And I'm asking the same question with respect to trauma. I'm not asking you whether or not 90 percent of all lung cancers
were considered to be caused by trauma as of January 1st, 1964. I'm asking you whether or not, as of January 1st, 1964, trauma
was still considered to be a contributing factor in the development of lung cancer in those people who had experienced trauma?
A. I believe that the same reply can be given to both perspectives in your question and I do appreciate both perspectives. If I
understand you correctly, you were saying that, of the individuals who have in some way sustained trauma to the chest or to
the lungs, what risks they have of developing lung cancer from that, recognizing that not many people may have trauma to the
lung; is that the question you're asking?
Q. A certain number of people develop lung cancer during the course of a year, if you will. Let's assume that 99 percent of
the lung cancers are attributable to something else. Is it fair to say that maybe 1 percent of the lung cancers may in some way
be attributable in whole or in part to trauma?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. GARNICK: This is before 1964?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Sure, January 1, 1964.
A. Well, I think that by January 1964 the view of most medical scientists was that trauma had been minimized in their mind as
a contributing factor to the development of lung cancer. And that is true from both perspectives.
If they were looking at the total amount of lung cancer, the amount that they would ascribe to trauma would be very tiny, if any
at all. Conversely, if they were looking at the subset of individuals who had sustained trauma to the lung, they would say that
the risk in that subset of developing trauma would be low. So I think that trauma is an example of an alleged association that
enjoyed more popularity in the thirties than it did in the fifties and the sixties when it had very little popularity by that time.
And I'm going to stretch now. Actually I'm enjoying these questions very much. I would like you to know that my habit is
to stretch; and, as Mr. Garnick and others can say, whenever we've had discussions, every hour to hour and a half I take a
stretch, and I'll do so now.
(Recess.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Did you want to say something, Doctor? I just saw you breathe a little bit and I thought you might want to say something.
A. Well, just to pick up on a comment before the break, I must say that, having spent so much time investigating these questions
and thinking about them, it actually is enjoyable having the opportunity to discuss them.
Q. Well, thank you. My pleasure.
Let me ask you about something I anticipate is going to come up, and that is whether you're going to allow this witness to
testify with respect to post-1964?
MR. GARNICK: The answer to that is we have no plans to do that.
MR. EDELL: No plans to let him testify?
MR. GARNICK: No plans to ask him any questions about the period of time following January of 1964.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, currently is trauma still considered to be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer?
A. Well, as I already indicated, I ended my systematic study in January of 1964 and I do not have an expert opinion on the
discussion, research, debate, et cetera, et cetera, that followed January of 1964. I can tell you as I already have that, by January
of 1964, trauma had been essentially eliminated in the minds of most people as a risk factor for lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
And, although I have not studied the literature subsequent to 1964 and do not have the same type of expert opinion that I do
1930 to 1964, I can tell you as a professor of internal medicine that we certainly do not talk about trauma today. But that's
not an expert opinion.
Q. You indicated that scars -- is that lung scars?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. -- was thought to be a possible factor in the development of lung cancer in human beings. Again, back in the 1930 to 1940
time frame, as of January 1, 1964, was lung scarring considered to be a contributing factor to the development of lung cancer
in human beings?
A. Well, again by January 1964 scarring had essentially been dismissed among the minds of most investigators as a risk factor.
You appreciate, of course, the evolution from 1930 to 1964. Almost all, though not entirely all, of the purported factors of the
1930's had diminished in importance or, indeed, had essentially been eliminated 34 years later.
Q. So is it fair to say, Doctor, that today lung scars is not considered to be a contributing factor to the development of Lung
cancer?
MR. GARNICK: I object to that as beyond his expertise.
THE WITNESS: I have no expert opinion on discussion beyond January 1964.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Are you familiar with the current literature?
A. I have no expert opinion on anything that happened after January 1964.
Q. I'm asking you whether or not, Doctor, you're familiar with the literature on lung cancer currently?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form. You mean all the literature on all phases of lung cancer?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you get journals, do you get publications as an internist?
A. Of course I do.
Q. What journals do you routinely receive?
A. I routinely receive the New England Journal of Medicine, Annals of Internal Medicine, the American Journal of Medicine,
Medical Letter, Archives of Internal Medicine, The Pharos.
Q. And do those publications carry articles dealing with lung cancer?
A. Occasionally.
Q. In terms of your care and treatment and diagnosis of lung cancer in your patients, do you rely upon these journals?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. I rely upon everything, journals, lectures, conferences, textbooks, grand rounds, discussions with experts. But I would
reiterate that my opinions for this case, my expertise for this case ends with January 1964.
Q. I understand what opinions the defendants may ask you for because they don't want you to get into the isseu of causation.
MR. GARNICK: I object to that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. That's a sticky wick for them?
A. I have no comment on what is a sticky wick for them.
Q. I'll ask you the simple question, whether cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer in human beings, and there you will
see an illustration of the sticky wick for these people.
MR. GARNICK: I don't know if it's a sticky wick, I'm not sure what that means, but certainly it's objectionable, it's beyond
his expertise.
MR. EDELL: Are you going to instruct him not to answer?
MR. GARNICK: I didn't do that.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Doctor, is it your opinion that cigarette smoking contributes to the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. I have no opinion on that.
Q. Do you have an opinion as a physician?
A. No, I have no expert opinion.
Q. Maybe you didn't hear me. Do you have an opinion as a physician who treats patients as to whether or not cigarette smoking
is a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: I don't understand what you mean by opinion as a physician.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Okay. Then I'll make it clear. Doctor, at least I think I gleaned from the Kotler transcript that you treat patients?
A. That's correct.
Q. That you see patients who, in fact, have lung cancer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Uh-huh.
Q. That you do see patients who smoke cigarettes?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. You have to say yes.
A. Yes.
Q. And as a physician your patients rely upon you to give them advice with respect to health care, do they not?
A. I give my patients advice; some of them follow my advice more than others.
Q. And there are patients who you know may be smoking and the patient may turn to you and ask you for advice, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You must have in your years of practice had patients turn to you and say, Doctor, I'm a cigarette smoker, what do you think;
did they ever say that to you?
A. Of course.
Q. And, as a physician responsible for the care of your patients, what do you tell them?
A. Well, I can describe to you what I do operationally when I take care of patients. I advise them that it would be prudent not to
smoke, that it's been shown to be a risk factor for a number of illnesses including lung cancer, that the common recommendations
from those who are expert in the area is that it would be in their best health interest not to smoke and that this, indeed,
is my recommendation to them and this is how I practice medicine. But I emphasize that I do that as a learner following
recommendations of those who are expert today in cancer, that I am not an expert in causation of lung cancer.
Q. And, if your patient says to you, Doctor, I don't understand this risk factor thing, I just want to know, do you think that
cigarette smoking really causes lung cancer in people, what are you going to tell the patient?
A. I would say I wish I knew what causes lung cancer, because I don't. And, to the best of my knowledge, we still don't know
ultimate causes of lung cancer. All I can tell you is that there is a strong statistical link, there clearly appears to be a link to
lung cancer as well as other conditions; and the recommendations of our experts today is that it is in your best interest not to
smoke and I'm recommending this to you, but I cannot honestly tell you what causes lung cancer and, indeed, there are issues
of fundamental biology underneath the surface of whatever inciting agents there may be. I wish I could tell you what causes
lung cancer because I would love to have the Nobel prize.
Q. Okay. Doctor, I understand that you don't know precisely the mechanism of how cancer develops and you would like to
have the Nobel prize. But I'm your patient and I want to know, I trust you, give me your best opinion, Doctor, more probably
than not do you think cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in people?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to that because I think that's been asked and answered now, I think he just answered that
question fully.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
MR. EDELL: If he tells me that he's answered that question, I'll be happy to hear it from his mouth, not the suggestion by
you, Mr. Garnick.
MR. GARNICK: That's an objection.
MR. EDELL: It's not an objection.
MR. GARNICK: It is an objection and I just made it.
MR. EDELL: It's not an appropriate objection.
MR. GARNICK: Whether or not it's appropriate, I just made it. I think it's appropriate.
But please, Doctor, answer it again.
THE WITNESS: I lost the question.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. I understand your reservation that you don't really know the mechanism on how cancer really develops. But I'm your patient
and I turn to you and I say, Doctor, one person to another, you're my doctor, I'm relying upon you, do you think that it's more
probable than not that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in human beings or is a cause of cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I say that, notwithstanding what I answered before, I don't know, I wish I did know. All I can tell you is that
the current teaching is that it is a risk factor, that's the extent of information that I have. My recommendation to you is to follow
current teaching, but I am not an expert in this and I cannot answer the question that you ask with any type of authority.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. The current teaching isn't that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Is that your testimony, Doctor?
A. What do you mean by current teaching?
Q. Whatever you're talking about in current teaching. I mean I can only refer to the literature. And it's my understanding from
review of the literature that with small exception people talk about cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer in human beings.
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form. What's the question?
BY MR. EDELL: The question is the witness has described the teachings today that, with respect to cigarette smoking and
lung cancer, that it's a risk factor.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. And I'm asking you whether or not, in fact, the teachings, whatever they may be, Doctor, in fact, reflect that cigarette smoking
not only is a risk factor for lung cancer but is a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: I object to that. I can't object to his answers, I can object to your questions.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. You can.
A. I am unable to answer that question. I have not reviewed the current literature in the same comprehensive fashion as I have
the literature until 1964. I am unable to speak with any authority on the state of knowledge today.
This is a very important point to an historian of medicine as well as to a critical physician who recognizes that common teachings
are frequently discarded with time, that we frequently -- that the history of medicine teaches humility, that today's pearl is often
next year's glass bead. I don't know what the state --
Q. You weren't talking about Raymond Pearl, were you?
A. No. We can if you like.
Q. We will later.
A. But I'm talking about a -- that will be very fine. we're talking about common wisdom in medicine. So many of today's
teachings at any point in time are subsequently disproven or discarded later. The answer -- I'm happy to give the answer as
many times as you wish -- is that I don't know what causes lung cancer, I don't have any expertise in this issue to even render
an informed opinion.
Q. Okay. Let's do it this way, Doctor. What you try to do in conducting your research into the history of medicine is to try to
assess what was known at a certain point in time by be it biomedical investigators or another segment of the medical population.
A. Or thought to be known.
Q. Or thought to be known. So what I'm asking you to do is not to give me a research project to try to divine what internists know
on March 25, 1991, regarding cigarette smoking and lung cancer but to tell me -- you're an internist, you get the publications
that internists in the United States normally receive?
A. Correct.
Q. Do you read the publications?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. So do you get about as much as the reasonably up-to-date internist in the United States on cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A. Yes. The reasonably up-to-date internists are not experts in cancer and lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Let me ask you this, in terms of the reasonably up-to-date medical internists in the United States, is it not the teaching among
those internists that cigarette smoking is not only a risk factor but a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form, also beyond his expertise.
THE WITNESS: I don't have a comment on that, it's not within my expertise.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. But you have done a systematic evaluation of the literature that internists are currently exposed to with respect to cigarette
smoking --
A. No, I have not done a systematic review of the literature.
Q. I thought you get that which your average internist in the general community receives in terms of publications that would
relate to internal medicine and lung cancer?
A. Well, your question reflects a lack of understanding of the nature of the medical literature. We have referred to clinical
journals with an orientation to clinical practice, we have excluded the large number of investigative journals that look into this
in a more critical, rigorous, experimental way from which any conclusions or policy, any conclusions however tentative, might
be drawn and any policies recommended. I haven't reviewed that literature and I just will not render an opinion in an area that
I'm not competent or qualified to enter an opinion.
Q. I'm not asking you to do that.
A. Yes, you are.
Q. No, I'm not, Doctor. Please let me see if I can explain myself better.
A. Okay.
Q. I am not asking you to make an assessment of the state of medical art with regard to cigarette smoking and lung cancer in
America today; do you have that?
A. Yes.
Q. What I am asking you to make an assessment of is the medical literature that internists in America routinely receive on the
issue of cigarette smoking and lung cancer and based upon that tell me whether or not that literature not only talks of cigarette
smoking in terms of it being a risk factor for lung cancer but, in fact, that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer in human
beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Do you understand the difference, sir?
A. That's a misguided question for a number of reasons.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. In other words you can't answer it?
A. It's a misguided question, it's based on false assumptions.
Q. Forget about whether or not it's misguided or not.
A. It is misguided and, hence, can't be answered.
Q. If you can't answer it, just tell me you can't answer it.
A. Well, I've told you I don't know how many times that I do not have an opinion on that subject. I would point out that I have
not reviewed the clinical journals systematically; secondly, any clinical journal is basing a recommendation or a thought on
original articles which I certainly have not gone back and read.
I am unable to answer that question, period, I don't know how many times -- you know, how much more clearly I can say it,
though I'm happy to answer the question the same way as many times as you ask the question. I do not have an opinion on that
question, I don't know. I wish I did, but I don't know.
Q. In other words you don't know what your colleagues in internal medicine consider to be -- I'm sorry.
You don't have an understanding as to what your colleagues in internal medicine know generally with respect to cigarette
smoking and lung cancer?
MR. GARNICK: Objection, form.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Is that correct?
A. I don't know what my colleagues know. I know certainly it's widely perceived to be a statistical association, a risk factor.
But I don't know how the actual evidence justifies those claims, I don't know how many of my colleagues have gone back to
the original literature and have established expert opinions, I just don't know.
Q. Okay. You indicated that, during the period 1930 to 1940, tuberculosis was identified as a factor that should be considered
as a possible cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Correct.
Q. As of January 1, 1964, was tuberculosis still considered to be a factor that was considered as a possible cause of lung cancer
in human beings or a contributing factor to the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Well, by 1964 tuberculosis had essentially gone the same way as scars and trauma, that it was no longer considered an
important factor, if, indeed, it was considered a factor at all.
Q. What do you mean an important factor, Doctor?
A. Either in terms of the number of cases of lung cancer that in some way would be associated with tuberculosis or alternatively
the risk of developing lung cancer in light of having had an attack of tuberculosis.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. In other words there wasn't a higher incidence of lung cancers in people who had tuberculosis as opposed to people who
had not had tuberculosis --
A. To the best of my --
Q. -- as of January 1964?
A. To the best of my knowledge, as we're discussing this now, as you know statistical associations are different from proof
of cause-and-effect relationship. I do not know offhand the percentage of individuals with tuberculosis who developed lung
cancer compared with those without tuberculosis who developed lung cancer.
On the other hand, I do recall that an association between the two, tuberculosis being a risk factor for the development of lung
cancer, is one of the many notions of the 1930's that had essentially lost popularity and credibility by the 1950's and 1960's.
MR. GARNICK: I'm sorry, could I get that answer read back.
THE REPORTER: “Answer: To the best of my knowledge, as we're discussing this now, as you know statistical associations
are different from proof of cause-and-effect relationship. I do not know offhand the percentage of individuals with tuberculosis
who developed lung cancer compared with those without tuberculosis who developed lung cancer.
On the other hand, I do recall that an association between the two, tuberculosis being a risk factor for the development of lung
cancer, is one of the many notions of the 1930's that had essentially lost popularity and credibility by the 1950's and 1960's.”
MR. GARNICK: Thank you.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. So in other words, as of January 1964, tuberculosis was not considered to be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer?
A. Certainly not a significant risk factor.
Q. How do you define significant?
A. Any notable increase -- to the best of my recollection, what you say is correct, that tuberculosis was no longer by most people
considered a risk factor, to the best of my recollection, by 1964.
Q. You indicated that, in the time frame 1930 to 1940, pneumonia was considered to be a factor that some believed might --
I'm trying to remember all the qualifications, might be a cause of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Or a risk factor.
Q. Or a risk factor, they speculated about it or hunched about it, however you want to qualify it. As of January 1, 1964, did
people still consider pneumonia to be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer?
A. Generally speaking that too had lost its supporters.
Q. What does that mean, sir?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. It means that the great majority of workers in the field no longer considered it to be a risk factor for the development of
lung cancer.
Q. Would the same be true with respect to bronchiectasis?
A. Yes.
Q. Would the same be true with respect to dusts?
A. Dusts, no, would not. Dusts posed a problem to investigators of the 1950's and 1960's.
Q. So, as of January 1964, dusts were still considered to be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Certain dusts and certain atmospheric pollutions had not been eliminated as risk factors for the development of lung cancer
as of January 1964. Unlike the other entities that you mentioned, that in the minds of most people who looked into it had not
been eliminated.
Q. When you say some dusts, what are you referring to?
A. I'm referring to among other things -- and I'd have to check my notes --
Q. Go ahead, check your notes.
A. No, I mean original papers. I don't have the information today to address that precisely so please accept that qualification.
But there was concern, if I'm not mistaken, about asbestos, about silicon, and about atmospheric pollution in general, whatever
components of pollution there might be.
Q. And, when you say there was concern, there was concern during the period 1930 to 1940 and that concern continued up
through January of 1964?
A. Yes. I'm saying that, unlike the other items that you had mentioned for which no evidence to support the hypotheses could
be brought forward, that there was evidence implicating certain dusts and atmospheric pollution and that investigators as of
January 1964 had not eliminated those factors as possibly being associated with lung cancer.
Q. Did they consider them to be risk factors for the development of lung cancer as of January 1964? Forget about eliminating.
A. Some investigators did, yes.
Q. What about the majority of investigators?
A. Well, I don't have numbers. I know many investigators considered them to be potential culprits on the list.
Q. When you say potential culprits --
A. Risk factors.
Q. Is that how you would describe cigarette smoking as of January 1964, that many people thought it was a potential culprit?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. I would say that by January 1964 clearly there was a great deal of focus on cigarette smoking and that was in the minds
of many people a major risk factor.
Q. But I'm asking you, with respect to dusts and environmental agents, is it true that in the minds of many people, as of January
1964, that they likewise were a significant risk factor for the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. Could you please repeat that.
Q. I don't know if I can do it again.
A. Could you please read it back.
THE REPORTER: “Question: But I'm asking you, with respect to dusts and environmental agents, is it true that in the mind's
of many people, as of January 1964, that they likewise were a significant risk factor for the development of lung cancer in
human beings?”
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
MR. EDELL: I thought it came out pretty good.
MR. GARNICK: I don't know what significant means.
MR. EDELL: I was just reiterating his prior use of the word.
MR. GARNICK: I don't know what it meant when he said it and I certainly don't know what it meant when you said it.
MR. EDELL: Then you certainly have your objection.
THE WITNESS: I think the best way to answer your question is to point out that in January 1964 some scientific workers were
suspicious that certain dusts and atmospheric pollution were risk factors for lung cancer.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Were what?
A. For lung cancer.
Q. Were what?
A. Risk factors for lung cancer as of January 1964.
Q. Were there many investigators that felt that way as of January 1964? I only use many because you used that before.
A. Well, there were a number including an important group from the National Cancer Institute. I cannot tell you precisely
how many there were, but I can tell you that respectable scientific investigators were of the opinion that dusts and atmospheric
pollution were risk factors for lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
I can also tell you that the same view was shared by many who also believed that tobacco smoking was a risk factor for lung
cancer. Those were not seen as exclusive or independent items, both can be contributing factors; and, looked at in that way,
the number was even larger.
Q. As of January of 1964, was heredity still thought to be a risk factor for the development of lung cancer in human beings?
A. That's an interesting question, because there was a group of biologists who had a biological orientation as opposed to an
epidemiological orientation to the problem of cancer who were very concerned about constitutional susceptibility, genetic
susceptibility, and there were respectable investigators who were concerned about that as the biological underpinning, if you
will, of the development of lung cancer, very troubled by the issue of the fact that most people who smoked did not develop
lung cancer and who were very respectful of the power of heredity and thought that the genes may in some way be implicated.
Q. So is the answer yes, that there were a significant number of respectable investigators as of January 1, 1964, that felt that
heredity was a risk factor for the development of lung cancer in human beings?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I don't know how to answer that question precisely because I'm not certain what a significant number
means.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. Many. I'm only using terms that you've used previously, Doctor.
A. I think that it would be accurate to reflect the knowledge of the times as saying that the genetic hypothesis had its advocates
including advocates among very respected medical scientists.
Q. And who were the very respected medical scientists you're referring to as of January 1964?
A. I think that by far the most important person who advanced that idea was Ronald Fisher from Great Britain. I qualify that
because, if I'm not mistaken, Fisher died in 1960. But he was a prominent advocate of the view that constitutional factors might
be involved and certainly the view that he helped popularize here and articulated did continue after his death. So I think I would
cite him as the most important person with that view.
Q. What other respectable investigators held that view, sir, as of January 1964?
A. Well, I'd have to go back to literature and my memory is not precise on that. I do know that, if I'm not mistaken, my
recollection is that Joseph Berkson from the Mayo Clinic was suspicious of the genetic hypothesis, that Clarence Little who
came from a background of genetics and was a very distinguished investigator was of that view, and there were individuals at
the National Cancer Institute whose names I could not tell you at the moment who are of that view.
Madge Macklin, an extremely prominent biologist, was of that view, though I qualified Madge Macklin because I don't
remember when she died. Certainly she was another who was very forceful in her articulation of the genetic hypothesis, and
she was a biologist and a geneticist who as I recall endorsed that we should look at biological genetic factors, though again I'm
speaking from memory and this is my best recollection as we're discussing this now.
Q. And what, if any, relationship did Clarence Cook Little have to the tobacco industry at or about that time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Well, Clarence Little you know as well as I somewhere around 1954 or so became president of the TIRC I believe it was.
But we should also point out that Little was an eminent biologist, very distinguished in scientific circles, a former university
president, if I'm not mistaken, and had a very distinguished scientific reputation generated from many decades of work.
His orientation had always been toward genetics, toward biology. In fact, it was his laboratory as you know in Maine that was
responsible for breeding different types of mice used in various genetic experiments. So this was a view that he had had through
a lifetime of scientific work that preceded any involvement that he did have with tobacco companies.
Q. What about R. A. Fisher's relationship with the tobacco industry prior to January of 1964?
A. I do not know the precise details of Fisher's involvement. I remember reading somewhere that he was connected in some
way insofar as the tobacco companies approached him for an opinion, something of that sort. That's really about as much as I
know. But I do think that, if we raise the question of Fisher, we should state clearly for the record who Fisher was.
Fisher was to biology as Einstein was to physics. we're talking about the greatest scientific figure in this entire history of lung
cancer and cigarette smoking, whose achievements in biology and biomedical research dwarfed those of any other person we
might mention. And it was his work that gave birth to the new science of clinical epidemiology that began in the 1950's.
For workers in the field or for tobacco companies not to have sought his opinion would have been for workers with a new
theory in physics or someone with a new idea in physics related to Einstein's work not to consult Einstein. Fisher represented
the mecca. And I don't think I can make that point too strongly, he is one of the greats in the history of biology.
Q. You have a lot of admiration for him?
A. Fisher was a human being, I'm not saying he was perfect or without his faults. I am saying that, when the history of 20th
century biology is written, his name will be one of the handful of remembered names as Einstein's name in physics, as Charles
Darwin and Louis Pasteur in biology of the 19th century, his scientific standing was of that magnitude.
Q. And when did he achieve this standing?
A. To my best recollection, and I do not profess to be R. A. Fisher's biographer, but to my best recollection his important
scientific work began in the twenties, continued into the thirties, the forties, the fifties. So by the 1950's he is a very senior
statesman who is already recognized by contemporaries to be one of the lasting giants. But his work dates back at least to the
early or mid-1920's.
Q. And your familiarity with Fisher stems in large part from your work on the history of eugenics; isn't that correct, am I
pronouncing it right, sir?
A. Eugenics and also the work that I have done more recently in terms of the history of the emergence of the new science of
clinical epidemiology.
Q. Tell me a little bit about eugenics, what is eugenics?
A. Eugenics is the idea of breeding better people.
Q. And was R. A. Fisher involved in the eugenics movement?
A. My recollection on that is imprecise, even though I have written on that subject. The book that I wrote was published 19
years ago.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. 1972?
A. 1972, 19 years ago. And I have really not thought of eugenics in the past 19 years. My recollection is that he was sympathetic
to the eugenics movement in a mild form in Great Britain.
Q. Were there any professional associations to which these eugenicists associated themselves?
A. Eugenicists in different countries did have professional associations. I am unable to tell you offhand what Fisher's
involvement with those associations was. Though I investigated the eugenics movement, my primary focus was the United
States and a little bit of looking at Britain. But my primary focus was the American eugenics movement.
Q. Tell me a little bit more about this eugenics, in terms of breeding people, what practical application did that have?
A. Well --
Q. Or maybe it's easier to ask you how it manifested itself?
MR. GARNICK: I'll object to form.
Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: What do you mean by manifested itself?
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What a surprise, we're going to do a statistical analysis every time Mr. Garnick objects to the form of the question and your
starting to answer it and then being unable to do so.
MR. GARNICK: I think that's uncalled for.
MR. EDELL: I don't think so.
MR. GARNICK: I think it is.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. In any event are there certain examples of eugenics that we can look to in history in terms of their philosophy being
implemented?
A. Well, in the United States, immigration laws were passed, the Immigration Restriction Act of 1924 would be an example.
Q. Any other examples that you can think of?
A. In the United States, the primary examples would be the Immigration Restriction Act and the so-called eugenic sterilization
laws.
Q. What are eugenic sterilization laws?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
A. Those were laws that were passed, though in the United States rarely enforced, though a couple of states did enforce them
a little bit, that people, primarily institutionalized individuals, who were deemed by the state to be genetically unfit were
vulnerable to sterilization so as not to pass on their bad genes to future generations.
Q. And can you give us some examples of this eugenics philosophy outside of the United States in terms of how it may have
been adopted?
A. That varied from country to country. The movement, to the best of my recollection, was much less organized in England
where Fisher lived than in the United States. To the best of my knowledge, it did not result in legislation in England as it did
in the United States.
And, to the best of my recollection from 20 years ago, it was more a social movement with those of certain conservative views
saying it would be nice if the upper classes had more children and the lower classes had fewer children. But that was the extent
of the discussion in England.
Q. In other words there should be an allocation of how many children people should have based upon their income; is that
correct?
A. Well, the eugenicists would say based upon the quality of their genetic material. But, as you rightly realize and as I
wrote about, there was a confusion of social prejudices with scientific statements and people -- judgments were often made
inappropriately about the genetic quality of an individual on the basis of income or social status or literacy or some other
criterion.
Q. Isn't the grossest example of eugenics the actions taken by the Nazis in Germany?
A. That would be the grossest example.
Q. Now, wasn't our friend Clarence Cook Little a eugenicist also?
A. He might have been, but I don't remember.
Q. Well, certainly, if you had put it in your book and identified him as a eugenicist in your book, you would have researched
that issue before you put him in your book, wouldn't you?
A. Yes, I would have. As I say I wrote the book over 20 years ago and I do not remember Little as clearly as I do some of the other
more active figures. I do think what is important to point out is that not all people who are sympathetic to the eugenics standpoint
were alike. There was quite a range of views, some people were very soft and conservative and cautious in their statements.
AS you point out correctly, such ideas were grotesquely misused in Germany. There is a whole range and spectrum both of
opinion in the matter and of participation in organizational activities and each individual has to be appraised on his own merit.
Not all eugenicists were alike, the eugenics movement had a different flavor in different countries.
Q. R. A. Fisher was the editor of Annals of Eugenics?
A. I don't remember, he might have been, but I don't remember.
Q. Well, if you put it in your book, you would be pretty confident that that was the fact?
A. Yes, I would. But you should also recognize that that journal changed names to Annals of Human Genetics.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. And you were also aware that he opposed that change, aren't you, Doctor?
A. I don't remember.
Q. If that was in your book, that would certainly be enough evidence of the truth of the matter for you, wouldn't it?
A. I stand behind anything that I wrote and it's very possible he opposed that change. He was a conservative in his social views,
he had a strong belief in the power of genetics which came out of a lifetime of scientific work, and he very well could have
opposed that view. And, indeed, I researched that question or I probably researched that question 20 years ago. And, if you've
looked at my book recently, you're probably more up to date on that than I am.
Q. And our friend R. A. Fisher agreed with the eugenics philosophy that certain steps should be taken such as family allowance
is graded in proportion to income; is that correct?
A. I don't recall.
Q. If you wrote it, that would be the case, wouldn't it?
A. I don't remember that I wrote that.
Q. You did.
MR. GARNICK: Well, can you show him something.
MR. EDELL: I certainly can.
THE WITNESS: Well, show me. I mean he may have, I just don't remember. I would like to clarify something for the record.
I'd like to point out -- I'm saying two things to you. I have already indicated to you, you didn't have to ask this, but I brought
forward that Fisher was a man of conservative social views who was sympathetic to some of the more mild aspects of the
eugenics movement, there's no secret about that.
And, secondly and most importantly, scientists are human beings and are allowed their political and social views independent
of their scientific work. And, regardless of whatever involvement Fisher might have had at an earlier, more innocent point of
time with the eugenics movement before World War II, that in no way has any bearing upon his scientific stature.
In the history of the 20th century, it is biology where he remains a giant. Even though he had social views that some today may
look upon with a certain amount of displeasure, which some of his colleagues look upon with certain amounts of displeasure,
he was a great scientist, one of the giants of 20th century biology, and that is the point that I'm making today.
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. When you say an earlier point in innocence, when. was this point of innocence, up through World War II?
A. As a generalization, yes. In the United States, in Britain, in other countries, the eugenics movement managed to survive
through the 1940's. And then, in the aftermath of World War II, when the lessons of Nazi Germany became apparent and when
it was learned how grotesquely some of these scientific ideas had been misused and the human tragedies that resulted, that many
people who might have been vaguely supportive of the eugenics movement before World War II certainly lost any enthusiasm
they had for it after World War II.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Antonio CIPOLLONE, Individually and as Executor of the..., 1991 WL 11685904...
Q. Is it your testimony that R. A. Fisher was only vaguely supportive of eugenics?
A. It's my testimony that Fisher was a social conservative who was involved with the eugenics movement in Great Britain. I
do not remember the extent or date of his involvement. I do know that his involvement was well-known by his contemporaries
and that independent of his involvement he was considered one of the great and most formidable biologists of the 20th century.
MR. GARNICK: Marc, it's almost five o'clock.
(Discussion off the record.)
BY MR. EDELL:
Q. What do you mean by a social conservative, sir, in general? You described our friend Dr. Fisher as a social conservative.
A. Again I'm speaking on recollection of work 20 years ago on another subject. With that understanding, there were those
in Britain who had a great sense of class-consciousness, they liked the wealth and the aristocracy and thought that there was
something inherently better about the wealthy and the aristocracy than about the middle classes or the working classes; you
might say, in the most derogatory fashion, snobbish. And Fisher as I recall was a little bit snobbish.
Q. That's how you would describe his social conservatism, as simply being snobbish?
A. He was a conservative, he had-a great deal of class-consciousness. But, as I've said before -- and you continue to ask me
questions about a subject and about certain aspects of an individual that I looked into over 20 years ago and whose activities
were only tangential to the book that you're citing. So anything I say has to be said in that qualification. You are testing a 20
year memory on a man who was not a central figure of the study done.
Q. Maybe Mr. Garnick will let you read the book tonight and refresh your memory.
MR. HARDY: I think this is a deposition that could easily be completed in two days and I just want to put you on notice, Mr.
Edell, while you still have a day to examine, that the defendants may not agree to produce Dr. Ludmerer voluntarily for any
deposing after tomorrow.
It's also my position, having worked out some agreements with you both by telephone and correspondence, that our agreement
does not extend to any financial courtesies to you after a second day of deposition of Dr. Ludmerer. And all I'm doing is putting
you on notice of that so that you won't be claiming later that we made any representations that you were going to get more
than two days of voluntary production.
MR. EDELL: I have never made any claim of surprise with you people yet. I believe our understanding is clear. I think that,
with regard to this witness' deposition, the issue of state of the art is one that spans a substantial period of time. It took you
people well over a week to take Dr. Harris' deposition. I can assure you that I will not be even close to that in length. Thank you.
(Whereupon, at 5:05 p.m., the deposition was adjourned, to be reconvened at 9:00 a.m., March 26, 1991.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83
