Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Original Image of 2003 WL 25967718 (PDF)
2003 WL 25967718 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
Circuit Court of Florida,
15th Judicial Circuit, General Jurisdiction Division.
Broward County
Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the
Estate, and Survivors of Leila Schwartz, deceased, Plaintiffs,
v.
LIGGETT GROUP, INC., et al., Defendants;
Beverly Davis and Alan Davis, Plaintiffs,
v.
Liggett Group, Inc., et al., Defendants.
Nos. 03-2074 AA, 02-18944 O5.
December 18, 2003.
Deposition of Otis L. Graham, Jr., Ph.D.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Broward County, Florida
Name of Expert: Otis L. Graham, Jr., Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances.
For the Plaintiffs: John F. Venable
Venable & Venable, PA
4902 Andros Drive
Tampa, Florida 33622
(813) 281-1200
Angel M. Reyes
Reyes & O'Shea, PA
1101 Brickell Avenue, Suite 1601
Miami, Florida 33131
(305) 374-8110
(305) 374-8112 Fax.
For the Defendants: Len Feiwus
Kasowitz, Benson, Torres & Friedman, LLP
1633 Broadway
New York, New York 10019-6799
(212) 506-1700
(212) 506-1800 Fax
lfeiwus@kasowitz.com.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
At Raleigh, NC
December 18, 2003 - 10:56 a.m.
Reported by:
Ginger Eason Huber
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXAMINATIONS
TABLE
STIPULATIONS
1. The deposition of OTIS L. GRAHAM, JR., Ph.D., may be taken on December 18, 2003, beginning at 10:56 a.m. at the offices
of Capital Reporting, located at 4004-101 Barrett Drive, Raleigh, North Carolina, before Ginger Eason Huber, a Verbatim
Reporter and Notary Public.
2. Said deposition shall be taken for the purpose of discovery or for use as evidence in the above-entitled action, or for both
purposes.
3. Any objections of any party hereto as to notice of the taking of said deposition or as to the time or place thereof, or as to the
competency of the person before whom the same shall be taken are deemed to have been met.
4. The Florida Rules of Civil Procedure shall control the taking of said deposition and the use thereof in court.
5. Objections to questions and motions to strike answers need not be made during the taking of this deposition but may be ??
Q: July of 2003?
A: Yes.
Q: All right, sir. And who contacted you?
A: Allen Purvis.
Q: Is Mr. Purvis an attorney?
A: Yes.
Q: And did Mr. Purvis advise you who he represented when he contacted you?
A: Well, I -- I mean, I knew.
Q: All right. And what was your -- tell me your understanding of who Mr. Purvis represented when he contacted you in July
of 2003.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: He's Purvis of Johnson, Tyler & Purvis.
Q: All right, sir. Do you know who that -- what is your understanding of who that firm represents?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. You can answer.
A: My understanding is Philip Morris.
Q: All right, sir. Had you met Mr. Purvis before July of 2003?
A: Yes.
Q: And when did you first meet Mr. Purvis?
A: I believe it was March of 1989.
Q: Can you tell me the circumstances surrounding your meeting Mr. Purvis in March of 1989?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I received a phone call in my office at Chapel Hill.
Q: And what was that phone call involving?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. The witness is cautioned to the extent that the question calls for attorney work product information
and is cautioned not to answer.
To the extent that the witness may answer the question without revealing privileged information, he may do so.
Q: Why was Mr. Purvis calling you in 1989, sir?
A: Mr. Purvis didn't -- you asked me earlier when did I meet with Mr. Purvis. Now -- I indicated -- I mean to indicate that the
phone call which led to the meeting with Mr. Purvis came from Janet Johnson.
Q: Okay. All right. So you got a call from Janet Johnson. Is Ms. Johnson an attorney?
A: Yes.
Q: And was that phone call merely to set up a meeting, or did you discuss other things in that phone call?
A: It was to suggest a meeting.
Q: Okay. Were you told at that time the subject matter of any future -- what any future meeting might involve?
A: In a very general way.
Q: And, sir, what did you understand the subject matter of a future meeting with Mr. Purvis or others to be?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: This was 13 years ago, but my memory of it is that they wanted to talk with me about the history of tobacco in America.
That's --
Q: All right, sir.
A: That's my memory.
Q: Now, prior to March of 1989, had you been contacted by anyone else concerning the subject matter of the history of tobacco
use in the United States?
A: No.
Q: And had you done any research in the area of tobacco use in the United States prior to March of 1989?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. You can answer.
A: I had done general reading and educated myself as an American historian. And in the process, one learns, among other
things, that tobacco is a very important product.
Q: Had you engaged in any systematic study of the use of tobacco in the United States prior to you being contacted in March
of 1989?
MR FEIWUS: Objection.
A: No.
Q: Had you published anything in the literature concerning the use of tobacco in the United States prior to being contacted in
March of 1989 by Ms. Johnson?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I was involved with two other authors -- three other authors in a textbook.
[Note: Pages 13-16 missing in original document]
?? history and the client has a need for history and they come to a professional historian, like you'd go to a professional doctor
or a lawyer.
Q: All right.
A: And I've been involved in this.
Q: All right. Who had some of your clients -- who had your clients been in public history, to your recollection, prior to 1989?
A: Prior to 1989, my involvement was as an academic. I had taught in the graduate program. The first graduate program in
public history was founded at my university by a colleague down the hall.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
I was intrigued by this, but it was brand new. It didn't even have a term, a language. No academic history department had ever,
to my knowledge, or anybody's knowledge, set up a graduate program to train young historians to leave the campus and be
public historians. This was new.
I was asked by my colleague to teach in the program. I was intrigued by it. I plunged into the teaching and taught for four years.
We were fairly visible nationally, so it was known that Robert Kelly, the founder, Otis Graham, Carol Purcell, a few others,
were teaching and had started a new program, were turning out graduate students and were teaching.
So that was -- I was fairly visible in that, but I had -- at that time, I had not done public history for clients at that time.
Q: Okay. So prior to 1989, you were teaching graduate students about the concepts and the practice of public history, but you
yourself had not actually engaged in being retained by individuals or entities to perform a public history function, is that correct?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I think that's correct, the timing. My client work came later, I think. I may be forgetting one.
Q: All right, sir. Was your first client in the area of public history Philip Morris?
A: My first applied history contract or engagement or involvement was with Allen Purvis and Jan Johnson.
Q: And they were attorneys representing Philip --
A: They were attorneys.
Q: -- Philip Morris at the time?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: Is that correct?
A: I think they were.
Q: You understood that the attorneys, Mr. Purvis and Ms. Johnson, were acting on behalf of a client when they retained your
services, did you not?
A: I think I understood that.
Q: And you understood that their client was a tobacco company, is that correct?
A: I think they told me that.
Q: All right, sir. When you were first contacted by Ms. Johnson, did you then subsequently agree to have a meeting with Mr.
Purvis and perhaps others?
A: I agreed to have a meeting with Jan Johnson and Allen Purvis.
Q: All right, sir. And did that meeting, in fact, take place?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: It did.
Q: And what was the nature of the -- as you understood it, of the assignment or what they wanted you to do?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. To the extent that the question calls for work product information, I ask the witness not to answer.
THE WITNESS: Am I supposed to answer?
MR. VENABLE: I believe you're supposed to answer.
MR. FEIWUS: You can only answer if you can reveal that -- you can only answer if you can answer the question without
revealing information concerning litigation and attorney work product.
If you can answer without revealing that information, you can answer.
MR. VENABLE: Just so it's ??
[Note: Pages 21-24 missing in original document]
?? would -- and the suggestion was that I'd begin research, assess the literature, the secondary literature, for what interesting
questions there were about the cigarette and determine if I -- and determine if I wanted to go forward.
After about a month, I guess it was about a month, I said I would -- I would begin. The understanding was I would -- I would
do research for a while and we would talk again. I would tell them what I was finding. If they wanted to -- I haven't mentioned
-- it was obvious that I would be paid for this and I could pay graduate students.
It's a research project like any other, in a sense. You get a funder. Most research at most universities is funded. You have to have
a client. Even historians need funders, most of them. Graduate students need pay. One needs travel money. One needs copy
money. So this was a -- this was an opportunity to fund research in a certain broad direction. And inside that broad direction,
I made -- it was clear to me I made the choice.
So I -- after about a month of pondering whether I had room in my research schedule and whether I was interested, I called
and said I would begin.
Q: Okay. So you spoke to the lawyers in March of 1989, and then you spoke to Mr. Patterson. I assume that would have been
within that 30 days before you --
A: I think it was.
Q: -- spoke back to the lawyers again?
A: I think it was.
Q: Okay. So sometime around April or May of 1989, you said to the lawyers, “I would at least begin to take a look at this
research project”?
A: Yes.
Q: All right, sir. And will you get --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I've --
Q: Go right ahead.
A: I've been thinking about 1989, and it could have been 1988.
Q: Could have been 1988. Okay. That's fair enough. A long time ago.
Now, you indicated to me that the subject matter that you were being asked to investigate was the history of the use of tobacco
in the United States, particularly the cigarette, and with regards to its social history and role in American life.
Were you given that broad of scope, in other -- is my question? Is that the scope you were given? Nothing else, no other direction?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I knew -- I had written two books by -- I had written more than two books by this time, but my first two books were on
the Progressive Era, a lengthy period of social reform in the US that began in the 1880s or 1890s and lasted until World War
I, two books that were out there.
These books were about these social movements that made up the Progressive Era. One of these social movements was the
prohibition of alcohol. Another social movement was the attack upon the cigarette. And the reformers were often the same
people, not always. I was aware of this.
Q: Had you written about the attack upon the cigarette at that time?
A: I had not written about it, and there's not -- there wasn't much written about it. And I knew -- I knew only a certain amount,
not a great deal about it, but I was aware that it was contemporaneous with prohibition. It was contemporaneous with the social
movement to -- the social reform movement to end child labor and a number of other movements that I was familiar with. So
it was on my turf.
These -- this ruckus over the cigarette had been in my turf. I knew that much. And the idea that I would find it an interesting
social movement or an interesting episode or an interesting topic was plausible to me, and I looked into it.
Q: Did your research include things such as research into the methods by which tobacco was utilized to make an end product?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
[Note: Pages 29-32 missing in original document]
In addition, manufacturing techniques -- the Bonsack machine gave, by the mid 1880s, the capacity of American manufacturers
of tobacco to make a uniform product -- you could count on the size and the shape and the weight -- cheaply. I mean, you could
fire 50 rollers of cigarettes with one machine, replacing them with a machine.
So the degree which it was aligned for urban, fast-paced living and the ability to manufacture the cigarette that way and make
it cheaply available gave the cigarette advantages -- in hindsight, we can see this -- over all the other forms of using tobacco,
whatever the other forms might be.
Q: The cigar had predated the cigarette, had it not?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: Yes.
Q: Was it recognized in the 1880s, 1890s that the method of smoking cigars and cigarettes were different?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Method of making?
Q: No, method of smoking. Let me strike that and let me ask you this.
Was it recognized in the 1880s or 1890s that cigar smoke generally was not inhaled and cigarette smoke generally was inhaled?
Was that understood at that time?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I think that was understood. It was understood -- cigars and cigarettes were understood as how in -- but not -- not all people
who smoked cigars failed to inhale. Some people inhaled cigars, did in the 19th century. Some didn't inhale, but you do inhale
the cigarette. I think that was understood. I haven't looked into that lately.
Q: All right. And you said that cigarette -- that tobacco had always been attacked in whatever form --
A: Yes.
Q: -- is that correct?
A: Yes.
Q: Was tobacco attacked as a cigarette, when it was used as a cigarette?
A: It was immediately attacked as soon as the cigarette appeared.
Q: All right. And what was the nature of the attack? What were the allegations?
A: They were -- they were many. They were -- the principal ones, I would say, would be allegations about harm to the body,
which we would call health. And there were a number of physical illnesses that were associated with it, according to its critics.
In addition to the physical problems, it entered American slang in the 1880s as a coffin nail. The dictionaries of slang tell us
that that term spread throughout America and can be called American slang, which means everybody understood it. And the
coffin nail slang tells us that the top health hazard of cigarettes was said to be it will kill you.
They had -- Americans at this time in the late 19th century had an inadequate scientific and medical understanding. It was just
from death and shortness of breath for athletes. They -- they alleged all sorts of illnesses to cigarettes.
Q: Okay.
A: Insomnia.
Q: So am I --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
MR. FEIWUS: I just want to make sure the witness is finished.
Q: All right. I'm sorry.
A: I hadn't finished, but --
Q: Go ahead. No, you go ahead. If you haven't finished, you --
A: Along with these -- with physical -- irritated lungs, enlarged heart, indigestion, ulcer, vomiting -- all of these physical harms,
there was also moral, what I think we, would call moral harms and hazards; that it was a gateway drug and led to other things;
that it undermined individuals' self-reliance; that it would -- and that it led to degeneration of character.
Language like that was American 19th century language. They were all bundled together, the physical, medical, the health ??
[Note: Pages 37-40 missing in original document]
?? whether or not or what percentage of the population believed those writings to be true?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Beyond the scope of the witness's disclosure statement. You can answer.
A: I'd like you to repeat it, then.
Q: Okay. First of all, let me ask you this. How do you know who received information contained in a writing about cigarette
health hazards during the period of 1850 to 1900? How do you know who received that information?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I can't tell you who read George Trask's journal. There's evidence, however -- the 19th century is a little more difficult than
the 20th century, but there is much evidence that messages like George Trask's message and the other messages that one runs
across were -- were showing up elsewhere in society.
The 19th century is harder and my primary interest has not been the 19th century, so I didn't pursue that question in the 19th
century with the -- with the -- with the dedication as I have for the 20th century.
Q: Are you in a position to offer an opinion as to what the general population knew about the health hazards of cigarette smoking
during the period of 1850 to 1900?
A: Yes. Yes.
Q: And can you tell me what that opinion is?
A: It would be that the health hazards of tobacco were common knowledge in the America of the late 19th century.
Q: And upon what do you base that opinion?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: Books written not by historians but primary sources first, always primary sources first. There was -- the libraries are jammed
with a large number of books about tobacco written by people in the 19th century.
And sometimes these books are mostly praise, but often they're mixed with the hazards and sometimes they're only hazards.
And I don't know how many of those books I've looked at. So that's -- that's primary evidence.
And then there are letters. John Quincy Adams, the sixth president of the United States, wrote a letter. Historians can read that
letter because it's been preserved. More than one letter, he wrote a lot of letters, but there's a famous letter that is often quoted
about how he was addicted to tobacco and he -- and it was bad for him and he knew it was bad for him and he broke the habit
and he hated the habit and he wanted all Americans to stop.
You get letters, you get books, you get diary entries. You get articles in -- in magazines like George Trask's magazine and
articles in the magazines of today. Mass communications developed pretty fast in the late 19th century. Harper's Magazine has
articles about it. It goes back -- Harper's Magazine goes back to the 1870s.
So in all these sources, it just -- it's just saturated with talk about tobacco. And when you get into talk about tobacco, there's
health hazards always involved.
Q: Okay. But my question is, you've stated that you have an opinion that it was common that the -- that the health hazards of
cigarette use were common knowledge --
A: Yes.
Q: -- during the period of 1850 to 1900, and you've told me that there were writings about the health hazards of cigarettes
during that period of time, correct?
A: Yes. It was also a social movement against the cigarette.
Q: Okay. Well, let -- one, you've told me about the writings, and then --
A: All right.
Q: -- we'll get to the social movement in just a second. So now let me ask you a few questions about the writings.
How were you able to ascertain what the American population believed -- well, strike that.
How were you able to ascertain that ??
[Note: Pages 45-48 missing in original document]
?? and answered, beyond the scope.
A: My interest in and my -- my interest has not been in belief, and I'm not claiming that I have established belief. I'm trying
to establish the availability of information.
Q: All right.
A: And it's -- whether it's broadly received. I've made a -- I indicated across the country, or is there some -- and I found no
regional differences.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: During the period of 1850 to 1900, were there also writings which appeared in the literature claiming that there was no
hazardous impact from the use of tobacco products?
A: A very small amount.
Q: Were there any?
A: I think I've seen -- I know I've seen, you do see, in that century -- whenever you're looking into the history of tobacco, you
see statements that might be -- it's so pervasive, the attack, that there are always some people who make a written record an
historian can find saying, “I'm not convinced of the -- of the attack. The attack sounds to me like hogwash, and I'll use a cigar
if I want to use a cigar.” There is that.
Q: Weren't there also writings during that period, from 1850 to 1900, which, in fact, claimed that the use of tobacco had a
benefit for human beings?
A: Yes.
Q: So if I'm correct, the writings span the entire spectrum, from -- that use of tobacco products were good for you all the way
to the end that use of tobacco products were bad for you?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Mischaracterizes the testimony.
Q:Is that correct?
A: I'd like to have the language again, if you don't mind.
Q: Okay. My question is that after -- when you looked at what had been written about tobacco during the period of 1850 to
1900, you found in your research that the writings included persons who had written and said that the use of tobacco was good
for human beings, that you found people that wrote and said that the use of tobacco was harmful to human beings, and you
found those that wrote and said, “We don't think it's been proven that it's bad for human beings.”
You found that entire spectrum in the literature during that period from 1850 to 1900, correct?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Leading --
A: If there's an implication --
MR. FEIWUS: Let me just finish my objection.
THE WITNESS: Sorry.
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Leading, mischaracterizes the testimony. You can answer.
A: If there's an implication that it was evenly balanced, I don't -- I reject that implication. But if there's not that implication, and
if you're just asking about a spectrum, I agree that you can find along that spectrum -- you will find items along that spectrum,
not in any balanced way.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Did you find there was more written in the literature about the harmful impact of tobacco use than -- for instance, that it
was good for you?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I never tried to get a percentage or some sort of number on that.
Q: All right. So you mentioned to me you didn't think it was balanced, that that spectrum wasn't balanced that we just talked
about, and I was just trying to get a handle on what you had found relative to the numbers of any of those categories we talked
about.
A: I never tried to do a balancing. I never tried to do any accounting.
Q: All right. Let's move on from the 1900s, and I want to take the next 50 years as a segment and talk about that a little bit.
A: Okay.
Q: In your research from 1900 to 1950, did you ??
[Note: Pages 53-56 missing in original document]
?? articles and my topic is not medical opinion --
Q: Yes, sir.
A: If I encounter medical opinion, I'm interested in it, but -- so -- now I've forgotten --
Q: Okay. Let's go back. Okay. I understand -- let me just ask you this.
Did you conduct a thorough search of the medical literature as part of your assignment that you undertook in 1989?
A: No.
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry.
MR. FEIWUS: No, go ahead. Just stating my objection. That's all.
Q: (By Mr. Venable) So your focus in your research was not medical articles themselves?
A: Not my primary focus.
Q: Did --
A: Themselves.
Q: All right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: If they become involved in public discussion, that's my dollar.
Q: Okay. Am I correct that you might encounter a medical article if that medical article is quoted, for instance, like, in a
newspaper?
Is that how you would encounter that, or would you encounter it more in going to a medical library and looking up articles
in the medical library?
MR. FEIWUS: Object to the form.
A: I would encounter it -- overwhelmingly, I would encounter it in the general stream of media discussion. I don't go to medical
schools and go through the medical -- for the reason that I said, that's not my focus.
Q: All right.
A: It would have to be discussed in -- in the public arena.
Q: All right. In the public arena discussion, did you encounter discussions during the period prior to 1950 by persons who
claimed that there -- that cigarette smoking was not a cause of lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Did I encounter -- exactly, would you --
Q: Yes. Did you.encounter persons who claimed in the public literature that you were reading that there was no relationship
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: You're asking about a period, 1900 to 1950, your -- your framing of a period --
Q: That's correct. That's correct.
A: -- in which the discussion of lung cancer is very skimpy. That comes after 1950, in and after 1950.
Q: But you told me you had found -- there were 40-something references to cigarettes and lung cancer prior to 1950, if I
understood your testimony. Is that correct?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I meant to say, I think I did say, I hope I said --
Q: Okay. I may have misunderstood, so you tell me again, if you don't mind.
A:-- that I have -- I have learned that there are -- that, generally, it is agreed among people who count medical articles --
Q: Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: -- and who care about that sort of thing, that you can count 40 medical articles in -- published in, I guess, medical journals,
wherever they get published, on the question, which was a minor medical question compared to many other illnesses that people
are worried about, on -- on lung cancer in -- in that period.
Q: Okay. Well, then I did misunderstand, so I want to see if I can make clear.
In your evaluation of the public literature -- not what maybe you found in a medical library but looking at the public sphere, did
you find references during the period of 1900 to 1950 concerning any relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Asked and answered.
A: It's a very, very, very minor health hazard compared to all the other health hazards that dominated the discussion of that
period.
[Note: Pages 61-64 missing in original document]
?? opinion that something is common knowledge.
First, the sheer inundation of the public. Year after year after year, through the main channels of communication: in the media;
through the schools; to some degrees, through the churches. The avenues are multiple. Year in and year out, this story stays.
It changes a little bit, but it stays in the -- in the culture.
And the inundation is not the inundation of quack, marginal, eccentric, unreliable sources. The -- my evaluation is that the
sources are increasingly distinguished and hard to impeach. So it's -- my first answer would be the inundation of high-quality
information in a sustained way about an important matter; health, including death.
Q: Okay.
A: So this is not off the margin in terms of the subjects of people's interest, and it's there. So that's the first -- my first part
of my response.
Slang itself: Coffin nails, that means death. Cancer sticks, that means cancer, that means death. Slang is common knowledge or
-- or it wouldn't work as slang. You can't have slang that isn't universally -- people know what that means. That's impressive.
And not necessarily finally, but the third point I want to make now, as I think about your question, if you read as widely as I
have read -- and you never find not one argument by anybody that this isn't common knowledge. You find many arguments
that it is common knowledge.
The executive president of the AMA -- I -- I remember this -- just one example; I can multiply this -- in 1966 said, “This has
been common knowledge for at least ten years,” talking about the lung cancer question, not all the other problems. The surgeon
general -- here's another example -- Leroy Burney in 1957 said, “We have informed the American people with the cooperation
of the media. They are fully informed.”
And so you can -- I can multiply those, and you -- those are on the one scale. And on the other scale, nobody, whoever makes
an argument of any kind, this isn't common knowledge, or it's not common knowledge in Arkansas, zero.
That's impressive to an historian.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Did you -- were you able to investigate the beliefs held by persons who smoked cigarettes as to the health hazards the
smoking habit presented?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Well, you used the term “beliefs.”
Q: Yes.
A: Mostly, I'm interested in information. Beliefs and information are not the same thing.
Q: Well, let me -- let me strike the question. Let me ask it again.
If we were to limit the population to just smokers, okay, just people who smoke cigarettes, were you able to determine the
common knowledge of those smokers as to what they understood the health hazards of cigarettes to be during any particular
point in time?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I haven't tried to isolate the smokers from the general population. I'm interested in the general population. Whether a person
smokes or not is their choice. What they do with the information is their choice. That's not my topic.
Q: Do different groups of people historically receive information differently?
And I'm not talking just about tobacco now, but as a historian, do certain groups of people tend to receive information differently,
or they all receive it generally the same way?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I'm an historian, and I think that sounds like a question for a psychologist or someone with different expertise.
Q: And are you -- are you qualified to evaluate how a person would process information given to them?
A: I'm not a professional psychologist, if ??
[Note: Pages 69-72 missing in original document]
?? choose whether you wanted to look at the history of the tobacco plant or you could look at health hazards or you could look
at the history of the manufacture of cigars. You could pick any of those. They didn't care. They just wanted you to do any
research about anything having to do with tobacco.
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: Is that -- is that your testimony, sir?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I always like to put things my own way, but you're asking the questions, and I -- I should respond to your question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
They made it clear it was very broad, and they were asking for one of my abilities. I have -- at a low, modest level, I have
several abilities -- one is to write, one is to research the methodology of history -- but I -- I like to ask questions my way. I'm
a question finder and then the answer comes after.
And they made it clear that I should go out and find the question that interested me and then pursue it and then tell them. The
implication was if I went off on -- the implication -- I guess this is the implication. This wasn't specified. If I went off in a
direction that they, for any reason, felt they didn't want to fund anymore, they would terminate the funding and I would then
do whatever I wanted.
So I was -- I felt in control all the way. And I -- I insisted on that because one has to insist on that, particularly with clients.
Historians who don't work with clients may not understand this. They -- they pick their topics and -- and they do it, if they
have the time and resources and abilities.
When you work with clients, it's different and you have to insist that clients understand that you are the professional. I did --
I insisted on that. They had no problem with that.
Q: All right, sir. But my point is, you had no direction whatsoever as to what you were going to research about tobacco. It
could have been anything you chose.
A: That was my understanding.
Q: And --
A: I said earlier, if you look back -- if we look back, that they did indicate a special interest in the cigarette era, which I knew
to be the last 100 to 125 years of the long history of tobacco.
Q: And they didn't suggest to you at all that they were interested in the issue of common knowledge regarding the health hazards
of cigarette smoking?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: No. I didn't --
Q: They did not indicate that to you at all?
A: I didn't hear that language.
Q: All right, sir. And you had no idea that they had any particular interest in the health hazards associated with tobacco use?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: That was -- no specific dimension of the broad subject, other than tobacco and in the tobacco story, which is 500 years old,
the modern era and the cigarette. That was the only direction -- if you call that direction, that's the potential agenda for me to
determine what kind of work interested me.
Q: So how long did it take you to complete this project?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: It's Still ongoing.
Q: Well, did you ever render any report back to Mr. Purvis or Ms. Johnson or anybody else regarding your findings?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes.
Q: When did you do -- when did you render your first report?
A: My first report would have been verbal, over the phone: “I'm finding this and that, this and that. I'm very interested in this
and that,” and -- and see what they say.
That was our understanding. Our understanding was I would keep in touch in the early stages. I would keep in touch and I
would report, so I made a verbal ??
[Note: Pages 77-80 missing in original document]
Q: So you knew that the research you were conducting may be the subject of testimony at trial?
A: Yes.
Q: And you were being paid for your services to conduct the research, correct?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I was being paid for my expertise as an historian.
Q: Were you paid an hourly rate?
A: Yes.
Q: What was your hourly rate that you were paid for your time?
MR. FEIWUS: Just -- objection. When?
MR. VENABLE: Prior to the Kotler case.
MR. FEIWUS: And what specifically --
MR. VENABLE: The amount that he was paid for his time that he was doing this research project for Philip Morris prior to
the Kotler case.
MR. FEIWUS: I just want to state my objection because I just want -- you're characterizing a particular project and I just don't
know whether or not he's clear as to what --
MR. VENABLE: The research.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
MR. FEIWUS: Okay.
A: In Kotler?
Q: (By Mr. Venable) Correct.
A: I don't recall with complete certainty exactly what my hourly rate was. I will give you what I think it was.
Q: Okay.
A: As an historian, as you now know, because of this morning, I have done a good bit of this work, but had done none before
then for a client, so I didn't know what my hourly rate was, should be.
So I thought about it and asked a few people, and I think, to answer your question, that my hourly rate at that time was $75 an
hour, if you -- or it was $125 because I moved from 75 to 125 in about that period.
Q: Okay. Now, when you testified in the Kotler case, did you charge a per diem for each day you were at trial?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I can't remember, but it's possible. In my thinking about the fee structure and in my reading of a couple of books on expert
witnessing, I -- I learned that sometimes that was the professional way to -- to bill.
When you are away from home at a trial, living in a hotel and not able to do your other work, that a daily fee -- and so at some
point, I may have done that. I had to learn and decide for myself what my fee structure was.
Q: Do you recall what your per diem charge was to Philip Morris in the Kotler case?
A: I don't, but -- I don't recall. Actually, in the Kotler case, I just don't recall how I billed them.
Q: Okay. Do you recall the number of hours that you billed Philip Morris for in the Kotler case?
That is, before you began the trial part, the time before, do you recall how many hours you had billed them for?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: No, but I could make a guess, if that's helpful.
Q: If you can make an educated estimate, that's fine. I don't want an absolute guess, but if you give us parameters, that'll be fine.
A: Two hundred hours.
Q: All right, sir. Now, after the Kotler case was over, did you continue to do the research?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I took a little break and then continued to do the research.
Q: All right. What was the next case you testified in after Kotler?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I could have --
MR. FEIWUS: Objection -- no objection.
A: I could have brought -- if I had known the nature of the question, I could have brought a list and be sure about that.
But I don't have a perfect memory of --
[Note: Pages 85-88 missing in original document]
?? other person, and I think we gathered it in that way.
I'm not -- that's my best memory.
Q: Would somebody actually sit down at some facility and review, for instance, the Dallas Morning News to locate articles in
the paper having to do with cigarette smoking and health?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: That's the basic way to do it.
Q: All right. And was there any -- any time parameters? Were you looking at from 1900 to whenever, or what were your time
parameters, if any, in the Texas case?
A: I think I remember -- as I remember, we started in 1950 and I -- I had no direction from anyone, not that -- I didn't want any
direction from anyone, when to cut it off. I think we might have taken it to 1980.
An historian has to stop at some point or you're getting into current events, so I --
Q: Why did you start at 1950?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: 1950 is a dramatic turn in the story of the cigarette and its effects on health, dramatic. It's a milestone.
Q: Did you make that determination to begin at 1950?
A: Oh, yes, yes, yes. I can defend it.
Q: Okay. Now, so we've got roughly 30 years or so of newspaper article -- newspapers to go through to see what articles were
there, correct, at the Dallas Morning News?
A: Yes.
Q: Are those -- were those newspapers on microfilm? Did they have research indexes? What was available to you?
A: As I remember, the Dallas Morning News does not have a research index, more's the pity. So you have to go through, and
that takes time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Is -- we're not talking about the physical piece of paper. Are we talking about, what, microfilm? What are we talking about?
A: Very few newspapers will let you use paper, it deteriorates, so you have to use some electronic form.
Q: Right.
A: I don't remember whether this was microfiche or microfilm.
Q: Something where you can somehow scroll through each paper, each day of the paper, and look physically at the entire paper
for that day and identify an article that you then want to read.
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: Is that fair of how you do it?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes, except you don't go through the want ads.
Q: Okay. There's some sections you might be able to skip because of --
A: Shortcuts.
Q: Okay. All right.
A: Want ads.
Q: Did you personally sit down at this electronic device and review each and every one of the Dallas Morning News papers
from 1950 to 1980?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I did some of that work, but that's very time consuming. He did most of it.
Q: “He” meaning your assistant?
A: The assistant. And his name I know, but I've forgotten it.
Q: That's okay. Just the two of you, is that the only two people that did this work at the Dallas Morning News?
A: I think he got another -- I can't remember it with absolute clarity, but I think he got another research assistant. We needed to
do it -- we didn't have a whole lot of time, like, three years or anything. So in order to get the work done, under my direction,
I always told him what to get and when in doubt, get it.
I read everything that they got, and I went to the newspaper, as I recall, and did some of the work to get a feel. You need to
get a feel for the process and the paper. So I did some of this so that I would have a feel for the paper. They did the rest of it.
I read what they had--and evaluated what they had found for me.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Now, those persons that were assisting you ??
[Note: Pages 93-96 missing in original document]
?? Charlottesville papers had a different story to tell or the same story to tell.
Q: Was the process in Virginia the same as it had been in Texas, the means by which you went to collect the newspaper articles?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes.
Q: And, again, did you read each and every one of them?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I read everything that the -- the researcher and I copied -- copied out of the paper. I read everything.
Q: And approximately how many hours did you spend in preparation for the LaBelle case?
A: Preparation for the LaBelle case?
Q: Yes, sir.
A: I don't know, but that -- that was a fairly extended -- let's go 200 again. I have never counted this up.
Q: I understand, but you think approximately 200? And I'm not trying to hold you to an exact hour.
A: A hundred and fifty to -- a hundred and fifty to two hundred is about the best I can do.
Q: Okay. Would the same have been true in the Texas AG case, about the same amount of time?
A: About the same.
Q: Okay. And Sackman about the same?
A: Maybe a little less.
Q: Okay.
A: Now -- no, I'm sorry. Go ahead.
Q: Okay. Now, you haven't done any -- have you done any research work for -- at the request of Mr. Purvis after LaBelle but
before you were contacted concerning this case?
MR FEIWUS: Objection.
A: My memory is that there was a -- the answer is no. There was a gap.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Okay. Now, when were you first contacted about any cases pending in Florida?
A: You mean Beverly Davis?
Q: Yeah.
A: I thought we said earlier July.
Q: July?
A: This year.
Q: July of this year. And have you undertaken any additional -- I know you've done a lot of research, been going on for years,
but I want to focus now on research that you might have done for the Davis case.
Have you reviewed any other newspapers, for instance?
A: Yes.
Q: And which newspapers have you reviewed for the Davis case?
A: She lived -- since she lived a considerable period in New Jersey and since she lived in a part of New Jersey where the
newspaper was the Philadelphia Inquirer, as I understand from her deposition -- I never read the Philadelphia Inquirer. And
then she moved to Florida in 1973, to my understanding, and -- and lived in -- near Fort Lauderdale, where the big paper -- it's
a pretty big paper -- is the Sun-Sentinel. It's changed its name a little bit.
As is my custom when I am looking at a case of an individual about whom I know they live here rather than over there, I read
those two papers to be -- to see if something is different there than in the other places that I know from the paper coverage
that I've read in another place.
So she comes from places I'd never -- I'd never read the Sun-Sentinel and Philadelphia Inquirer. I read them.
Q: All right. And was the process the same, that you would go and collect for any -- for a period of time all of the articles
having to do with cigarettes and health?
A: Not in this case.
Q: Okay. Tell me how it differed in this one.
A: That was July, when I was contacted about the case. This is December. That's not much time. That's -- so haste is a factor.
And instead of -- I have two research assistants now at Chapel Hill that work with me.
But in this case, a copy of the smoking and health-related articles in those two newspapers was available in an ??
[Note: Pages 101-104 missing in original document]
Q: Okay. And you're currently in the process of doing the Philadelphia --
A: Yes. I haven't finished.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Okay. I want to return -- are you -- let me ask you this. Have you been contacted by Mr. Purvis concerning any other cases
that you are currently working on?
A: Yes.
Q: What other cases have you been contacted about?
A: Mr. Purvis asked me if I would consider talking to the lawyers about a case in California, a state where I've lived much of
my life, where my children are and where I like to travel, California.
Q: Okay.
A: And that was the Coolidge case.
Q: And is that something that you may be working on in the future for Mr. Purvis?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I may be working on it in the future. You said Mr. Purvis. I don't work for --
Q: At the request of Mr. Purvis. I didn't mean anything by it.
A: Right.
Q: Have you been contacted concerning a case called Schwartz?
A: I have been -- it has been -- the discussions about that have happened.
Q: All right. Can you tell me what, if any, work you've done concerning the Schwartz case?
A: The discussion of the Schwartz case was very recent. And some materials arrived at my house on Monday evening of this
week, and I have not looked at them at all. I have -- I've been preoccupied.
Q: Have you formed any opinions relative to the Schwartz case at this point?
A: I know nothing about the Schwartz case really.
Q: Okay.
A: I have not read anything.
Q: You haven't read the Philadelphia Inquirer yet, correct? You're still in the process of --
A: In the process.
Q: -- doing that?
A: Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Have you formed your opinions that you may have concerning the Davis case?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I have formed what you would call tentative opinions, unless the Philadelphia Inquirer greatly surprises me.
Q: Okay.
A: But that has never happened, but anything, I suppose, could happen.
Q: When do you anticipate being able to finalize your opinions in Davis?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Well, if by finalize my opinions you mean when I've finished, I have read the Philadelphia Inquirer, but I have not audited
it. So I want to audit it because that's what I do with papers -- newspapers that come from an archive rather than from me.
Q: Did you make any notes when you were reviewing the Philadelphia paper in the Davis case?
A: No.
Q: How about the Sun-Sentinel? Did you make any notes when you reviewed that?
A: I made notes of the three missed articles just to write them down and look at them. And --
Q: Do you presently --
MR. FEIWUS: Wait. Let him finish.
Q: I'm sorry. Go ahead. I'm sorry.
A: And as I said before, what I do with my notes, so as not to be swamped with notes, and it's to train myself to remember
things, I keep the notes and look at them over a week two or three times. And then I don't want to be swamped in notes, so
I get rid of them.
Q: How much time can you estimate that you've spent in preparation for the Davis case thus far?
A: I did think about that and I think the answer would be 100 to 150, but I have not added it up. And that's an estimate.
Q: Right. And what are you presently charging per hour for that time?
[Note: Pages 109-112 missing in original document]
?? 1950. It surfaced in 1949 and 1950. 1950, it surfaced to the public.
Its underpinnings go back, and I'm not -- I don't testify as a medical historian, but I know for purposes of our discussion that the
medical research would methodologically take a quantum leap by adding epidemiological studies, retrospective and prospective
both, to the other -- along with clinical and autopsy studies.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
And this evidence, while initially not adopted even by all -- by all doctors, medical researchers, was coming into its own as an
impressive way, one way, of trying to assess chronic disease and its causation.
So that when you had in 1950, in June, the publication in JAMA of what normally wouldn't be a noteworthy -- medical articles
don't make headlines very often in my reading of American discussion. This article by Graham and Wynder was front-page
news across the country.
And it's -- in retrospect now, it's obvious we had entered a new -- the cigarette controversy had entered a new era with the --
with the arrival of a different type of medical research. It would take a while for that to -- for the weight of it to be felt. Not
very long, really, to a historian, it happened very fast.
But that's why I -- that article is really a good place to just draw a line, in a way, in the story and the controversy about smoking
and its health effects.
Q: Did the -- was the Wynder article reported -- I think you said in many newspapers in the United States?
A: Many.
Q: And did the Wynder article involve a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A: Yes. That was its central focus.
Q: And as a result of the research that had been done by Dr. Wynder and his colleagues, had they concluded that there was a
relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: They concluded that it was very -- I forget the exact language. They were very careful about their language. That the evidence.
suggested -- strongly suggested, I think that was the language -- a causal link. And they went on to do more research, as others
went on to do more research.
Q: And so in 1950, if a person was interested, they could have -- through the newspaper articles of the day, have found a
discussion of the Wynder article and the alleged relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: If I understand the way you phrased it, I -- I think I need to know -- could have found or did find?
Q: Could have found, if they looked. Let me rephrase the question.
If a person was interested in the potential health consequences of cigarette smoking, a person could have found articles written
in American newspapers in 1950 concerning the medical research done by Dr. Wynder and his colleagues?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Calls for speculation, beyond the scope of --
A: If a person were interested or were not interested, whether they were interested or not interested, they would encounter --
they would -- they would live in an America in which in the front pages, and the second pages sometimes, of major newspapers
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
across the country and in news magazines, like Time and Newsweek, they would have encountered the information about the
publication of that article in JAMA.
Q: Okay. And would they have been -- would they have had an ability to not only read the newspaper article concerning that
publication by Dr. Wynder, but would they have had the ability to find the actual article, had they so desired --
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: -- with the information provided by the ??
[Note: Pages 117-120 missing in original document]
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A:. If I understand the question, articles continued -- news articles continued to report medical research so that by 1964 the
Surgeon General's Committee could read 7,000 medical reports.
Q: Okay. But let me back up because I don't want to get down -- we're going to get down to 1964 in a minute, but I want to
keep us concentrated right now in the early 1950s. Okay?
And I want to take a period between 1950 and 1953. Let's break it down that way just for a moment, if we could. Is the Wynder
-- strike that.
Did you find, in looking at the newspapers of that time period, reports concerning any research other than Dr. Wynder's that
was reported in 1950 regarding cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes.
Q: What did you find -- during the period after Dr. Wynder's article that that discussion is had in the newspaper, before the
beginning of 1953, what else did you find?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: The major ones come to my mind. First, some people, not many, reported a second article in that very journal that Wynder
and Graham were in by Morton Levin. It was number three rather than number one. But there was -- some reporters didn't --
they got two that day.
Q: Uh-huh (yes).
A: Then in 1950, the same year, a few months later, a British study, a major British epidemiological study, by two authors, Doll
and Hill. There was much press coverage of the fact that they had launched a study and had some preliminary results which
linked, epidemiologically, statistically, lung cancer and cigarette smoking. So that's a big British -- and that was reported even
though it's far away. So I think of those two in 1950.
In 1952, the Doll and Hill final article came out, and it got publicity again.
Q: And what did they conclude in the final?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: They concluded that -- rather unequivocally, as I recall, that lung cancer and cigarette smoking were causally related on the
basis of their study of 8,000 British doctors -- or 7,000, some large number. They had many more than Wynder and Graham
had had. So that's 1952. That's a big, big report -- medical report given. It's publicity.
You said 1953. We're going to 1953?
Q: Let's stop at the beginning of 1953 right now, and then I'll ask you some similar questions about another time period.
A: 1953 is the year, late 1953, as I recall, in which I personally regard as the biggest study. Looking back, we can see. I mean,
you never know when you're going through it.
Q: Uh-huh (yes).
A: And that is the American Cancer Society had launched a stupendous research effort, which only the American Cancer Society
could do. No doctor could do this.
And it was Hammond and Horn, were the two doctors. And they were able to study 200,000 Americans. Wynder and Graham
had 600. I forget, the British had about 6,000 or 7,000. Two hundred thousand because they used American Cancer Society
volunteers to interview.
And they had started a prospective study, which is different, not retrospective. They had live people and followed them. And
they announced that they had started and they had some preliminary results. And it didn't -- and it.indicated -- once again. I forget
their language. It was careful language about a link, and they promised further results. And they -- they reported periodically,
until they were finished in 1958.
So that would be 1953. I tried to answer 1950, 1952 and 1953.
Q: Okay. So by the end of 1953, there had been at least three major studies reported ??
[Note: Pages 125-128 missing in original document]
A: But you could get -- scattered here and there, you could find in the media some Ph.D. doctor or M.D. doctor who expressed
views of that kind.
Q: Okay. So am I correct that at the -- by the end of 1953 that in the American press two points of view have been reported,
the first being the -- those scientists whose studies and research was suggesting to them that cigarette smoking was a cause of
lung cancer and those doctors who were interviewed and quoted as saying they did not believe that these studies to date had
established any relationship between lung cancer and smoking cigarettes?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: Am I correct?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Your question seems to me to imply an equivalence; one point of view, another point of view. Your --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: I don't mean to.
MR. FEIWUS: Let the witness finish.
A: Well, your hands are like this, and when I put my hands like that -- (indicating) --
MR. FEIWUS: Please let the witness finish.
A: But I would point out, as anyone reading the stories would see, that the weight, credibility, between a serious study by the
American Cancer Society or the -- or the Royal College of Physicians in London is a report of evidence. And then you interview
an individual doctor who may have an academic position, but he hasn't done a study. He's skeptical.
I don't -- I don't put my hands that way with that. I think the average reader would --
Q: Okay. That really wasn't my question, so let me -- let me clarify.
My question was only this, that in the American press by the end of 1953, two competing ideas had been enunciated in those
papers by, one, the reports of Dr. Wyndeman [sic] and others, coverage of their studies and quotations from them, wherein they
offer the opinion that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer.
And not necessarily equivalent but also available in those same papers were the statements by other doctors and scientists that
they did not believe that relationship had yet been established.
Were both of those two things in the American press during the period 1950 through the end of 1953?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Asked and answered.
A: The way you framed it this time, I would say yes.
Q: All right, sir. Now, moving on after 1953, let's take the period from 1954 --
MR.VENABLE: It's 1:30. I've still got a ways to go. Do y'all want to do a break?
MR. FEIWUS: I think we probably should.
MR.VENABLE: I think we should.
MR. FEIWUS: Yeah. Let's just go off the record for a minute and talk about scheduling.
[LUNCH RECESS -- 1:25 P.M. TO 2:34 P.M.]
Q: (By Mr. Venable) I think when we broke, we had been talking about the period of 1950 to 1953, and I think you told me
everything that I needed to know about that time frame.
I want to pick up at 1954, and let's this time go to 1960. And during that time frame, can you tell me what other important events
that you found in the newspapers or whatever other writings that you reviewed during that period?
MR FEIWUS: Objection Calls for a narrative.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I'll give you the big ones.
Q: Okay. That's fine.
A: 1954 is the year when the Hammond and Horn American Cancer Society study first reported its substantial results. They
had -- they had leaked some preliminary results before, but this was a -- while not a final ??
[Note: Pages 133-136 missing in original document]
?? means, but I'll leave that to you.
Q: Okay. What happens -- anything else in 1957? Any other major events in 1957 that get reported?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: My mind was going to forward rather than any further in 1957.
Q: Can you think of any more in 1957? And then we'll move forward.
MR. FEIWUS: Same objection.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay.
A: Yes. I'm glad I didn't.
Q: Okay. What else happened in 1957?
A: That escaped me entirely.
MR. FEIWUS: The question -- just so I'm clear, what exactly is the question that you're asking the witness about 1957?
MR. VENABLE: I'm asking the witness what he found as he reviewed the periodicals of that year of significance concerning
the relationship between smoking and lung cancer.
MR. FEIWUS: Okay. I'll object to the form.
A: Many things, but now I'll mention another. And then I think that this is -- I think, and, apparently, the people who allocate
newspaper space and magazine space thought that this was quite noteworthy.
A coalition of institutions came together on -- on the question, but were brought together by the question of -- well, the broader
question of the health effects. I think this was not just lung -- it was just lung cancer.
And the coalition was a coalition, as I recall it, of the American Cancer Society and American Lung Association, another big,
national institution interested for a long time in respiratory questions, and the National Cancer Institute, a branch of the federal
government.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
That's an unusual -- for that time, for that period, in the context of the 1950s, this was, to my mind, the first joint effort to engage
this question. And they didn't conduct research. They conducted an analysis of all the existing big studies of the question of
lung cancer and smoking. I think they conducted an analysis of 12.
And they rendered a judgment that repeated in a very strong way the findings that there was a link and the link was -- I don't think
they used the word -- term “incontestable” -- that jumped to my mind -- but that all the evidence shows a causative connection,
a causative link between -- and it -- it has special significance. I think it was reported widely because of the cluster of respected
institutions that came together to do that assessment.
Q: All right, sir. To your recollection, in the reports concerning the statement by the American Cancer Society -- and I think
you said the National Cancer Institute, is that correct?
A: And the American Lung Association.
Q: And the American Lung Association. In that statement by them, did they cite to any studies suggesting there was no causal
relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I don't have that in front of me, and I won't testify that it's not there.
Q: Okay.
A: I don't remember it.
Q: All right, sir. Anything else in 1957?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: There was much else, but I -- you asked me for -- to select some leading ones.
Q: All right, sir. Was there anything in 1957 that was reported in the literature that you reviewed stating that there was no
relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I don't remember anything in particular, but I wouldn't be surprised if somewhere that general sentiment that -- unproven.
You could see that here and there ??
[Note: Pages 141-144 missing in original document]
A: No, I didn't.
Q: Okay.
A: But I went through this and determined that none of it -- I had none of it. I don't have any of this.
Q: You don't have any of the items that are listed 1 through 18 here?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I have no medical records relating to Beverly Davis.
Reports, summaries, impressions and evaluations that I prepared relating to this litigation, including testing performed, I didn't
do any.
Reports, summaries, impressions and evaluations -- well, either I haven't ever read exactly this version --
Q: Okay. Let me -- I'm just going to ask you, from this, some things, and you can tell me whether or not you have them --
A: Right.
Q: -- and you just were -- did not bring them with you today.
MR. FEIWUS: You know, just as a Q&A procedure, if you could give him a copy of it to follow while you're reading, it may
be easier for him because it's -- it's pretty dense.
MR. VENABLE: Well, I'm going to try.
Q: (By Mr. Venable) And if -- if -- I'll be glad to show it to you at any time. Okay?
It says, “All documents, literature and/or data relied upon by Dr. Otis L. Graham specifically for purposes of formulating his
opinions in this litigation.”
A: My --
Q: That's No. 4.
MR. FEIWUS: We're on No. 4?
MR. VENABLE: Yes.
A: It's my understanding that, from my lawyer, these lawyers -- (indicating) --
Q: (By Mr. Venable) Okay.
A: -- that that was done -- that was satisfied by a list of materials relied upon. Is that the right language? And that -- that's
been sent to -- I believe, to you.
Q: You were told by whom that a list of documents would satisfy this --
A: If I remember correctly --
Q: -- fourth item?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Well, I have a little indistinct memory, but looking at this No. 4, it appears to me, now that I look at it, to request all
documents, literature and data relied upon. And I helped -- I prepared and have read several times a document of about ten
pages or eight pages or some potential, the title of which I forget. But it is a list of -- of my documents relied upon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: I understand this didn't request -- let's -- let's -- I understand that --
A: I think that satisfied No. 4.
Q: I understand that that was your belief. Okay.
Could we move to No. 6? “All newspaper articles, magazine articles, scientific publications, medical publications” --
A: Yes.
Q: -- “literature, movies”
A: I see.
Q: -- “TV programs or commercials, radio programs or commercials” --
A: I see it.
Q: -- “advertisements, lists, compilations, medical records, data or other documents provided to Dr. Otis L. Graham by Liggett
Group, Inc., and/or Kelly Anne Arthur [sic], Esquire, Clark, Silvergate, Kasowitz, Benson, Torres & Friedman, any lawyer
representing Liggett Group, any agent of Liggett Group” --
A: Right. I see it.
Q: “or its counsel”?
A: I see it and there is nothing supplied to me by them.
Q: Could you look at No. 17?
A: Yes.
Q: And for the court reporter, let me just read it. “All newspaper articles, magazine articles, scientific publications, medical
publications, literature, movies and movie transcripts, TV programs, TV commercials or TV transcripts, radio programs, radio ??
[Note: Pages 149-152 missing in original document]
Q: But the coverage of the statement that appeared in JAMA took place in the national press?
A: Yes. It was big news or was thought to be big news or was big news.
Q: And what did the press report the statement to be?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I have to go back and review it to be absolutely precise, but this -- he didn't change much, the statement of 1957, except to
elaborate on the medical evidence and to make the words stronger. And he signed his -- his name as “Surgeon General.” So
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
it's a -- he didn't go way beyond what he had said before. He said the weight of evidence is now -- is now overwhelming that
there is a link. And he mentioned a link to bronchitis, as I recall.
That's all I recall without having the statement in front of me, but I remember it's prominent coverage. You might say a little
article by a doctor in a medical magazine wouldn't get -- it got big press across the country.
Q: Okay. And you said “a link.” Did you mean by that the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A: And lung cancer, yes. By this time, he was treating that as virtually established.
Q: To your recollection, in 1959, did any studies of -- strike that.
To your recollection, in 1959, did there appear in the American press coverage of any scientist or physicians who had conducted
studies or tests suggesting that there was no link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A: I believe there were none.
Q: Doctor, I'm going to try to move us along and -- but during the period between 1960 and the end of 1963, did the coverage in
the American press remain fairly consistent, as you have described it before, and that being that there were numerous references
in the press coverage to the causal connection between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
Did that remain constant through those next three years?
MR. FEIWUS: Object to the form.
A: Constant in one -- in a sense. In another sense, I haven't measured constant that I -- I didn't count the numbers to see if
they blipped up a little bit. So I'm not referring to a numerical constancy here but a -- but just a general sense of the -- that
the story is not -- it has legs. It's not fading.
It did not fade. In fact, I think I would say that in those years there's an intensity about it and an urgency about the discussions
because we're approaching the point where the big question is shifting from is there a link to what do we do.
Q: Okay. Now, were there any significant -- let me strike that.
Do you recall any statements reported in the national press during the period 1960 through the end of 1963 to the effect that
there was no relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I cannot remember a statement, cannot remember a statement that there was no relation. The way you frame it, in that period,
absolutely, that's not a question of there might have been one. I'm convinced there wasn't one or it would have made a big
impression.
Q: All right, sir. In your review of the press coverage, the newspapers, magazines, did you find at any point in time any physician
that recommended that persons smoke cigarettes?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I can't remember such a thing.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Now, throughout the period well, strike that.
In your review of newspapers and magazines, did you ever come across any advertisements by companies that manufactured
cigarettes?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you find in those advertisement claims that cigarette smoking was not injurious to ??
[Note: Pages 157-160 missing in original document]
Q: Did you find in your review of the literature any statements by any representatives of cigarette manufacturers?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you find those in the literature during the 1950s?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes.
Q: Did you find statements by representatives of cigarette manufacturers to the effect that the relationship between lung cancer
and cigarette smoking had not been yet established?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Yes.
Q: Did you find those statements appeared in the literature all the way through the 1950s and into the early 1960s?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: With this qualification: The press seemed to be losing interest in those statements and to reprint them if they were made.
You saw them with less frequency as the 1960s arrived. You could still see them, but you didn't see them as often as in the
1950s. That's just my evaluative judgment.
Whether that means that they weren't being made as often or whether it means that they weren't regarded as news as time went
on because it had -- it had -- they had been going on and it -- I can't say which is the answer for that because that's -- that was
a decision by the journalists as to where to place -- how to frame the story and what to report.
Q: Do you recall seeing in the newspapers that you reviewed a statement entitled “A Frank Statement”?
A: Yes.
Q: And can you tell us what you recall about that?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: It was called “A Frank Statement to Smokers.” It was addressed to smokers. And it -- it began with a sentence that ran
something like “You may have been hearing a lot lately about the link between certain serious diseases and cigarette smoking,”
something of that manner.
It.went on to say, “We take this seriously. Such charges should be taken seriously. We intend to establish” -- and the “we” you
discovered at the bottom, you could discover at the bottom who this was. “We intend to establish a research program apart from
the individual research programs of individual companies.”
This was a coalition that had come together to form the Tobacco Institute Research Committee, that is TIRC, and that it would
be conducting research to get at the truth or falsity -- I'm not quoting here.
Q: Uh-huh (yes).
A: But that was the main message. “We take it seriously. We intend to establish a research program and fund it, and we will
report to the American people as we go along on this serious question.”
Q: All right. And in your review of the newspapers, the national press in this country and the magazines that you've conducted
-- and that's been a fairly thorough review, as I understand it?
A: I believe so.
Q: All right, sir. Can you tell me if you ever found a further statement by the entities that consisted -- that made the “Frank
Statement,” that published the “Frank Statement” in the 1950s, where they, in fact, told the American public what they had
found?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. And note for the record that earlier in the testimony there was a temporal cutoff that has a reference
to part of his research, and your question doesn't have any such temporal cutoff.
So the question is therefore misleading and I don't want the record to be misleading.
Q: (By Mr. Venable) All right. At any time, did you ever find in the American press a statement by that group that had promised
to conduct that research and report to the American people?
[Note: Pages 165-168 missing in original document]
?? think you're saying anything, you're just swearing to tell the truth.
Q: Right. But -- but you've read the newspaper accounts of their testimony, did you not?
A: I probably did. I probably did.
Q: Okay. And what do you recall of the substance of that testimony?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection. Calls for speculation, lack of foundation, outside the scope of the expert disclosure.
Q: Doctor, I'm not asking you to speculate at all. Do you remember that story in the paper?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I remember that occasion.
Q: And you -- do you recall what those executives were saying to the United States Congress?
A: I'm not speaking as an expert on that occasion because I'm not an expert on the 1990s.
Q: You don't recall -- you don't recall what occurred in the United States Congress in the 1990s, when the executives from the
tobacco industries went there and testified?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I'm not speaking as an expert about that. My -- my expert research doesn't extend to that. But as a citizen, I -- I was alert to
the issue. I'm alive in that year, and I remember seeing that picture. And I'm sure I must have read, as a citizen, that story.
Q: And do you remember anything about the contents of that story?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
Q: What do you remember, sir?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I remember they were before -- I don't know why I remember that I think they were before a House subcommittee, and I
think it was Congressman -- the name I forget. Obviously, I don't remember everything if I forget the Congressman's name.
And they had been asked, I think -- I was reading this as a citizen in the morning with my coffee -- that they believed smoking
-- tobacco -- cigarettes were addictive. I could be way off. I was just not reading it as a -- as a specialist and as an historian.
I was just reading through the 1990s.
I think they were asked about did they believe smoking was addictive. There was a definitional question about addictive. And
whatever definition they used, I don't remember. And they made their statement. They all seemed to be agreeing with each other.
Q: What did they say?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I don't know what the question was. Apparently, it was, “Do you believe” -- I don't remember. As a citizen reading the
paper, I don't remember the exact wording.
MR. FEIWUS: You're asking the witness to speculate and --
Q: So you --
MR. FEIWUS: Excuse me, sir. I just want the record to be clear. You're persisting in asking the witness to speculate.
I'll allow you to go-- to continue to ask the questions, but I am noting for the record that this line has been asked and answered
repeatedly, and you're bordering on argumentative Q&A here.
MR. VENABLE: Counsel, I've been putting up with objections that are improper throughout this entire deposition.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
You can object, if you would like.
MR. FEIWUS: That's fine.
MR. VENABLE: You do not need to give me a speaking objection and you certainly don't need to rule on whether or not my
questions are argumentative.
MR. FEIWUS: I'm not ruling --
MR. VENABLE: Now --
MR. FEIWUS: Sir, I'm not ruling on it. If you want to engage in colloquy, we can please do it outside ??
[Note: Pages 173-176 missing in original document]
A: I'm an historian. I'm not trained in images. I'm trained in what is communicated and evaluating what is communicated. We've
been talking all afternoon about that.
But if you mean-- if you speak of images, iconography, I'm not a -- whatever profession that is, that's not what I am.
Q: So you didn't concern yourself with what information the public may have ascertained by seeing pictures?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I evaluated -- if I saw a picture, I evaluated that and in context of the story.
Q: Did you make a copy of the advertisement with the person riding the horse in Montana?
A: No, I don't think so.
Q: Why not?
A: I didn't make an -- I didn't make a copy of what was not relevant to my story, to my focus, to my research topic. If it's
outside -- I saw -- I saw sports stories that were fascinating, but I didn't photocopy them. I photocopied the mainstream of my
story as it evolved.
Q: And that was what? What was the mainstream of your story?
A: The health --
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: The health -- the question of the health hazards and risks of cigarette smoking, the question of that. That's my topic, and
the public discussion of -- around that question.
Q: All right. And if the public discussion involved images, you didn't consider that?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: If the public discussion had involved images and the discussion had been plainly about health and smoking, that's my subject.
Q: Can you tell me what opinions you formulated in the Davis case?
A: Yes.
Q: All right, sir. Please.
A: The history of tobacco reveals it as a uniquely contested and controversial item of consumption unique in American history.
While cherished by many, it has been attacked from the very beginning from a wide variety of points of view at a very high
volume and unrelentingly. It never lets up.
When the cigarette entered American life, the cigarette was received with that same barrage of criticisms, never been without
criticism. It's -- and as of 1950, the controversy over many, many -- the controversy over the many ways in which the cigarette
was said -- smoking cigarettes was said or found, alleged, by reports by doctors and others we've talked about, the controversy
over that had the question of what the cigarette might do to your health and your life. Well, it's common knowledge, as I have
said earlier today.
Q: As of when? I didn't hear you.
A: I believe it was common knowledge from the beginning that it was dangerous. That's a health dimension to the discussion,
that it's very dangerous and hard to quit. You find that from the beginning.
But that set of charges against smoking and tobacco in any form in 1950 takes on a dramatic new turn with the new evidence
that we've talked about. And I will testify that that was these medical reports. A series of them were widely reported in the mass
media to all of the American people, deepening and adding an additional scientific veracity, a believability, to the general -- to
the general case to be made that tobacco was harmful, that smoking was harmful.
Q: Okay. Do you have an opinion that there was a legitimate debate as to the health consequences of smoking after 1950?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Legitimate debate?
Q: Yes.
A: Would you define “legitimate”?
Q: Yes, sir. Did you find in your review of the literature that there were two positions being espoused after 1950; that is, one
that cigarette smoking was causally related to lung cancer and one that cigarette smoking had not been proven to be ??
[Note: Pages 181-184 missing in original document]
A: Yes.
Q: All right, sir. Do you recall any of the data that you read in those news stories?
A: Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Can you tell me what you recall?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: One of the most prominent polls is the Gallup poll. They have published in a book all of their polls on tobacco and any
aspect of tobacco. That's a very handy source from Gallup.
Q: Okay.
A: As early as 1946, as I recall, the Gallup polls probably then would have been 10 years old, 11 years old, 12 years old, and
began for the first time to ask questions about tobacco and related tobacco issues.
And in 1949, there was a poll with some figures that I recall as -- and you heard anywhere in the media -- I forget how it is
worded, but it's worded, “Have you heard that cigarette smoking may be dangerous to your health?”
And I recall -- I would have to go back to the record -- 42 percent said yes, about 29 percent said no and the others didn't
really answer. That's 1949, before 1950, before the events of 1950. That figure starts to go up as to danger. By the end of the
1960s, it's 90 percent.
Q: Have heard -- is that have heard about --
A: I was just starting with “have heard.”
Q: Okay. Now, do you have committed to memory all of the results of those polls and what the questions were?
A: I have reviewed that, and I don't have it committed to memory without the possibility of a fuzzy figure. But, yes, I -- I
could talk about it a while.
If I -- I would prefer to have the material in front of me, but we can work on my memory of it.
Q: Okay. Do you have those polls here with you today?
A: That book?
Q: Yes, sir.
A: No, I didn't bring that book.
Q: All right. Well, why don't you tell me all of the questions that were asked in the 1949 poll concerning cigarette smoking?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I can't remember that. I tried to indicate in the question before that the principal -- the main question was fairly simple, as
I recall it, very memorable, the first time they had asked it, “Have you heard?”
Q: Have you heard what?
A: Have you heard that smoking may be dangerous to your health.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: And who was the subject of the poll?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: The American people, I guess. I don't recall that it was some subset of the American people. It was all the American people.
Q: Is that true of all the polls that you have seen regarding this issue?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: No. Polls sometimes are only they ask women or they ask men or they ask smoking questions to nonsmokers and then
smokers and then the general public and they have another figure.
Q: Which polls did the nonsmoking and the smokers? Which specific polls were those along those lines?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I'm not a polling expert, but I looked at these polls. And the Roper polls as well as the Gallup poll tend to -- sometimes they
just ask everybody, and sometimes they break the tobacco question down into smokers and nonsmokers.
There may be other ways that they break it down. I can't recall. So sometimes you'll get three figures: smokers, nonsmokers, all.
Q: Okay well, let's talk about the polls where they polled smokers separately. Okay?
When's the first poll that polled smokers separately?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: You're asking -- you're asking for my memory to deliver that. I can't -- I can't recall that sitting here.
Q: Could we find it? If we had the book, ??
[Note: Pages 189-192 missing in original document]
Q: You have. You've read Mrs. Davis's deposition?
A: Yes.
Q: Have you read any depositions in the Schwartz case yet?
A: No.
Q: Okay. Have you reviewed anything else in the Davis case?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: Depositions of Mrs. Davis, her husband, a dentist, I believe, and I believe three children. I think five or six of those were
in a stack, and I've reviewed those.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
Q: Did you -- in reviewing Mrs. Davis's deposition, did you attempt to extract from that various periodicals that she might
have read during her lifetime?
A: If you mean, was I -- did I see and was I interested in it or --
Q: Yes. Yes. Did you -- did you identify periodicals --
A: I remember what she said about that.
Q: Right. Did you go then and try to obtain copies or to do searches in those periodicals to find out what had been written in
those periodicals about smoking and health?
A: I already knew.
Q: You already -- you had already gone through all of those periodicals that she mentioned? There wasn't one she mentioned
that you hadn't previously gone through?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
A: I don't think there was one that I don't know well.
Q: Okay.
A: I'm not swearing to that. I mean, I did swear to tell the truth, but I'm going to believe that -- that there wasn't one.
Q: Okay. And you collected all of that information previously?
A: Yes.
Q: All right.
A: And read it more than once.
Q: And you have all of that information -- where is it physically located now?
A: I think I have every one of -- there might have been one -- I have a feeling there was one that I don't have anymore, but the
-- but I have -- I know what's in there, and I could go check it if I needed to go and check it.
Q: Okay. And --
A: She didn't name one that I remember that is new to me.
Q: Okay. And have -- have you reviewed those -- those articles that you've collected from those periodicals concerning the
Davis case, or do you just know what's in them and you don't have to review them again?
And I'm not trying to be a smart aleck. I just -- do you need to review them again or not?
MR. FEIWUS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Leonard SCHWARTZ as Personal, Representative of the..., 2003 WL 25967718...
A: I've -- since I was working on the Davis case, I've gone back to several of those just to browse, but, basically, not because
I didn't remember them. I'm intimately aware of what they were except sometimes I'll forget maybe did Life magazine have
something. So I occasionally go back, but I didn't have to go back and re-read because I had forgotten. I haven't forgotten.
Q: All right. Where are all of these documents that you have collected? Where are they located today?
A: I have a one-room office in Chapel Hill, and that's where they are.
Q: All right, sir. And how many -- if you talk about banker boxes, how many banker boxes of documents are we talking about?
A: Pile them on this table twice or maybe two and a half times.
Q: Oh, banker boxes. We'd have a couple of rows of them, so we would have probably 20, 30?
A: I don't have them arranged on the table, so it's hard for me to imagine. They're all scattered around. But I would say that
you'd get -- I'm pretty sure you could stack them up twice.
Q: Okay. As an estimate, and I'm not -- you know, it doesn't matter if you're off a few. You'd say it's approximately 30? I mean,
we could probably get -- we could ??
[Note: Pages 197-200 missing in original document]
(Addressing the Reporter) Second thing is you can send the deposition to me. I will make it available to Professor Graham for
him to review and correct, if necessary.
Just give me a minute to see if I have any --
MR -- VENABLE: Certainly. [BRIEF PAUSE]
MR. FEIWUS: Okay. That's it. We're done.
[WITNESS DISMISSED AT 3:49 P.M.]
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42
