Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Original Image of 2012 WL 3450318 (PDF)
2012 WL 3450318 (M.D.Fla.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
United States District Court, M.D. Florida,
Jacksonville Division.
Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the Estate of Helen Rodehaver, Plaintiff,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY, et al., Defendant.
No. 09CV10000.
May 24, 2012.
Case No. 3:09-cv-10490-UAMH-HTS
Deposition of Joan Hoff, Ph.D.
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Warranty/Breach of Warranty
Jurisdiction: M.D.Fla.
Name of Expert: Joan Hoff, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
399 Park Avenue
New York, New York
10:01 a.m.
DEPOSITION of JOAN HOFF, Ph.D., an Expert Witness herein, taken by Plaintiff, pursuant to Notice, held at the above
mentioned time and place, before Robin LaFemina, a Certified LiveNote Reporter and Notary Public within and for the State
of New York.
individual smokers?
A. Yes.
Q. And were the smokers based in different locations in the United States or were they predominantly from Indiana?
A. They were from different parts of the United States.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. And in connection with your research into those several cases, did you do research into the newspapers local to wherever
the plaintiff was located?
A. Yes.
Q. So essentially the work that you were doing for Philip Morris and Shook Hardy in the late 1990s is essentially the same
work that you've done in connection with this case?
MS. McGRODER: Object to form.
A. Again, that's a broad question. I think I probably sharpened the way in which I look at some material over time and I know
from experience where to go to look for some material better than I did perhaps early on, but, generally speaking, it's the same
kind of research.
Q. So you indicated that you testified in five cases between 1995 and 1999; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And, to the best of your knowledge, all of those cases on which you testified were on behalf of Philip Morris?
A. I -- since the plaintiffs would have smoked other than Philip Morris cigarettes, I don't think all of them were exclusively
Philip Morris cases. Some of them were, but I don't think all of them were.
Q. So did you have occasion to work with other law firms in connection with these cases in which you were an expert witness
between 1995 and 1999?
A. No.
Q. In connection with your testimony in these cases, you only spoke to counsel from Shook Hardy; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you continue to work on cases on behalf of the cigarette or on
[Note: Pages 28-32 missing in original document]
is that the first Engle case in which you testified?
A. I believe it is since these are listed chronologically.
Q. So this listing on page 34 of your report, to the best of your knowledge, that would be a comprehensive listing of the cases
in which you've testified since 2007; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. How much money has Shook Hardy paid to you from 1995 to the present in total?
A. In total, for over that 17 year period, it comes out to be around $19,000 a year or, say, $325,000.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. And if you could estimate how much money you received from Shook Hardy in the year 2009?
A. I couldn't. I'd have to look back at the invoices.
Q. What about for 2010?
A. Same answer.
Q. Can you estimate the amount of money that you received since 2009 forward
[Note: Pages 34-53 missing in original document]
analysis of those national publications.
Q. So the only -- I just want to make sure I understand that. You did some kind of quantitative analysis of Time Magazine
and what other magazine?
A. And Reader's Digest.
Q. And Reader's Digest in the 1964 time frame
A. No.
Q. is that right?
A. I
Q. Okay. I
A. Because both of those had such consistent coverage of the issue of smoking, I finally simply went back to the 1930s actually
or in the case of the Reader's Digest to the 1920s to see how many articles on smoking, the hazards of smoking, the attempts
-- how you could quit or any of the especially reports on the scientific studies and simply counted them by hand manually, it
wasn't a sophisticated, quantitative study, I just added them up.
Q. And you did that for Reader's
[Note: Pages 55-57 missing in original document]
Q. Okay.
Have you done any kind of similar analysis for any other journal other than the ones that you've done for Reader's Digest and
Time Magazine that you've just described?
A. As I said, no.
Q. On page 17, you describe the reports of Doll and Bradford Hill, that they confirm Wynder's and Graham's work. Do you
see that?
A. Yes, I do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. And then you go on to say that other epidemiological reports accumulated throughout the 1950s.
My question is what epidemiological reports are you referring to specifically?
A. Well, I think most of them are referenced on the next page in the report because they would include the 1954 Hammond and
Horn, the 1957 Hammond and Horn, the 1959 Hammond and Horn and then you would have had another Doll and Hill report. So
[Note: Pages 59-64 missing in original document]
they said about these scientific studies, but also to see where, if any, response from the industry might be, so I've read numerous
articles.
Q. Have you published anywhere the conclusions of your analysis about this?
A. No.
Q. Have you done any kind of empirical analysis of these articles to demonstrate that what you're saying is in fact true?
A. And by empirical, you mean what? That I would have
Q. Have you counted the number of articles and seen where the industry's response was, if anywhere, in the article?
A. No, I haven't counted.
Q. Is there any, as we sit here today, is there any way for you to confirm or to demonstrate the conclusions that you've reached
here other than your say so?
A. Well, there are articles on my research materials list that you could look at, which would show what I'm talking about
[Note: Pages 66-96 missing in original document]
Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And you begin in that section by talking about cartoons, comedic and dramatic movies and even popular songs have long
contained negative smoking references. Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. What kind of analysis, if any, have you done of cartoons specifically about how cartoons contain negative smoking
references?
A. I haven't done any systematic research on popular culture in general because what popular culture shows basically is how far
down into the public domain certain slang terms or certain caricatures of the habit of smoking and other problems with smoking,
how far down into the public domain those kinds of things go, and so I and just citing things here would show that the use of
slang terms and the use of especially a song or some kind of comedic performance to show addiction or something like that, just
to indicate that these things did exist and that they did permeate down to the public domain, which is all I use popular culture for.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. Well, is there a difference if there's a negative smoking reference in one cartoon as opposed to if there's a negative reference
in, you know, thousands of cartoons?
A. I don't know. I didn't
Q. I'm sorry. Let me finish. In terms of how the message has infiltrated the public domain?
A. I guess there would be a difference between 1 and a thousand; yes.
Q. You have not done any kind of systemic survey of cartoons to determine how often cartoons reflected a negative message
regarding cigarettes and smoking
A. No.
Q. is that right?
A. That's what I said. No, I have not.
Q. And have you engaged in any kind of systematic analysis of television shows to determine how deeply negative inferences
to cigarette smoking infiltrated the public domain?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. So on page 29 of the report, cite to Sanford & Son, Happy Days and Welcome Back, Kotter. Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Do you have any evidence as you sit here today that Ms. Rodehaver ever watched these shows?
A. Not these specific ones; no.
Q. And have you studied all of the episodes of each of these three shows that you've identified on page 29 of your report?
A. These three shows being the Sanford & Son and Happy Days and Welcome Back?
Q. Yes.
A. No, I have not.
Q. How did you come to know that these three shows contained or dealt with the issue of smoking in health and addiction?
A. Well, in the case of Sanford & Sons and Welcome Back, Kotter, I actually saw some of them. I don't recall seeing many
episodes of Happy Days for some reason.
Q. So how did you come to put Happy Days in this report?
A. This particular episode of Happy Days was given to me by Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. Did Shook Hardy provide to you any other television shows in terms of your information about
A. I didn't get the question.
Q. I'll rephrase the question.
A. Okay.
Q. Did counsel from Shook Hardy provide to you any other episodes of any other television shows other than the Happy Days
episode that you just referenced?
A. I don't think they did because I was here in New York doing research at the TV And Radio Museum and that research was
on tobacco and smoking and so I was able to see a number, for example, of the news programs that appeared on that subject,
and I was
[Note: Pages 101-106 missing in original document]
that list of movies that you believe had negative connotations about cigarettes?
A. Again, some of the movies came from The Radio and Television Museum here because they took out clips from some movies
for their segment on smoking, but many of the movies I had seen personally, which I then recommended beyond this list, and
some of the films on that list were recommended or put on the list by Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. Okay. And when you say the list, you're referencing a list of reliance materials?
A. On the disk; yes.
Q. Okay. Is there an actual list as well or no?
A. No. It's just on the disk.
Q. As you sit here today, do you know what movies were given to you by counsel for Shook Hardy?
A. No. I don't know if I could even answer that by looking at the list that's on the disk because it's rather extensive and at this
point in time I might not remember
[Note: Page 108 missing in original document]
which ones I suggested and which ones they put there.
Q. Did you go about viewing movies in any kind of systematic way in order to determine which movies had a negative
connotation or relayed a negative connotation about cigarettes?
A. No, not in any systematic way. I am a movie buff, which helps, but I did not do it systematically.
Q. Are you aware of movies that portrayed cigarettes in a, for example, glamorous light?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
Q. What movies are you aware of that did that?
A. Well, I think the ones that come to mind are the Bette Davis movies primarily, but the -- but to a degree her movies are
problematic because glamour didn't always indicate health or mental stability.
Q. Other than movies in which Bette Davis stars, are you aware of any other movies that made smoking look glamorous?
A. I probably have seen them, but I can't think of what they might be off the top of my head here.
Q. Have you reviewed any secondary sources about how movies portrayed smoking over the last century?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you reviewed any secondary sources as to how cigarettes were portrayed on television over the last century?
A. No.
Q. Have you reviewed any secondary sources as to how cigarettes were portrayed on radio during the 20th Century?
A. No. I've served on a National Endowment Committee which was trying to preserve radio broadcasts and it's a very, very
difficult field to research because so many of the broadcasts weren't preserved, but the museum has some, but they have very
few under their category of smoking or tobacco; that is, very few radio --
Q. But have you
A. very few radio broadcasts. They have a number of television broadcasts.
Q. But have you reviewed any secondary sources about how cigarettes were portrayed on radio during the last century?
A. No.
Q. Are you aware of films in which the actors smoked cigarettes and cigarettes were portrayed as just an ordinary part of life?
MS. McGRODER: Object to form.
A. I can't think of them offhand, but I would imagine they exist. I simply didn't study them in any systematic way.
Q. You state in your report that male actors tended to use more antismoking slang term than women in films from the 40s
through the '80s.
Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Have you done any kind of systematic analysis of movies upon which you base that conclusion?
A. No. I just cite, as you can see in the footnote, at least one, that 30 Seconds Over Tokyo, where Van Johnson uses the term
coffin nails, but on that list of movies, on the materials resource list, you'll see other ones where this was the case, especially
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
for the '40s and '50s, men would have been more likely to use slang terms than women actors would be today where both men
and women actors swear and use slang terms now, but they didn't in this earlier time period.
Q. And, again, my question is whether or not that analysis or the conclusions which you've drawn, do they follow a systematic
of analysis of all film, all cinema from the '40s through the '80s?
A. No.
Q. On page 29, you describe certain advice columns; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. As you sit here today, are you aware of any evidence that would demonstrate that Ms. Rodehaver read any of the advice
columns that you are describing in page 21 of your report?
A. No, I cannot.
[Note: Pages 112-165 missing in original document]
aware of this one, and, of course, it's again a catchy title because he lost every case except one on the Perry Mason program
and then he lost his life to cigarettes.
Q. My question was not whether or not you were aware of this on your own, but whether or not the actual PSA that you intend
to play, whether that was located and produced by counsel from Shook Hardy to you. MS. McGRODER: Object to form.
A. I would say I think maybe so, though I could have well, I could have seen it in reference and references to them at the TV
and Radio Museum, but I'm not sure where I originally saw it.
Q. My question is where you got it from.
MS. McGRODER: Objection. Asked and answered.
A. I said I probably -- they probably produced this.
Q. The same question with regard to PMU-2570, which is the PSA starring Yul Brynner.
A. Yes.
Q. Was that given to you by counsel from Shook Hardy?
A. Yes. I mean, I know about the obituary and the appearance of him on television, but, again, I may have seen it at the TV
and Radio Museum, but this was produced here by Shook Hardy.
Q. Well, I just want to make sure the record is clear. My question is whether the PSA was produced to you. Was it produced
to you actually by counsel at Shook Hardy?
MS. McGRODER: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
A. I probably saw this one myself, though this production here in the demonstrative was not my production. I didn't produce
it here.
Q. Right. And, again, that's not my question. My question is -- I'm not asking whether you saw it and I'm not asking you
A. Okay.
Q. who produced it in terms of this slide? My question is: Did you obtain a copy of this PSA from Shook Hardy?
[Note: Pages 168-170 missing in original document]
is just one, so it would be a logical choice.
Q. Did counsel from Shook Hardy provide this episode excerpt to you?
A. They did; yes.
Q. And did counsel from Shook Hardy provide the excerpt in PMU-2094 of The Seven Year Itch from 1955?
A. Yes; but it also was a movie that I was well aware of and well aware of the theme of the movie, which is a fellow trying
to quit smoking.
Q. This excerpt was provided to you by counsel from Shook Hardy?
A. Yes.
Q. And slide PMU-8001 is an excerpt from Healthy, Wealthy and Dumb from 1938. Was that provided to you by counsel
from Shook Hardy?
A. Yes. And as I said before, I would have seen it when it was replayed in the '50s.
Q. The next slide is Smoke, Smoke, Smoke, PMU 36215, PMU-26559. Did you create this slide or did counsel from Shook
Hardy create the slide?
A. They created it.
Q. The next slide I want to direct your attention to, if I could, is by Good Housekeeping.
A. Yes.
Q. Is there any evidence of which you're aware that Ms. Rodehaver ever read any of these specific articles identified in this slide?
A. It's referenced in the depositions that I think it was her daughter thought she read the magazine. Whether she read any of
these articles, I don't know.
Q. Did you review -- how did you identify the articles that are referenced in this slide which has a number of PMU-slides,
the last one being 5889?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Douglas RODEHAVER, as Personal Representative of the..., 2012 WL 3450318...
A. I actually had a research assistant go through research, Better Homes and Gardens, and she came up with a list of the articles
that are on the hazards of smoking or how to stop smoking, smoking clinics, as you can see, so that it was
[Note: Pages 173-178 missing in original document]
A. To the degree that they may have asked the belief question, it's probably in the poll, but I -- I'm not remembering it or
citing it here.
Q. Do you agree with the statement, and I'm going to read this, in the 1950s, 40 to 50 percent of adults believe that cigarette
smoking is a form of lung cancer?
MS. McGRODER: Object to form and foundation. She's already said she doesn't know the answer to that question. Answer
it if you can, Dr. Hoff.
A. I can't answer it. I don't even know where it comes from.
Q. Well, I am reading actually from the Surgeon General report from 1989.
A. Okay.
Q. And it reads as follows: In the 1950s, 40 to 50 percent of adults believed that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
And my question is whether or not you believe with that statement?
MS. McGRODER: Object to form and foundation.
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10
