Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34672161 (PDF)
1997 WL 34672161 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
Fourth Judicial Circuit, General Jurisdiction Division.
Duval County
Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO., etc., et al., Defendants;
John Keegan, Plaintiff,
v.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., etc., et al., Defendants.
Nos. 95-04697-CA, 96-03247-CA.
September 26, 1997.
Division: CV-H
Division: CV-D
(Deposition of Dr. Lacy Ford)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Duval County, Florida
Name of Expert: Lacy Ford, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances of Counsel:
On behalf of the Plaintiff: Norwood S. Wilner, Esq.
Spohrer, Wilner, Maxwell, Maciejewski & Matthews
444 East Duval Street
Jacksonville, FL 32202.
On behalf of the Defendant
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.: E.C. Deeno Kitchen, Esq.
Kitchen, Judkins, Simpson & High
1102 N. Gadsden Street
Tallahassee, FL 32302-2368.
On behalf of the Defendant
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.: Paul D. Koethe, Esq.
Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
901 Lakeside Avenue
Cleveland, OH 44114.
On behalf of the Defendant
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.: Robin A. Schmahl, Esq.
Jones, Day. Reavis & Pogue
3500 One Peachtree Center
303 Peachtree Street, NE
Atlanta, GA 30308-3242.
Deposition of DR. LACY FORD, taken on behalf of the Plaintiffs, pursuant to Notice, before Martha L. Hufstetler, Certified
Court Reporter and Notary Public, at 303 Peachtree Street, N.E., 3500 SunTrust Plaza, Atlanta, Georgia, on the 26th day of
September, 1997, commencing at the hour of 10:00 a.m.
REGENCY REPORTING, INC.
Certified Court Reporters
Suite 107
Atlanta, Georgia 30329
(404) 321-333
INDEX OF EXAMINATIONS
DR. LACY FORD ... Page
CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR. WILNER ... 2
Also present: Virginia Steinger
MR. WILNER: Please swear the witness.
DR. LACY FORD, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
CROSS-EXAMINATION
BY MR. WILNER:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Ford.
A. Good morning.
Q. You're from Athens?
A. No, no, University of South Carolina.
Q. That's right. USC. I'm sorry. I thought it was University of Georgia. Anyway, we're here in town in Atlanta to take your
deposition. Do you have any documents that you brought with you to your deposition?
A. Yes, I do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Where are they?
A. I have a copy of my curriculum vitae in front of me and I have nine boxes of copies of research notes and copies of newspapers,
magazines, other materials of that variety.
Q. Okay. Great. You said nine boxes or how many boxes; three or four?
A. That's nine boxes.
Q. Okay. Is there a way we can tell what's in each box just in general, box one has something, box two has something else,
or you can't?
A. Probably the accurate answer to that is that some of them I might be able to do that and others I would not. Others are more
hodgepodge of things. I had to pack in a hurry.
Q. What I'd like to do while I'm questioning you is my assistant, Ms. Steiger, could inventory what's in those boxes.
A. Things are internally in some sort of order. As long as she --
Q. We won't get them out of order. Okay. Fine?
A. There's no objection to that.
Q. Okay. Let's just get an inventory of what's there and I'll just let you do that. If we need to stop, you need to look at something,
we'll do that.
Okay. Have you done any work on the issue of cigarettes or hazards of cigarettes or public knowledge about hazards since
testifying in the Connor case?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. What have you done?
A. The bulk of what I've done since testifying in the Connor case would be to review materials that came to my attention as
being pertinent after reviewing the depositions of Karbiwnyk and Keegan, the plaintiffs in this case, as well as look at some
material that I've just encountered in the process of doing further research, and I looked at some of the material that was not
previously seen that I was cross-examined on during the Connor case, and I may have done -- I don't want to be -- I may have
done something else, but those are the things that I can recall doing.
Q. What did you feel that you looked at specific to the Karbiwnyk case?
A. Specific to the Karbiwnyk case, I looked at newspapers from places of Ms. Karbiwnyk's residence at various points in her
life, Charleston, West Virginia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. I looked at educational materials from the state of West Virginia
school curriculum, samples of textbooks and things like that where she was educated. I did the same thing with Mr. Keegan.
And again, there's probably -- you're always expanding your research horizons to some extent, so I may be leaving something
out, but those are the focus things that I've done.
Q. Did you look at any women's magazines?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Yes, I have looked at some women's magazines. I have looked -- I had looked at some before the Connor trial and I probably
looked at more since.
Q. Have you kept a record of what you've looked at?
A. No. I have -- I do have in I believe I certainly hope in one of these boxes over here copies of selected articles that I am -- I
or my research assistant found in women's magazines. I did not keep of list of everything that I looked at, though.
Q. Do you know which women's magazines you did look at?
A. Let's see. I believe I looked at Ladies Home Journal, McCall's, Good Housekeeping, Cosmopolitan. Quite frankly, I've
looked at a lot of magazines, some of which may have predominantly a women's readership and I may not characterize them
as women's magazines, but a bunch of magazines.
Q. Where is the list of magazines that you've looked at?
A. As I say, I don't believe that I have a comprehensive list. I do have and did bring copies of the articles that I found in those.
Q. What years did you look at for Ladies Home Journal?
A. For Ladies Home Journal, my recollection is that -- I'll say my research assistant went through these. I believe we looked
at the 1950s, '60s and '70s, but I might not -- that might be --
Q. How often did the Ladies Home Journal publish?
A. I believe the Ladies Home Journal was a monthly magazine.
Q. And then would you have looked at every month of Ladies Home Journal from the '50s through '70s?
A. Just to make it clear in the case of -- as in the case of most of these magazines, one of my research assistants looked at
the magazines and reported to me and presented material that they found, but it's certainly my belief that we covered those
years with some care, yes.
Q. And how many articles on the hazards of cigarettes did you find in the Ladies Home Journal from the 1950s through 1970s?
A. I couldn't give you a precise answer on that. Ladies Home Journal was of course not a news magazine and was not covering
news stories, but it did run features from time to time either about smoking or related to smoking, but I couldn't give you a
quantitative answer.
Q. How about McCall's, did you --
A. Again, my recollection is that we discovered features on the subject from McCall's.
Q. As I understand it, then you have not attempted to do any kind of a quantitative analysis of the number of stories relating to
the health hazards of smoking as it compares to the number of stories generated by the magazine in total?
A. You're referring to the women's magazines that you're asking about?
Q. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. That is correct. I have not attempted a quantitative analysis of the stories in the women's magazines. The stories that I did find
in the women's magazines seemed to reflect what I discovered from other sources, and that is the broad awareness of readers
of the possible health hazards of smoking. Indeed, that seemed in most of these articles an assumption that the articles made
about the readership and they were elaborating on that basis.
Q. All right. I understand that you said that the articles reflected readerships, the awareness of the readers?
A. The substance of certainly at least some of the articles that I'm referring to jumped sort of right into a discussion say of how
to quit smoking or some other aspect referring to smoking and health that showed that the authors of those articles expected the
readership to have a broad awareness of the basic news stories which had been presented to them in other publications.
Q. I'm still trying to understand. You thought that you could tell from the article that the authors believed that the readers had
seen other news stories, is that true?
A. Maybe I can -- maybe I can express it better to you this way: As a general rule, the women's magazines were not news
magazines and the type of stories they carried were feature stories as opposed to news stories essentially is what I'm trying
to say. But there are feature stories that sort of grew out of the awareness of the potential health hazards of smoking that was
being covered in the newspapers and the news magazines and that type of thing. I'm not trying to characterize the women's
magazines as carrying news stories.
Q. Did your assistant catalog the frequency with which cigarettes were advertised in the women's magazine?
A. To the best of my recollection, we did not attempt a quantitative analysis of that. We did look at the issue qualitatively.
Cigarettes were certainly advertised in some of the women's magazines. Good Housekeeping I believe did not carry women's
magazines -- I mean did not carry cigarette advertisements. In other magazines, however, cigarettes were certainly advertised.
Q. Now did you look at some women's magazines other than Ladies Home Journal, McCall's, Good Housekeeping and
Cosmopolitan?
A. I'm trying to think of all of the magazines that I've looked at, if there are others that might be characterized as women's
magazines. Certainly, I looked at some health and education magazines whose readership was probably predominantly women
but which I don't think of as women's magazines. So I don't want to cut myself off and say that those are the only magazines
that I've looked at that somebody might characterize as women's magazines.
Q. Well, which other magazines, whether you consider them women's or not, did you look at?
A. Well, in the broader scope of what I'm doing, I've looked at Newsweek, Time, U.S. News and World Report, Reader's Digest,
Life magazine, other news and pictorial magazines of that type. I've also looked at magazines put out by the parent/teachers
organizations, I believe a magazine called Today's Health, I've looked at again education magazines whose titles escape me at
the moment frankly, I've looked at Good Health, a magazine that was circulated widely in an earlier period. And again, just off
the top of my head, I may be leaving something out that I don't intend to, but that gives you some idea of what I've looked at.
Q. Well, were there some magazines that you looked at that didn't have any coverage of smoking and disease?
A. To the best of my recollection, I don't recall a single magazine that did not have -- that I looked at that did not have any
coverage. There were certainly varying levels of coverage, the news magazines of course providing the most coverage and the
feature-oriented magazines tending to carry only occasional feature stories on the subject.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. So you're saying that every magazine that you chose to look at carried a story on cigarettes and disease during the time
period 1950s through 1970s?
A. To the best of my recollection, that's true. If I've looked at -- if I looked at a magazine that didn't carry anything, I can't
recall it at the moment.
Q. But you made no note of all of the magazines you looked at evidently or you don't have that in a report somewhere or notation?
A. I might be able to obtain that information from my assistant or one of my assistants, but I don't have it in my possession
today or at my office.
Q. What about by year, do you have an index of what -- of the articles that you chose to copy which indicates the year and
the publication?
A. Again, let me understand your question. Are you referring to what you've been referring to as the women's magazines?
Q. Let's extend it to any magazine. Do you have an index for what you have -- do you have an index of the articles that you
have chosen to copy?
A. I believe that my research assistants have that index. I do not have it. And there might be a copy in one of these boxes,
but I'm not sure.
Q. Have you looked at any secondary sources, and by that I mean articles in learned journals and periodicals which discuss the
issue of news coverage of cigarette hazards? Do you understand my question?
A. I think so. Well, without claiming to be an expert in disciplines other than history, yes, I have looked at -- I have seen some
what I would call secondary sources as well as some primary sources that had articles addressing that question.
Q. Which secondary sources have you consulted?
A. Again, I might leave something out. Off the top of my head, there was an article which I was asked about by Mr. Motley at
trial in the Columbia Journalism Review which I've looked at and there were other articles written in, let's see, I believe it was
the Review of Economics and Statistics and maybe one in the American Journal of Public Health which made some reference
to that issue even if they were not focused.
And again, I just want to throw out as a caveat, I may be leaving something out that I've looked at, because I can't recall all
of these things off the top of my head.
Q. Did you Columbia Business Review attempt to evaluate the extent of news coverage of smoking and disease?
A. They ran an article I believe it was in 1963 which attempted to evaluate the coverage of the smoking and health controversy
since 1954.
Q. And did they use methods which were reliable?
A. Well, the article was for a historian and not a journalist, a curious one to some degree. It was published in the journal without
an author. And the editors of the journal ran an article in the journal saying that the author had asked that his name be removed
from the story because he didn't agree with the editorial decisions that the editors made and the editors said they didn't agree
with the conclusion that the author had drawn.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
And so I think that the very fact -- in fact, the editors specifically said they thought the author's conclusion went way beyond
his evidence. So I think, frankly, that that's probably not the type of article that gets published in historical journals given the
standards that we have to meet. However, the article, nevertheless, included a good bit of interesting information, but I would
hesitate to say that they met the sort of high standards of scholarship because of the very fact that the editors of the journal
sort of alerted you to this problem that emerged.
Q. Have you read any articles that discuss the new coverage of smoking and disease other than the Columbia Business Review?
A. Well, certainly I've read -- the ones I mentioned to you in my previous answer I believe, while they're not focused on that
subject, address it in some way. And certainly there were other stories that in my search of the particular press talked about
how the issue was being covered.
Q. Which are those? Identify those that you're speaking.
A. Could you repeat the question.
Q. Just identify the ones that you just made mention to, that you eluded to.
A. The Columbia Journalism article that we talked about, the Review of Economy and Statistics articles, the American Journal
of Public Health article, and again, the stories that were coming out in the newspapers I would have to sit down and methodically
go through all of the newspapers to give you a specific date, but they are in fact in there, a discussion of how much coverage,
but they're not -- I should perhaps -- maybe I misunderstood. Those are not scholarly articles.
Q. Identify, if you would, the Review of Economics and Statistics, or whatever that was, and the American Journal of Public
Health, would you identify those articles, please.
A. Do you mean give you the titles or --
Q. Sure.
A. I can't do that off the top of my head.
Q. You can't remember what they were?
A. I can probably give you the years. 1972 would be the article in the Review of Economics and Statistics and I believe the
American Journal of Public Health was about 1977 or '78. Both of those articles are attempts to judge how effective antismoking
publicity is in discouraging smoking in one fashion or another, and they both characterize the coverage of the controversy and
they both characterize it as a controversy that has received an enormous amount of coverage from the news media.
Q. As a controversy?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you seen anything more recent in terms of secondary sources that discuss the effectiveness or validity of news coverage
on smoking and disease?
A. To the best of my recollection, I have not seen any secondary material on that that postdates 1978 or 1980.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Are you aware of anyone who has done a quantitative analysis on the amount of newspaper copy devoted to cigarettes and
disease versus the amount devoted to other types of hazards?
A. In the initial stages of my research on public awareness of the health hazards of cigarette smoking, I read a number of
secondary sources written by people, some who were scholars and some who were not, and as any historian would in trying to
get started reading as much of that material as he can, and my recollection is that some of those secondary sources which I read
included some information along those lines. I cannot -- it's been quite a number of months now and I cannot recall whether
they were systematic or impressionistic, and I hesitate to characterize them any further for fear of mischaracterizing them.
Q. Systematic being a quantitative analysis of the number of times --
A. A quantitative -- excuse me. I interrupted you.
Q. Continue.
A. A quantitative analysis that met, you know, the standards of reliable statistic and quantitative methods. Sometimes people --
sometimes I do this myself, use -- make quantitative statements that were based on an analysis that's not a formal quantitative
inquiry.
Q. As I understand it, you have not done a formal quantitative inquiry into this subject.
A. That is correct. I have in some magazines and newspapers counted advertisements over, you know, how many ads appeared
per week or how many ads appeared per month to help myself form a qualitative opinion about public awareness, but not with
any intent of being quantitatively definitive.
Q. You've counted cigarette advertisements in certain magazines?
A. What I have done is, for example, when I reviewed the Florida Times Union for, say, the year 1955, I would count how
many times cigarettes were advertised in the Florida Times Union per week, and I would do that of course on a sample basis.
I would pick a month, for example, and see how many advertisements appeared per week that month and try to note that and
note how that changed over time or if it changed over time.
Q. That was for a newspaper?
A. Yes.
Q. What about for magazines?
A. I reviewed advertisements in magazines, but I don't -- do not recall that I attempted a quantitative analysis of that.
Q. How about television advertising, did you -- let me ask you first, have you seen any television advertisements for cigarettes
at all?
A. Yes, I have seen some television advertisements for cigarettes.
Q. Where did you get them?
A. I saw some television -- I was actually shown a television advertisement for a cigarette at the Connor trial in Jacksonville
while I was being cross-examined. I saw some other ads which I believe had been placed into evidence in that trial in preparation
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
for my testimony at that trial, but before that I had seen some television ads or actually replays of television ads at the Vanderbilt
television news archives in Nashville, Tennessee.
Q. And you kept a record of what you saw?
A. I believe that in these boxes here there is a record of the clips that I watched at Vanderbilt.
Q. And did you --
A. But I don't claim that I noted particularly every ad that I looked at.
Q. Did you get information on where and when the ads played?
A. Any information of that kind that I have came from the larger research that I've done, stories in the newspapers, magazines,
that sort of thing talking about, you know, cigarette advertising has certainly generated a lot of publicity and some of these stories
carry information about sponsorship of shows and other just general information about cigarette advertising on television.
Q. So do you have a list of the shows that were sponsored by cigarette manufacturers at any given point in time?
A. No, I do not.
Q. Is it your belief that if a show is sponsored by a cigarette manufacturer, that there's more than likely going to be a cigarette
advertisement shown during part of that during that show?
A. I feel certain that that would be the case, yes.
Q. So if we took a day, an average day in the year 1960, let's say, and we considered how many hours of television were shown
during between 6 o'clock and 11 o'clock p.m., how many cigarette ads would a viewer who watched one of the major networks
in that time frame be seeing during that period?
A. I don't know. The cigarettes advertised on television in 1960, they were along with other marketers of major national products,
a large advertiser, so I'm sure you would have seen ads.
It was my opinion and is my opinion that since I'm not an expert on advertising, it's my job to evaluate not simply what appeared,
but what impact those advertisements had. And clearly, public awareness of the health hazards of smoking was risking high
and rising fairly dramatically throughout this period. And from that I can conclude is that even though cigarettes were widely
advertised with substantial budgets especially for television advertising, this advertising, while it may have had impact in a
variety of other ways, did nothing to diminish the public's awareness of the health hazards of smoking.
Q. And you base that on what?
A. I base that on really all of the research that I've done which indicates how widespread awareness was, how it was increasing
through the 1950s and 1960s, even though cigarette advertising was still permitted on television during this period of time as
well as in other venues.
Q. Well, I mean specifically tell me why you think that or you are sure that television advertising had little impact, as you put
it, on people's understandings of what cigarettes did to them.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, while certainly it would not be the only type of evidence I would rely on to reach that opinion, one important type
of evidence is polling data. As polls ask people if they were aware that cigarette smoking might be a cause of lung cancer and
might be a cause of other disease, these levels of awareness were high and rising through this period even as television became
a sort of common thing in American households and people, as you point out, watched a good bit of it, but just during that
precise period that awareness was growing by leaps and bounds according to the polls.
Q. It was growing from what to what?
A. I think that in -- just give me a second to think about this. In 1954, I think that approximately 80 percent, 77 to 80 percent
of the population were aware of the studies that were coming out linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer, and that number
grows to essentially 95, 98 percent at the present time or in the 1990s.
Q. And that's -- you're talking about polling information?
A. Yes.
Q. And I want to see if we can talk about polling a little bit, and as we get to that, do you have an index of what polls you've
looked at?
A. I have in these boxes copies of a significant portion of the polls I've looked at. There are other polls that I've looked at, a few
that I don't have copies of, and some that were included in various government documents and publications which are generally
available in libraries and which I didn't make copies of but which I have looked at.
Q. The question is do you have an index?
A. No, I don't believe that I have an index.
Q. You mean you just have copies of the polls?
A. As a general rule, that's the case, yes.
Q. Well, you must have summarized them somehow. Must you not summarize all of this voluminous stuff to remember what
the polls say?
A. Well, as I say, I have copies and I refer to those and you may find them marked in some way, but I have not -- I do not
have a written summary of them, no.
Q. Do you mean -- well, how many polls have you looked at?
A. I would say in excess of 20 probably not counting the polls that are reported in the Surgeon General's report and places
like that.
Q. Twenty polls basically?
A. I said in excess of that.
Q. And each one you would just kind of look at, make a mark and then put it back down, but you wouldn't make a summary
or index of what they showed?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, I don't think that's exactly a fair characterization of the way I handle them. I spread them out in front of me, tracked
awareness over time. If I made any notes on that, they would be in the folder with the polls or one of the folders with the polls
that I have in them, but I would track those over time. There is one kind of outline which is somewhere over here in the box
which I made notes about percentage of awareness at various points in time.
Q. Okay.
A. But that didn't -- that doesn't include information simply about the polls, but other things as well, and there's polling
information in there.
Q. So you did make an outline of some of these things?
A. Yes, I do have a working outline which -- which is in the box.
Q. Well, why don't we find that.
MR. WILNER: Take five. I'll be right back.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) All right. Did you find the outline you're talking about?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Okay. Can I see it?
A. Sure. Let me just state that this is not a survey polling data, you understood that. This is just a general outline.
Q. All right. Is there someplace where you have summarized polling data?
A. Not other than in that outline if I understand what you're looking for.
MR. KITCHEN: That's the only one we've got of that.
MR. WILNER: Yeah, that's fine. We'll make a copy.
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) Well, can you identify the polls? Are they in one box?
A. I believe that most of the ones that I have copies of are in one pouch in those boxes. I can identify them for you as being
primarily Gallup and Harris polls with some other polls. Polls that I have copies of are primarily Gallup or Harris polls and I've
looked at other polls in government documents which I do not have copies of.
Q. Well, have you made notes from looking at those things that you don't have copies of?
A. I do not believe that I have -- I do not believe that I currently have any notes of that kind.
Q. Well, is your opinion based on things that you have read but have not copies and have made no notes of?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, as I said, I have copies of these polls that you -- again, it's not in these boxes, but you can for short periods of time
check materials out of government documents in the library, and I sit down at my desk and I look at this material and I examine
it over time. And as I work with the attorneys, you know, I say that we have this poll and this poll and this poll that they can
list for exhibits and develop demonstrables from and that sort of thing. So I certainly can sit down with the materials that I have
and can easily get my hands on and reconstruct the polling environment during the period of time in question.
Q. Let me get this straight. So you don't have your own notes, but you've told the attorneys that I can make demonstrative
exhibits out of some of these polls that you don't otherwise have copies of, is that the idea?
A. No. I think those are ones that -- ones that I'm suggesting for use are ones that I have copies of.
Q. I'm just curious about the ones that you don't have copies of and have no notes of. Are those ones that you rely on in part
for your opinion or are you not going to consider those?
A. No, they are polls that I rely on in part for my opinion. Like any historian, you don't necessarily -- when evidence becomes
repetitive, when you see the same thing over and over again, you don't always take down every citation. So there may have
been polls that had information of which was virtually identical to the information that I did copy or that I didn't copy, but all
of it was information that I processed mentally and used to form my opinions. So that's certainly the case.
Q. All right. So I'd like for you to state for me then those polls which are not here which you have no notes of and which you
rely on in whole or in part.
A. There is a great deal of polling which is not here, there's a great deal of polling data summarized and reprinted in the 1989
Surgeon General's report that I do not have. Our University of South Carolina government department has that document which
is readily available. I do not have copies of nor do I have that volume with me, but that is something that I've very much relied on.
Q. All right. So let me see if I get this straight. So what you're saying is you relied on the Surgeon General's report summary
of these other polls?
A. In many cases, it's not just a summary, but they actually reprint the polling data from earlier polls done by the federal
government.
Q. Okay.
A. In some cases -- in some cases -- let me complete that answer. In some cases, I actually went to government documents
and looked at the original versions of those polls as they were published and but fairly quickly I found that the republication
of the data in the 1989 Surgeon General's report was a good -- provided really the data that you needed for reference and it
wasn't necessary to do -- to try to accumulate year by year, that the Surgeon General's report of 1989 was a good compilation
of that data frankly.
Q. All right. So let me get this straight. You looked at the '89 Surgeon General's report which you don't have a copy of now?
A. That's correct. I don't have it, but I can --
Q. All right. And then you say there's a summary of some polling of that date in there, and some of those you went and looked
at, but others you didn't is that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, let me sort of explain my method to you. It will probably be a better way of answering that question. In my early stages
of research on this project, one of the things that I tried to do was to look at the Surgeon General's reports beginning with the
first one in 1964 and continuing up into, you know, to 1989 and perhaps thereafter.
And certainly in reviewing the 1989 Surgeon General's report which attempts to provide a retrospeculative on the issue to some
extent, I became aware of other polls that the government had done. I went back to see the original versions of some of those
provided information that would influence my opinion more than the Surgeon General's report, and after doing some work in
that regard I determined that I was better served by using the 1989 Surgeon General's report, but I have looked at the underlying
polls in some of those cases and I could not tell you off the top of my head exactly which ones that was since it's quite a good
while ago when I did that.
Q. And you think that the only polls that were reported on or do you -- is what you're suggesting -- you keep using the word
government polls. Were there other polls that were reported on in the '89 Surgeon General's report?
A. Yes, yes. I didn't mean to limit it to the government, the Harris polls, Gallup polls, Roper polls, polls done by private polling
organizations for different entities, different government agencies. There was the -- my impression is that the Surgeon General's
office made a fairly broad collection of data for that report and it certainly didn't rely simply on government polls. Much of it
simply reprinted information that I had already found in my own search of other polls, nongovernment polls that are available
in the public domain.
Q. Well, was the Surgeon General the only government entity who addressed the issue of public awareness of smoking and
disease?
A. The Surgeon General, to the best of my knowledge, the Surgeon General's office has been at the forefront of doing that and
is probably the most important single entity, but they're not the only ones, no.
Q. Who else?
A. There are Federal Trade Commission publications on the subject, and I mean I'm sure there are other -- state governments and
through various of their publications, public health publications and so forth put out information, so, no, the Surgeon General
is certainly not the only entity.
Q. Did you know whether the FTC was charged by Congress with the obligation of reporting to Congress on pubic awareness
of health hazards?
A. I am aware that they issued from time to time some reports. I don't know that I was aware that they were mandated to do that.
Q. And you have copies of these FTC reports?
A. As a general rule, I do not. As a general rule, I do not have copies of federal government documents because as a general
rule, federal government -- let me start over and explain that. The government documents section of the University of South
Carolina library has most of those materials. Many of them are for in-library use only, and so I'm confident that when I need
to go look at them, I can go over and look at them.
So as a general rule, I don't have copies of that material. There might be a few copies that I -- something I just decided to run
over and copy that would be in this material, but as a general rule I don't have copies of any federal government documents
because of the pretty easy availability I have as a university faculty member of getting those.
Q. Well, would you have looked at the FTC documents that specifically reported on the issue of public awareness?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I have certainly looked at FTC documents which make that report. One document which I believe was the -- which I know
is cited in the plaintiff's expert disclosure for the Karbiwnyk case and I believe which I was shown on the witness stand in
the Connor case is for some reason missing from the government's document section of the USC library and but it is relied on
substantially in the 1989 Surgeon General's report.
So my knowledge of that document comes primarily from the extent to which the 1989 Surgeon General's report relies on it
and the brief perusal I was able to make of it when Mr. Motley showed it to me in the Connor trial.
Q. What year FTC report was that?
A. I believe that was 1981.
Q. And but since that trial, now we've had four months or so, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. So you haven't been able to obtain a copy in four months?
A. I have not. And I have -- I have looked actually for several hours for it. I've had a research assistant look for several hours
for it. It's supposed to be held in our library. It does not appear to be there. I'm in the process of trying to locate it on inner-
library loan at this point, but when your library is supposed to have something, it's hard to get other libraries to loan it to you.
But I must say that it is pretty heavily relied on in the 1989 Surgeon General's report and I feel like that I have -- I'd certainly
like to see the document, but I think I have a pretty good understanding of its contents.
Q. Do you know how the document -- or what research underlied the document?
A. To the best of my recollection, it used a lot of polling data to help it formulate conclusions.
Q. The same data that you relied on?
A. Some of it was certainly the same data. There may have been some data that I did not have access to or had not been able
to look at that's included in that report.
And as I say, since I have not really had a chance to study the 1981 FTC report, I'm hesitant to make further comments about
that report specifically.
Q. Well, would you say that based on your looking at the citations in the '89 Surgeon General report as it includes the 1981
FTC report, that the FTC or the Surgeon General or either or both relied on data that was not available to you?
A. The best of my recollection is that they relied on data that was available to me and but I believe that they relied on some
data that I had not previously seen.
Q. I'm sorry. I wasn't --
A. I said they may have relied on some data that I had not previously seen, but all of the data was very consistent it seemed to me
with the polling data that I had seen and confirmed the conclusions that I had drawn from the polling data that I had surveyed.
Q. So your testimony is that the FTC report confirmed the conclusions that you have drawn?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I don't recall in general that there was anything inconsistent in the FTC -- in the polling data, not necessarily the conclusions
drawn from it, but in the polling data that there's anything inconsistent and that the other polling data had shown. To the best of
my recollection, it showed a very high public awareness, an extremely high level of public awareness of the hazards of smoking
as well as the public awareness of most other things.
Q. But I take it you disagreed with the conclusions of the FTC in 1981?
A. Having had only the barest chance to look at that document in the courtroom, I'm hesitant to make any sort of blanket
statement to that effect.
Q. Well, you saw the quotations from the expert witness disclosure, right?
A. Yes, I did read that disclosure.
Q. And did you determine whether the disclosure accurately stated the conclusions of the FTC?
A. I would need to refer back to the disclosure to where I can answer that question.
Q. Okay. Well, let me ask you to assume that the FTC report was accurately quoted in this disclosure at least to the effect at
least insofar as those passages that I'll read to you and ask you whether you agree or disagree with this particular conclusion or
conclusions since we've discussed them generally. The FTC concluded, I want you to assume in 1981, that the data indicates
that substantial numbers of consumers that seriously misunderstand and underestimate the increased risk of suffering health
problems as a result of smoking.
A. Can I see that?
Q. This is just a quote from the expert witness disclosure. Sure.
A. I'd like to be able to read it. Well, I can go no further than basically the first sentence and say, yes, it's certainly true that
I disagree with that conclusion. The Federal Trade Commission in saying -- in reaching a conclusion that the public lacks
sufficient knowledge to make informed decisions, it goes on to confirm my analysis that the public was extraordinarily aware
of the health hazards of smoking, but to conclude essentially that because people -- all people had not given up smoking, that
they had somehow failed to recognize its significance, and that is a conclusion which I strongly disagree. I think the public
was well aware of the hazards and some people simply exercised their right to smoke knowing full well of the hazards that
are confronting them.
Q. So your view is that the FTC concluded that people seriously underestimated the risk for the reason that some people still
smoked, did you feel that was their methodology?
A. I think that an assumption underlying their argument is certainly the fact that -- I think that is an assumption that underlies
their argument. There does seem to be a belief that if people are aware of the risks, they will not smoke. And I think that is a
judgment rather than a methodology that they're making and I think it's an erroneous judgment.
None of the data that I've seen suggests that the public was not aware and did not have a strong sense that cigarette smoking
was potentially very dangerous to them, that it could be a matter -- could be life shortening, and for whatever reason, reasons
which I necessarily have no special expertise in, continue to smoke.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Do you -- the FTC quotes in 1981, however, among those polled in the 1980 Roper study, 30 percent of the population and
41 percent of the smokers did not know that a typical 30 year old male shortened his life expectancy at all by smoking, did
you see that in the 1980 Roper study?
A. I believe that I have seen that piece of information. I hesitate to say exactly where I saw it.
Q. Do you -- did you disagree with the data itself, that i.e. 30 percent of the population and 41 percent of the smokers did not
know that a typical 30 year old male shortened his life at all?
A. I would say that that is somewhat inconsistent with data I have from other places that people were aware of the health risks
of smoking. They were aware that it was life shortening. And there may have been something about the way that question was
posed that attracted a somewhat different answer, because as a general rule, awareness levels by 1980 were well in excess of
80 percent.
Q. Well, let me get this straight now. Awareness levels of what?
A. Awareness levels that cigarette smoking had been associated with higher incidents of lung cancer and other diseases and
then that it might be potentially, for any individual who smoked, life shortening.
Q. And you feel that that was inconsistent with the citation just given to you quoted by the FTC?
A. Well, even the information you just gave me indicates that the overwhelming majority, if I recall the numbers you just gave
me, that the overwhelming majority of people were aware of that specific fact that was asked.
Q. So to you if 41 percent of smokers expressed that even in 1980 that they do not know that a typical 30 year old male shortened
life expectancy at all, according to you that still indicates common knowledge of that particular facts?
A. Well, it's certainly indicating that 60 percent roughly of smokers do know that even in the way that question was phrased and
the context that was asked and I've seen even higher levels of awareness cited for cigarette smokers in that same period of time.
Q. Well, let me stick to one thing at a time. I appreciate you saying there are others, but I'm trying to get down to the bottom
of this. Is it then that if 60 percent say yes and 40 percent say they're not aware, does that indicate to you that there's universal
awareness?
A. Well, I'm certainly not basing my opinion on one fact in isolation.
Q. I know that. That's why I'm pinning you down. Just let's take this 60 and 40 business. I know that you've got opinions, but
I want to explore them. What is -- assuming this to be the case for purposes of argument, do you contend that that indicates
universal awareness?
A. I'm just not willing to accept your assumption for the sake of argument. That asks me to give a sort of speculative opinion.
Q. Well, all right. You're not willing to accept it. Then tell me what percentage of people have to accept the fact before
considering it universally accepted?
A. Well, again, I think it depends on what you've talking about. I think the standard I'm looking for was public awareness
and that's not necessarily something different from universal acceptance. Acceptance implies that people not only are aware
of something, but sort of absolutely accept it. And that's a different proposition. I think certainly when majorities of any
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
given community are aware of something, knowledge has become pretty common. And when super majorities become aware,
knowledge becomes pervasive.
Q. All right. Let me see if I get this straight. A majority to you, 50 percent of the people say they know something, 50 percent
say they don't, is that common knowledge?
A. A 50 percent level of awareness of a particular fact is a pretty significant level of awareness. Higher levels of course are
more impressive and indicate pervasive knowledge.
Q. All right. But I asked you about common knowledge. I want to stick to one thing at a time. Is 50 percent and 50 percent
common knowledge?
A. Well, common knowledge is certainly an ongoing process, and if 50 percent of the population are aware of something, it's
pretty likely that that awareness is going to expand, because that's certainly enough people to disseminate the information pretty
widely in the community.
So I'm going to say that 50 percent is an impressive level of knowledge in any given community. Obviously higher levels are
even more impressive. But, you know, I'm trying to refrain from trying to peg a specific percentage as being definitive, because
I think quantitative measures are only one aspect of what you have to do. They're significant, but they're only one aspect.
Q. That's what I'm asking about; that one aspect. That's exactly why I'm asking you. Do you have an opinion as to what
percentage of -- as to whether if 50 percent of the people say they know something 50 percent don't, is that common knowledge
as you used the term?
A. Again, I'm going to say that I think if a majority of people in any given community are aware of something, that is a pretty
significant level of public awareness and certainly higher levels of knowledge or higher incidence of knowledge indicates a
broader and more pervasive awareness. But I think that it's not really intellectually sound to try to peg some number in the
abstract.
Q. Well, have you ever used the term common knowledge?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. It has a meaning to you then?
A. Yes, it does.
Q. All right. And does it indicate -- would you say that common knowledge would be fulfilled if 50 percent of the people knew
it and 50 percent didn't?
A. Common knowledge, as I understand it, couldn't be defined in a purely quantitative way, although certainly quantitative
measures are suggestive and important in how to determine it. And so I don't know -- I think I would try to examine all factors
involved and have examined in other instances and would not rely solely on a quantitative measure.
Q. I understand you wouldn't. But I'm asking you would the quantitative -- to the extent that the quantitative measure is part of
the analysis, does that support the conclusion or does it not support the conclusion?
A. I think a 50 percent level of -- it depends on the larger circumstances. Fifty percent level of awareness in polling data is
sometimes quite striking. And the basis of my opinion in this case, the 50 percent level was polled in the 1940s and much higher
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
levels were polled after that. So I think it's not an issue that even bears necessarily on my opinion in this case as opposed to my
sort of abstract thinking on the subject, because public awareness by 1954 in much, much higher than 50 percent.
Q. But, Dr. Ford, you understand that I'm permitted to inquire about the basis for your thinking and not just here, you know --
I understand that you've given your opinion, but I'm really trying to inquire as to the structural basis of your thought, not just
-- not just a given factual conclusion that you may have.
So forgive me if I inquire as to the nature and the formulations that underlie your opinion. You understand that that's the nature
of my question, not to say whether or not you agree or disagree with that statement.
So again I'm left with the -- I don't know what you answer -- and I don't mean to belabor the point, but I wonder is it possible for
you to answer the question, and if not, then I will stop. But is it possible for you to tell me the answer to this question, and that
is I'm trying to define common knowledge in terms of the amount of people that have to know about it before it's considered
common knowledge? If you can answer that, I would like you to try. If you can't, then I understand that, too.
A. I think that it is not possible for me to give a definition of common knowledge that is purely quantitative in nature. I think
quantitative measures are important, very important to consider in constructing an opinion about common knowledge, but I do
not believe it is possible to give a precise percentage figure without looking at the whole environment of evidence and facts
and information that's at the historian's disposal.
Q. What other government bodies besides the FTC, the Federal Trade Commission, were charged, and the Surgeon General,
were charged with the responsibility of determining public awareness of health hazards, if you know?
A. Well, certainly -- I'm probably just going to be giving you subsets of these bodies. The National Cancer Institute, Center for
Disease Control, a whole array of health departments of HEW.
Q. Okay. Anything else?
A. Again, I'm sure there were other -- probably other entities and probably other entities that I've seen information from, but
I can't list them off the top of my head.
Q. Let me hand you an exhibit that is from the files of the Tobacco Institute, see if you've ever seen it before. Have you been
shown that, the degree of public awareness from the files of the Tobacco Institute?
A. No, I have not. I do not recall ever seeing this before.
Q. You can look at it and see that it summarizes various polls.
A. At a very superficial glance, that seems to be what it does.
Q. Do you know -- well, let me ask you this: You know, before you mentioned that a given poll might have a result that you
didn't agree with because of the way the question was asked. Do you remember saying that or words to that effect?
A. Something to that effect probably, yes.
Q. And, in fact, the way a poll is -- the way a question is asked can have a material result on the response, can't it?
A. Yes, in certain circumstances it can.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. And, in fact, you were quick to identify the way the question was asked as a possible explanation for the polling data that
you were not sure you agreed with, true?
A. I'm not sure I was quick to identify, but I identified.
Q. Okay. And, therefore, I guess you have looked very closely at the way the questions were asked for the polls that you believe
are correct, is that true?
A. Well, I think that I've looked very closely at the way questions are asked. I don't accept your characterization about believing
necessarily some are correct and some are incorrect. You'd just have to interpret polls. But, yes, I do pay some attention -- the
simple answer is, yes, I pay attention to the way questions are phrased.
Q. And the way questions are phrased -- or who determines the way questions are phrased?
A. The pollsters.
Q. Okay. And is it known to you in the study of polling that some polls may be intended to give a certain result?
A. It's certainly known to me that one form of polling attempts to -- well, for example, that polling that is done for political
candidates often asks questions trying to find out what we could say about our candidate that would cause his or her ratings to
go up or what could we say about the opposition to cause his or her ratings to go down. I don't know that I would characterize
those as questions designed to get a specific response, but they are probing-type questions rather than questions that are simply
trying to ascertain current opinions.
Q. Let me go one further. What I asked is are you aware of any polls which have ever been conducted by anyone in the history
of the world where the poll was designed to obtain a specific result in the way the questions were formulated and the way
they were asked?
A. Again, I want to give you the best answer I can give. I don't have knowledge of that in the sense that I know that some entity
deliberately set out to poll and get certain kind of information. I do not have knowledge of that. As a historian looking at certain
polls, comparing them to other polls, you could infer that that might be the case from the nature of the question.
Q. Well, cigarette hazards are not the first polls you've looked at, are they?
A. No, they're not.
Q. Are there references on the interpretation of polls, scholarly references on how to read polls?
A. Yes, there is scholarly literature on polling, yes.
Q. And does that literature consist of textbooks?
A. Scholarly articles.
Q. Okay. Can you cite to me a few of the better ones?
A. I can certainly cite to you journals where you can find studies of this kind. Social science History, Political Science Quarterly
would be a good place to start.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Well, if I wanted to look at a textbook or a summary of an overview of the scholarly issues that are raised in the interpretation
of polls, where would I go?
A. There's a pretty good textbook on statistics by Hamilton, his first name I can't recall and -- Modern Statistics might be the
title, something like that. It has a section in there on polling data. As a general rule, textbooks are not -- are going to be somewhat
broader, not focused purely on polling data, but merely have sections.
Q. Well, there are statistical issues in the interpretation of polls which involve how reliable the poll is based on the sample
size and so forth, right?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. All right. And then isn't there a psychological dimension to polling where the interpretation of the question becomes the
issue, not the mathematical tabulation of the results or not? I didn't mean to suggest the answer. Maybe it's no.
A. It is -- I'm not -- I am a historian and not a political scientist. But it is my understanding that currently research on the
psychology of polling is a topic that political scientists are looking into. That is not as relevant an area of inquiry for historians
as it is for political scientists, because we do not generally have the kind of detailed polling data that they can -- that is currently
generated in exit polls from elections, for example, where political scientists can get into that type of information.
Q. So your expertise does not extend to evaluation of the psychology of polling from a scholarly basis?
A. I didn't intend to say that exactly. I think as a historian I can examine the questions as phrased by pollsters for possible bias
and as being leading as questions can be. At the same time, I'm not -- I do not claim to be an expert on the current political
science literature on that subject.
Q. Well, you say as a historian, you think you have special expertise to interpret leading questions or would that jut be general
expertise as a human being?
A. I think historians have expertise about understanding what might be a bias or what you might call a loaded question at a
particular time that an ordinary human being would not. It may well be that any witness being deposed could spot a leading
question, but at the same time I think that it would take perhaps a historian to fully understand that the environment that a
question was being posed in 1946 or 1957 that ordinary individuals and indeed scholars who are not historians, including
political scientists, would not necessarily full understand.
Q. On the other hand, if there were bias in the question which depended upon for its understanding upon a scientific or medical
knowledge of the underlying material, then you wouldn't claim any particular expertise about that, would you?
A. If it required scholarly knowledge of medicine or biochemistry, no, I would not.
Q. All right. So did you identify any textbooks or scholarly articles on polling other than just the statistics of polling that are
known to you?
A. I have had as part of my overall training for my Ph.D. and indeed some post-doctoral work that I had done some training in
statistics and some knowledge of poll interpretation and I had done some reading in that regard as part of my general background
in preparation.
Q. And that's in the statistical interpretation and power of polls, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Yes, matters relating to sample size, but also in the way questions are constructed.
Q. All right. So we're back to that. Are you saying that you have not personally been or ever seen a poll which you believe
was constructed for in order to obtain a given result?
A. Well, I've not personally -- I don't have personal knowledge that polls were so designed. I certainly have seen public reports
of polls which, you know, I believe questions were phrased in a way that's to improve say one candidate's standing against
the other and that sort of thing.
Q. And in evaluating polls, do you feel that it's appropriate and necessary to consider the financial or other interests of the
person or persons doing the polls?
A. That's certainly a valuable piece of information. I think that there can be polls done that are, you know, paid for by one
entity or another. And if they meet all of the statistical tests, they nevertheless can be good polls. But it's certainly information
that you're interested in knowing.
One reason of course that I relied on polls that were in the public sector conducted by Gallup and Harris and publicized as
they do in their standard opinion polls so heavily in my work is that these organizations are, by everything I've been able to
determine and to the best of my knowledge, organizations which have no bias, are not being used by any particular political
party or interest in the collecting of their data and I think it is generally important for their standing that they remain that way.
Q. Have you looked at what are known as the Roper organization?
A. Yes.
Q. And what is that?
A. Well, in order to avoid some potential confusion, there is a Roper center for polling data at the University of Connecticut
which is simply a library or an archive. It collects polling data from the Harris and Gallup and other organizations and makes
it available to researchers. It's even available on the Internet, not on the Worldwide web, but on the Internet for researchers.
And, on the other hand, but not to be confused with that even though I think the organization has provided those polls to the
center, there was a Roper organization that conducts polling.
Q. Okay. Did you see any of the Roper polls as part of your analysis of the issues that you've looked at?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And where did you find these Roper polls?
A. Again, to the best of my recollection, I found them on the -- I subscribe to the Roper -- I'm a member of the Roper polling
center, and on the computer I can access their files there. Indeed, there are some -- there are Harris and Gallup and other polls.
Q. Well, did the Roper organization -- Roper research associates ever conduct polling?
A. Yes, yes, they did.
Q. And are they a private polling organization?
A. They do private polling. I don't know how they characterize themselves as an organization.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Have you looked at polls from the Roper research association?
A. It is my recollection that during the Connor trial under cross-examination I was shown a poll done by the Roper organization
by the, you know, by plaintiff's attorneys, by Mr. Motley. To my recollection, that's the only -- as I'm sitting here right now,
that's the best recollection I have of ever seeing any poll that Roper conducted as a private -- for a private entity I believe.
Q. You mean the '89 Surgeon General didn't cite to the Roper poll?
A. The '89 Surgeon General's report did cite Roper polls, and I'm not aware of the ones where they cited were private or public.
I was -- I do recollect that.
Q. Did you go and look at those Roper polls that were cited by the Surgeon General?
A. Well, I had actually already looked at Roper polls that were available to be looked at through the Internet, and I suppose it's
possible that it's there and I simply didn't find it because of my Internet skills, but I don't believe that that private poll I was
shown in cross-examination was available in the public domain, but Roper did do polls that they made available in the public
domain and I had seen those in the Roper material before actually seeing them in the Attorney General's report.
MR. WILNER: Two minutes.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) All right. I was asking about the Roper polls, and so let me see if I can get it. Your answer is the ones
you've looked at, are they among the 20?
A. I've looked -- the Roper polls at I've looked at are, with the exception of that one that I characterized, are polls that, to the
best of my knowledge, are in the public domain.
Q. All right. Let me just show you one just for instance and see whether you recollect seeing I it's called a study of public
attitudes about -- I don't know what the rest of it is -- public attitudes towards cigarette smoking and health or something like
that. It's in 1972. Do you see it?
A. This may have been the poll that I was shown by Mr. Motley in the Connor case. I can't -- it looks very similar to the one he
showed me, so I don't want to -- so I believe that it is. It could be the one, so I don't want to say, no, I haven't seen it.
Q. Other than in trial, because I don't remember what you were shown in trial, but in part of your research.
A. To the best of my recollection, this was not a poll which I saw or relied on in forming my opinions about public awareness of
smoking. Indeed, a poll commissioned by the tobacco industry would have to be a poll that I would view with some skepticism
as I would view a poll that was commissioned by an antismoking activist organization.
Q. Well, would you consider, and whether you view it with skepticism, whether the poll reported information which was against
the apparent interest of the party making the report?
A. If I understand that question, that's certainly something that I would consider then.
Q. I mean it may be that if a candidate, for instance, reports in a poll that he's way ahead or that everyone agrees with him, you
might view that with suspicion, because he was the one that authored the poll, true?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. That's correct.
Q. But if we were to report that based on his polling he was in the minority or completely wrong, might that not be something
you'd consider with a little more -- that you'd view with a little more concern?
A. It's certainly something I would consider. It might, however, be that that candidate had some interest in wanting to appear
behind at that particular point in the race. But things like that are things that you would attempt to take into consideration and
evaluate.
Q. I mean, in fact, when dealing with people's receptiveness to different messages, isn't the question of whether the message is
against the interest of the author something that people typically use to evaluate the reliability and credibility of the message?
A. It certainly would be one among many factors that people would use, yes.
Q. So since the Connor case, you've made no attempt to evaluate what internal polling the cigarette industry did over the years?
A. No. I have made no request to see internal company documents that I can recollect since the Connor trial. I did -- let me
try to be very accurate with that. I think that I did ask during the trial to see overnight documents that had been presented to
me one day and I looked at them that night. So I did request to see those. And if I have seen anything else, it would have been
other things that I was shown in that trial.
Q. Okay.
A. I have not requested any --
Q. Let me ask you to have a look at this document entitled Degree of Public Concern. I think you've got an extra copy, didn't you?
Okay. This document appears to summarize certain polls which we've heard names of Gallup and Roper and so forth, so I'm
going to ask you about whether you agree or disagree about these statements. This document begins 1949 Gallup, 52 percent of
smokers or 66 percent of nonsmokers think cigarette smoking is, quote, “harmful.” Do you agree, disagree or have no opinion?
A. That is a figure that I have certainly uncovered in my own research and it seems to be reliable polling data from 1949 to
the best of my knowledge.
Q. Okay. 1954 Gallup, 41 percent or 32 percent of smokers think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer.
A. Again, that is another piece of information that is part of my own research and it is showing that 41 percent of the population
in 1954 believed that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer and a much higher percentage in that year were
aware that cigarette smoking had been linked to lung cancer by some studies.
Q. Let me just talk about this.
A. Okay. Yes, that's a piece of polling data that I'm familiar with.
Q. Now does that indicate to you common knowledge that cigarettes cause lung cancer?
A. This is a response to what I would call a belief question, not simply are you aware, but do you believe the information you've
heard, do you think that it's accurate. And I think in 1954, 41 percent is an impressive belief level. It would be important to
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
make a distinction between a belief level and an awareness level. And as I said I believe in my last answer, awareness levels
in 1954 were much higher.
Q. All right. Let me try to ask the question again. Do you believe that this indicates that there is common knowledge that
cigarettes cause lung cancer in 1954?
A. I think I've already answered that question as best I can, because in making my judgments, I'm not seizing on any one piece
of information. When you put together a belief level of 41 percent with an awareness level of 77 percent and as well as a survey
of all of the publicity that's being generated in 1954 of what's being taught in schools, I don't form an opinion based on one
piece of information. There's nothing about this one piece of information that suggests a contrary conclusion to my opinion
it doesn't seem to me.
Q. Well, if the number instead of 32 percent of smokers were 10 percent of smokers, would that suggest a contrary conclusion?
A. In a belief as opposed to an awareness poll, I don't think that you can draw a question -- I don't think you can really draw
a conclusion about common knowledge. And as I say, this is a statement about how many people believe it. But I want to
emphasize again that no historian would hinge an opinion merely on one fact no matter how impressive or unimpressive it
might be when there is a larger body of data available.
Q. Well, we'll go into that. I just want to go a step at a time. Okay. So your testimony is then that the belief polls do not indicate
or are not important in the issue of common knowledge, it is the awareness polls that you rely on, is that what you said?
A. It was my testimony that awareness polls are by far more useful in determining common knowledge than belief polls, because
belief measures something else again. However, I do think that the levels of belief and the rising levels of belief in the period
of time I studied tend to confirm belief trials awareness, but it trials it in an upward trajectory showing in fact that supporting
my opinion on awareness.
Q. All right. I'm just talking -- I'm not talking about trends or anything else, I'm just talking about 1954. So let's confine our
comments to that for just a minute if we could. So my question is based on your response then, an awareness poll is something
that indicates how many people say that they're aware of the issue, right?
A. Yeah, aware of the issue of the facts, the arguments that are being presented.
Q. All right. And a belief poll is how many people believe that they're true, right?
A. It's a poll of how many people are convinced that a particular proposition that's being discussed is correct.
Q. Right. And your testimony is that when you evaluate common knowledge, that what is more interesting to you is whether
people have heard about it, not whether they believe it?
A. My testimony is that I believe that awareness polls are a more closer, more proximate measure of common knowledge of
what the public knows than polls which address beliefs. I think that you can use belief polls, you can certainly study those in
conjunction with awareness polls, but I think awareness polls are better pieces of evidence.
Q. Cite me a support for that belief.
A. When you say “cite me a support” --
Q. Cite me someone who, but you, who's ever said that in a learned publication or anything else.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, I'm not sure that you would necessarily --
Q. Can you cite me anything?
A. I was thinking.
Q. I didn't mean to interrupt you. Sorry.
A. I'm not, on the top of my head -- off the top of my head, going to be able to give you a citation on that, but it is certainly
I think an opinion which is -- there's support for it certainly among historians that awareness is what the public was aware of,
not -- people can be extraordinarily aware of things and not necessarily be convinced and willing to make a belief out of that.
Q. Okay. So the way you use common knowledge, it's fair to say you're talking about awareness and not belief?
A. Awareness is certainly more important to my understanding of common knowledge than belief. The fact of the matter,
though, is that empirically while awareness levels run higher than beliefs on the issue that we're interested in here of smoking
and human health, belief levels are when compared to belief levels for other things pretty high and track upward with awareness
even though there is obviously a difference between awareness and belief.
Q. Well, now you've talked about belief levels in comparison to belief levels on other things, is that what you said?
A. I actually don't recall what I said, but I'll restate my answer.
Q. What did you say?
A. I think that belief levels involve -- are not simply a function of what information is available in the public domain and what
the public knows, what it is aware of. It involves a personal decision about accepting that knowledge, believing it to be true,
believing it to be -- it involves a number of personal decisions. So I think that it's fairly obvious that, and it is the case with
most people, there are many things of which they're aware of, they have knowledge of, but they do not necessarily accept that
knowledge as accurate or true, and that's what I was attempting to say.
Q. You used the term belief, compared to belief levels on other things. You said belief levels on cigarettes and hazard was
compared to the belief levels on others things, didn't you say that, or do you mean that regardless of what you said, is that true?
A. I'm honestly trying to think. Off the top of my head, I don't want to try to compare belief levels to other type responses that
might require belief. So let me confine my comparison to awareness and belief.
Q. Well, is it important to know if you're talking about whether something is common knowledge, do you -- in fact, I think I've
seen your charts that compare common knowledge of cigarette hazards with other hazards, haven't I seen those?
A. You've certainly probably seen some comparative charts.
Q. So you have done comparison of cigarette hazards with other types of hazards?
A. Well, what I've -- I think it would be more accurate to say that my charts compare awareness of the hazards of cigarette
smoking awareness of other types of information of other knowledge of all kinds that's out here in the community. And what
that comparison does, it shows strikingly how much more aware of the potential hazards of cigarette smoking the public was
than they were of many other pieces of common knowledge. So --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. So the question was do you compare beliefs about cigarette hazards with beliefs about other hazards or you haven't made
that comparison?
A. To the best of my recollection, I've not undertaken to compare that systematically. I believe, though, that I have seen reports
of those comparisons.
Q. How many -- if 32 percent of smokers think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, how many people think
that air pollution is one of the causes of lung cancer?
A. I think I've actually seen a poll on that. I can't recall that off the top of my head, however. I don't want to give you misleading
information and I'd have to know which date -- I mean what dates you're referring to.
Q. Let's take any date that you can remember.
A. There was a substantial body of information reaching the public in the 19 -- early 1950s, early and mid-1950s that air
pollution was being investigated by some scientists as a possible cause of lung cancer, and a number of people I think believed
that or certainly were aware of it and some believed it and I think continue to over a good period of time.
Again, I can't recollect exact numbers off the top of my head, but I do recollect that there was information to that effect.
Q. Would you look at the degree of public concern summer 1957 Gallup poll, 50 percent or 38 percent of smokers think cigarette
smoking is one of the causes of cancer of the lung. Do you agree that that's accurate data?
A. Yes, I believe that's data I have in fact seen before.
Q. Winter 1957 Gallup, 47 percent or 35 percent of smokers thinks cigarette smoking is one of the causes of cancer of the
lung, see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that accurate data, too?
A. Well, again I think -- let me make sure you understand my answer. This does seem to be an accurate reporting of data from
Gallup polls that I have seen independently. I've seen this.
Q. 1958 Gallup, 44 percent or 33 percent of smokers think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, is that also
an accurate reporting of data?
A. Again, to my recollection that was an answer In the 50 Gallup poll.
Q. Do you see that there was a drop between 1957 and 1958 on the question of whether cigarette smoking is one of the causes
of lung cancer?
A. Well, I'm certainly not going to try to push my expertise here too far, but that's probably about the same level of awareness
that most of these polls are going to have a margin of error about that and it's probably about the same level.
Q. So that's not a statistically significant change as far as you can tell?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. It does not appear to be, no.
Q. How many people in 1958 thought that cigarette smoking was the major cause of lung cancer?
A. I don't have data in front of me to answer that question.
Q. Any idea based on any data that you've seen or heard about or read or that you base your opinion on?
A. I couldn't recall an exact number off the top of my head.
Q. How many people in 1958, if you have an opinion, believed that the -- that smokers were -- how many people in 1958
believed, if you know, that 40 to 50 percent of cigarette smokers would die prematurely from cigarette smoking?
A. I don't have an answer to that off the top of my head.
Q. Have you seen any polls at any time where the question was asked of the public how many people believe that 40 to 50
percent of regular cigarette smokers die prematurely?
A. I have seen that question posed, and I don't recall the exact date, but I have seen -- what I can say is I have seen polling data
on that point or a point very similar to that, if not exactly that.
Q. When?
A. But I can't quote it to you off the top of my head.
Q. What was the result?
A. I don't recall off the top of my head what it was.
Q. Okay. All right. Continuing down, 1959 Roper, when asked, 69 percent of smokers agreed that as long as you are careful
not to smoke too much, cigarettes won't do you any real harm. Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Was that an accurate reporting of the data?
A. I think that's an accurate restatement of the Roper -- that Roper poll I believe.
Q. All right. Does it -- is it consistent -- do you believe that it was common knowledge at that time as you define common
knowledge that cigarettes were harmful even if you didn't smoke too much?
A. I believe that in 1959, the public had been well informed and was well aware from a variety of sources that cigarette smoking
had been associated with higher incidents of lung cancer and other disease, that they were aware that as many reports indicated
that the more you smoked, the more hazardous smoking was. So, yes, I do think there was substantial public awareness in
that period.
Q. And so do you believe that when 69 percent of smokers agreed that as long as you're careful not to smoke too much, cigarettes
won't do you any real harm, does that indicate to you that they had misunderstood that question?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I mean I think it indicates to me that that was a conclusion they had drawn from the information that was at their disposal,
but that the information was certainly out there that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer and I think smokers would
certainly be aware that lung cancer could shorten your life.
Q. So what you're saying is that there was information available to these people who believed that as long as you don't smoke
too much, they won't do you any harm, but that they didn't -- these people, the 69 percent in this poll who did not -- who agreed
with that just didn't accept the information that was out there?
A. Let me check the wording. I believe, yes, that's a fair -- may be a fair characterization.
Q. So would it be fair to say then that there was also information out there that said or implied that as long as you're careful
not to smoke too much, cigarettes wont do you any real harem?
A. I would put it this way: I think there was information out there that heavy smoking was more dangerous and the more you
smoke, the more dangerous it was. And there were of course people not associated with the tobacco manufacturers who were
still questioning the link between tobacco and lung cancer, for example, but I'm not sure that there were any statements being
made to the effect that if you only smoked a little bit, there was no danger.
Well, I mean I guess, yeah, there were people out there who were still questioning the link of smoking and disease who were
making -- and I guess if they were doing that, they were very definitely suggesting that was the case.
And I think there were probably people -- and again, well, my best characterization of the information is that people were saying
that the more you smoked, the more -- the higher your risk level was.
Q. Well, you just said that there were people out there not associated with the cigarette industry who were denying that cigarettes
caused or had any hazard, right?
A. I may have misspoke on that. There were certainly people out there who were raising questions about whether it had been
proven and expressing skepticism about the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, And to the best of my knowledge,
some of these people were not associated with the tobacco manufacturers.
Q. You said there were people out there not associated with the cigarette industry who were saying this?
A. There were people out there who, to the best of my knowledge, were scientists and public health figures who were not
associated with the tobacco industry who were either not convinced by the medical and statistical studies that had been produced
at that point or who were calling for further research or who were proposing other theories to explain. That was certainly the case.
Q. Were there people who were associated with the tobacco industry who were saying the same thing?
A. The response, must common response from representatives of tobacco companies and other tobacco industries were saying
that the statistical studies in which the bulk of the health concern was based and in the middle of the 1950s were not proof and
they were pointing that out and calling for additional research I guess of a clinical and laboratory rather than a statistical nature.
Q. You've seen what the tobacco industries' response was?
A. I have seen the response that appeared in the public press, yes.
Q. You've seen the response that appeared in the public press, is that what you said?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Yes. I'm simply saying that I have not asked the tobacco companies to provide me with their responses. What I wanted to see
was that the tobacco industry said that was reaching the public to an appreciable extent and that includes stories in newspapers
and magazine where company spokespeople are quoted and testimony they may have given and those kinds of materials.
Q. Well, how about information sent directly to doctors, wouldn't that affect the sum total of knowledge about cigarettes and
disease?
A. Yes, it would. And I'm aware that the tobacco companies or I believe it was the Tobacco Institute actually distributed reports
on research and statements about the status of the research to physicians. I'm also aware that there was a good bit of public
controversy. I think Time magazine ran an article talking about this and calling the public's attention to it. And one of the leading
medical journals, either JAMA or the New England Journal actually ran an editorial sort of warning doctors to be on the lookout
for kind of information and to recognize that it was coming from the companies and might contain bias.
Q. Well, you said that the companies were sending reports on research do doctors, those are your words?
A. Well, I'm trying to give you the best characterization of what they -- that I can think of what they were sending. There were
reports pointing to research taking the position. I mean they were coming from the tobacco industry to doctors. I'm not trying
to be -- i'm certainly not wanting to mischaracterize what they were. I have no intention of trying to do that.
Q. Well, you'v e seen them, haven't you?
A. I have seen a few of these. I've seen some of these. I have not seen all of them.
Q. Where did you get them?
A. Again I believe that I first actually saw one of these at the Connor trial. That's my recollection. I was aware of them before
that, but I first actually saw one there.
Q. So since the Connor trial you've undertaken to at least determine what the medical community was exposed to through
efforts of the Tobacco Institute?
A. No. I mean actually I was aware of that before the Connor trial, and as I do in everything, you have to examine the impact
that it had. It seemed to me that this information had very little impact based on shaping the public's level of awareness.
Most doctors -- it seemed to me that this had very little impact in shaping public awareness and that doctors were certainly
forewarned about the potential bias of this information and that there was enough coverage in the public -- there was enough
coverage of this that it was well aware. People were well aware that this was being done, and it certainly did nothing. this was
in the very period of which awareness is not only high, but increasing, and I saw no evidence that this information diminished
awareness.
Q. Let's take that one step at a time. First you said that you thought doctors were forewarned that this information could be
biased, Did you say that?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. So how were doctors forewarned that the tobacco industry was trying to bias doctors?
A. My dates here are approximate, but as I said earlier, I think about in 1958 either JAMA or the New England Journal of
Medicine ran an editorial saying that they were what I would characterize as pamphlets being sent out to doctors from I believe
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
the Tobacco Institute and sort of criticizing this practice and suggesting to doctors that this would be a one-sided presentation,
that that warning from the medical journal got a good bit of coverage in the public press.
Q. And that was enough to forewarn the doctors by your opinion?
A. Well, I think the mere fact that these things were being sent out by the Tobacco Institute probably would alert doctors in
and of itself. I'm not sure that they even had to be warned. But I think that it did -- this early criticism tended to minimize any
impact that those publication could have had.
Q. Well, if you feel these publications had -- do you feel that -- strike that. Are you aware of -- or how would you find out what
doctors believed and what they told their patients at various times?
A. There was information in materials that -- in newspapers. sometimes there were interviews with doctors and surveys of
doctors, and I believe also there was information that came out in the Florida public health publication which I reviewed
suggesting that information doctors had and what doctors' positions were.
Q. All right. Identify that, please.
A. The position of doctors as a general rule --
Q. No, please give me the source of your data and then we can go through your general opinions. You just identified certain
sources of information. I'd like you to be more specific or obtain them for me from your records or do something to give me
a citation rather than an opinion, if you could.
A. It would be very time consuming for me to try to flip through all of this stuff and find it. I can -- I've identified the areas
from which it came.
Q. Newspapers and doing surveys of doctors, that's one of the things you talked about, okay?
A. That's right. Interviews with and surveys of doctors.
Q. Let me stop you there, because I want to proceed -- I don't mean to interrupt, but I just want to get this along. Surveys of
doctors, that's what I want to hear about if you know it. Can you cite me to any surveys of doctors?
A. I can't off the top of my head give you a precise citation. I believe that in the material I have from the Florida board of
publications and the Florida board of public health there is a report of a survey of doctors in that material, but I can't provide
you with a more precise citation to it and I do -- but I do recall reading that and I do recall that being a factor.
Q. let's go back to the degree of public concern. When asked which one of -- this is 1959 Roper. Eleven percent chose smoking
a pack or more of cigarettes a day compared to 10 percent who chose climbing in and out of a bathtub. Do you see that?
A. I do not recall seeing that, but I may have.
Q. That wasn't part of your consideration when you testified about the perception of relative hazard?
A. I did not say that. I said that I didn't -- don't recall at this point specifically seeing that particular comparison. I may have
seen it and I may not have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. What is the truthful, if you know, comparison of lifetime hazard from smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day compared
to climbing in and out of a bathtub?
A. I do not know what the hazards of climbing in and out of a bathtub are. I'm sure that they are, in my personal opinion, a
substantially less risky activity than smoking cigarettes.
Q. Can you account for why 10 percent chose climbing in and out of a bathtub whereas 11 percent chose cigarettes?
A. No, I cannot.
Q. Does that seem to you to be a disproportion to the actual difference in hazard between bathtubs and cigarettes?
A. Without having more of this poll in front of me to look at or more of these types of questions, it's hare for me to answer
that questions.
Q. Is it your opinion that in 1963 -- 1962, that there was common knowledge about the hazards of cigarette smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. Therefore, had you been asked in 1962 whether a cautionary label should be placed on such packages, you would have --
had you had the database available to you today, you would have said no?
A. Would you repeat that question.
Q. Yeah, Had you been asked in 1962 whether a cautionary label should have been placed on the packages of cigarettes as was
done by order of Congress in 1966, you would have said as of 1952 no?
MR. KITCHEN: Excuse me, What year?
MR. WILNER: '62. Thank you.
THE WITNESS: In 1962, I would have -- if asked that question, I would certainly say that the public was already well-
knowledgeable and well-informed about the dangers, but that it would be perfectly reasonable to me to include a warning to that
effect I see no harm in adding the warning to the information that was already available. That would just be my personal opinion.
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) On page two, 1964 HEW survey, do you see that?
A. I do, yes, Well, wait a minute. Yes.
Q. 1964, HEW.
A. I got it.
Q. Do you have that survey?
A. I have seen it, yes. Well, it may be -- excuse me. Let me restate that. it may be the 1966 survey that I have seen a copy of.
Q. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. But I believe that ‘66 survey compares their findings to the '64 findings.
Q. All right. So looking at the '66 survey that you mentioned that you've seen, halfway down the page, do you see where that's
referenced?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And have you looked at that survey yourself?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Do you have it as part of your files here today?
A. No, I do not. It was a volume which I looked at in the government documents section at the University of South Carolina,
but I do not have it in these boxes. It's a pretty sizable volume as I recall.
Q. Looking at the second paragraph, it says 63 percent either strongly or mildly agreed with the statement that, quote, “before
people will be convinced that cigarette smoking is harmful to health, the tobacco industry itself will have to say that smoking
is harmful to health,” do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Is that an accurate statement of what the '66
A. I recall seeing that, yes.
Q. And is that consistent with your understanding of people's beliefs at that time?
A. No, it's really not. I would -- again, I'll point out that the word convinced in there suggests that this is belief and my opinion
being rendered is about awareness. But other information that I have seen certainly suggested to me that the public by 1966
in the aftermath of the Surgeon General's report and at the time that warnings are in effect going in the pack, it is very well-
informed and knowledgeable about the dangers allegedly associated with cigarette smoking and health.
And it strikes me that they were more interested in getting their health information from public health officials, et cetera, than
they would have been for the tobacco company. So I would maintain that that statement is somewhat inconsistent with other
things that I have seen.
Q. Well, are there any other questions that you're aware of, any other polling questions which have inquired into exactly that area,
i.e. whether respondents state that they will -- that before they're convinced, they want to hear the tobacco industry say it's so?
A. Actually, that -- well, that's not the question.
MR. KITCHEN: I want to make an objection. I think that's a mischaracterization of this poll. Where are we?
THE WITNESS: We're right here.
MR. KITCHEN: Okay. I think he knows what I'm talking about.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
THE WITNESS: Before Mr. kitchen objected, I was going to say that from what I have in front of me as well as what I can
recollect from actually looking at the poll, what this poll is doing is asking respondents, saying before other people will believe,
do you think this is necessary, and that's not the way that you characterized the question.
I do -- but to answer your question, I do not know off the top of my head of polls other than these two HEW polls, Again, and
that's just to the best of my recollection, I may have seen if somewhere which asked a question like that which is what do you
think it will take to convince other people, It's not asking people themselves if they believe, but what do you think.
And this simply -- the response, it's simply the opinion of the respondent of what they think it will take -- would take to make
other people believe a certain proposition.
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) So you don't think when the people were answering this question they were including themselves in the
word people to give a short --
A. I think people is used here in a collective sense. There was not any reason for people to assume that it was asking -- it's not
asking a personal or individual belief question, but sort of what do you think other people think.
Q. My question to you directly is do you see the word other people in this question or do you see only the word people?
A. It says, “before people will be convinced.”
Q. You've now said that it's your interpretation of this question that it involves an answer pertaining to other people not including
the respondent, is that your opinion?
A. This is a question asking people for their opinion about public opinion. It's not asking them for their personal opinion about
cigarette smoking. That's what I'm trying o say. It's asking ordinary lay people, not people necessarily with any special expertise
to communicate what they think influences public opinion. It's not their personal view necessarily that's being asked for.
The way that question is phrased, it's impossible for me to say how they were -- how they as individuals would have responded
to that question.
Q. Do you have any other citations to any other questions asked on the issue of the requirement in people's mind, in the public's
minds that the manufacturer identify the hazards of the product before people will be convince, anything other than the ‘66
and '64 HEW Surveys?
A. It may have been -- I have seen other statements, but it may have been recapitulations of these questions in later government
documents, so I cannot -- the answer I can given is I don't recall any other information off the top of my head.
Q. Okay. Let's look at page three. On the 1966 HEW survey continued, halfway down the page, 43 percent of smokers or 63
percent of female smokers either strongly agree or mildly agree with the statement that cigarette smoking is nowhere near as
dangerous as many common health hazards, do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Is that an accurate statement of the data that was found in the '66 HEW survey?
A. My recollection is that that is in the poll yes.
Q. And do you feel that that question accurately represents the status of public opinion as of that time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, I think that that statement does not suggest that there's not a strong awareness of cigarette smoking is dangerous,
but simply that other things are dangerous as well, And since the phrase common health hazards is fairly vague, I don't know
exactly what people might have been thinking. But at the same time. I do recall that being a response to that question. But
there's nothing about that answer that suggests that people did not recognize that cigarette smoking was dangerous and certainly
nothing to Suggest that they weren't aware that there were serious charges that it was dangerous.
Q. Well, let me ask you then, was it common knowledge, in your opinion in 1966, among female smokers that cigarette smoking
is nowhere near as dangerous as many common health hazards?
A. I'm not willing to agree with that statement based on this one piece of polling information here.
Q. Well, can you cite any other piece of polling information that disagrees with it?
A. Well, in my view, certainly the broad scope of polling information suggests that the public including women and including
women smokers were very well aware of the possibility that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and, by this time, heart
disease and was hazardous to the health generally. And I think that level of awareness was high in 1966. I cannot off the top of
my head give you comparisons of their belief about that danger as compared to other things that they believed to be hazardous
to their health.
Q. Please consider the statement 44 percent of females and 60 percent of female smokers either strongly agreed or mildly agreed
that the connection between smoking and disease is not yet proven because it is only based on statistics, do you see that?
A I do.
Q. Is that an accurate statement of what public opinion was about the connection between smoking and disease in 1966?
A. The Surgeon General's report which had come out in '64 relied heavily on its compilation of the statistical data, and part of
the discussion surrounding that was whether or not you can -- and this was in a discussion n the '50s and it's been ongoing to
some extent as to whether you can establish causation as I gather it's understood in medicine or science, I don't claim to be an
expert in that myself, as opposed to association through statistical studies.
So, in fact, I thing there was a question of whether statistics amount to scientific proof. That of course does not mean that
people were not aware of the risks. The statistics are certainly good predictors of risk factors and I think people were very
well aware of those.
And it doesn't strike me necessarily that this -- as odd that you would get a response like this since there was a kind of widespread
belief that statistics is not a definitive proof of scientific causation.
Q. So you accept that this was a valid reporting of what public opinion was like in 1966?
A. Well, this is one piece of information, and I have no reason to doubt the methodology behind it, but I'm not willing to accept
that general proposition at this point.
Q. You're not? That 60 percent of female smokers believed that -- are you willing to accept the proposition that the poll, number
one, that this is an accurate statement of what was in the 1966 HEW poll?
A. I believe to the best of my recollection It's an accurate statement of that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. All right. That the poll was representative of the smoking population?
A. I have no reason to doubt that.
Q. Do you presently believe that the connection between smoking and disease is not yet proven because it is only based on
statistics?
A. Would you restate the question. I was thinking of something else.
Q. Do you presently believe what is exactly is quotes in that thing?
A. I'm not an expert on medicine or biochemistry and I couldn't offer an expert opinion on causation. I am convinced by
statistical evidence. educational materials and life experience that cigarette smoking is a high risk activity that's potentially very
dangerous to your health. I personally am not willing to accept those risks.
Q. Well, I understand that, but let me see if I can ground this poll in some discussion, because you went into a little discussion
about statistics in your previous answer. So in order to understand how you used the term, I'd like to know whether you would
say yes or not to this poll question if it were asked your today.
MR. KITCHEN: You're asking for his personal opinion. This is outside the scope of his designation.
MR.WILNER: I understand that. I understand that completely.
Q. (By Mr. Wilner ) Do you -- if you were one to the people poled in the 1966 HEW survey and you were asked the following
question, quote, “the connection between smoking and disease is not yet proven because it is only based on statistics,” period,
end quote, would you answer yes or no?
A. If I were asked that question today in 1997, I would not in 1997 agree with that statement, because simply as a person sitting
here in 1997, I'm very impressed with statistical evidence. And so I would not agree with that statement, but that's my statement
as a lay person and not as anybody with an -- who has any expertise in medical causation.
Q. All right. If we assume that 60 percent of female smokers believed that in 1966 based on this sampling, do you have an
opinion whether the majority of female smokers believe it today?
A. I have seen polling data on that and I'm trying to recall it. I've certainly seen polling data where the majority of smokers
today believe that smoking is hazardous to their health but smoke anyway, and that would be the characterization that I'm
willing to give.
Q. All right. My question was whether the majority of smokers today believe, if you have an opinion, that the connection
between smoking and disease is not yet proven because it is only based on statistics, if you know. If you don't know, okay.
A. Off the top of my head, I do not believe that's the case.
Q. You don't believe that the majority would say yes to that question today?
A. That's my recollection.
Q. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. But let me qualify that a bit. Most of my research for this topic is not in the most recent period.
Q. Okay.
A. Because I was asked to focus on earlier periods, and I'm certainly aware of data in the '70s and '80s, but I haven't looked at
that recently, so I'm just -- I'm not trying to speak with -- not trying to give you an erroneous answer, but it seems to me that I
recall some time back seeing data that showed that most smokers today do recognize the health hazards.
Q. You mentioned the Surgeon General's report of 1964.
A. Yes.
Q. You have read that?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. How many copies were mad?
A. You know, I have seen reports on that and seen that figure cited, but I don't recall it off the top of my head. It was distributed
very broadly to libraries or purchased by government documents, repositories, libraries generally, et cetera.
Q. How many copies were sent to physicians?
A. I don't know the answer to that.
Q. Were you aware that the Tobacco Institute generated a white paper called The Cigarette Controversy which followed on
the heels of the 1964 Surgeon General report?
A. Yes, I have seen copies of The Cigarette Controversy. I didn't necessarily recollect that it followed hot on the heels of the
Surgeon General's report. I was thinking maybe it was a title of a document that was distributed on different occasions, but
I'm aware of that publication.
Q. Have you been given the information of how many copies of that document were distributed over different periods of time?
A. No.
Q. No?
A. I do not recollect -- I certainly have not been given it and I do not recollect seeing it reported anywhere. I may have, but
I don't recall.
Q. 1967 on page three. Ted Bates & Company, it's stated that 50 percent disagreed that the government has proved to me that
smoking causes serious health problems. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you aware of that polling data?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I do not recall having seen that polling data previously. I believe Ted Bates is an organization that -- I don't believe this poll
was in the public domain and I don't recall having seen it.
Q. Does the statement that 50 percent disagreed that the government has proved to me that smoking causes serious health
problems, does that strike you as consistent with your view of public opinion in that time period?
A. Well, I think that there were certainly higher levels of -- very much higher levels of awareness that smoking caused serious
-- was alleged to cause serious health problems and higher levels of belief than this reported. It seems to me this problem -- this
question specifies the government, and of course a lot of the information that was coming to people was not coming form -- a
substantial amount of it was, but a substantial amount of it was coming from other sources as well.
MR KITCHEN: Time out.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) You have evidently reviewed some material that was part of various school curricula?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. And that includes textbooks and teacher materials and things like that?
A. Yes, it does.
Q. And you are -- it's your opinion that the material in that -- in the various curricula were actually taught to students?
A. Yes.
Q. And at times material, were you ever able to document that it was taught to students that cigarette smoking was the major
cause of lung cancer in the United State?
A. I can't -- your exact phraseology, certainly as textbooks contain statements like most scientists believe that lung cancer is
a leading -- I mean cigarettes are a leading cause of lung cancer, those kind of things were reported in textbooks. There was
an abundance of evidence in these textbooks from very early on keeping the -- keeping the public school teachers and children
abreast of exactly what was known among scientists.
Q. So can you find for me a textbook, the first textbook that you believe contains the statement that most scientists believe that
cigarettes are a leading cause or the leading cause of lung cancer?
A. Well, again that was a paraphrase, but the information certainly included in the textbooks that the research -- let me
characterize the answer. The researchers' findings of recent research are regularly and readily incorporated into the textbooks,
and in the 1950s material from the American Cancer Society statistical study by Hammond and Horn moves into the school
textbooks very rapidly.
Q. So if you could find for me then the first time that you believe the statement that most scientists believe that cigarettes are
the leading cause of lung cancer.
A. Again, that was a paraphrase off the top of my head. I could get out my education materials and go through them, but it
might take me some time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. All right. Well, I want you to tell me when you believe the first time that statement was made.
A. Well, when I believe --
Q. First I'll ask you that and then I'll ask you to back it up, if you can.
A. My recollection is that the textbooks incorporated information about lung cancer and cigarette smoking as readily as those
reports came into the public domain. And as I say, my recollection off the top of my head is that the Hammond material was
incorporated in the 1950s, and as the textbooks moved forward, you began to see stronger statements.
The earlier statement I made was simply a paraphrase I guess of my interpretation of the textbooks, but I'll be happy to pull
out textbooks and start looking.
Q. Please show me in the 1950s where the Hammond data becomes taught.
A. Again, I'm sorry, but it will just take me a minute to find some of this.
Q. Okay.
A. Textbook dated 1957, the title of the textbook Your health and Safety, page 323, the American Cancer Society has studied
the lives of 188, 078 men. This is what they found: Lung cancer kills seven times as many cigarette smokers an nonsmokers.
Furthermore, it killed twice as many people who smoked over two packs a day as those who smoked one to two packs per
day. That's an example.
Q. Okay. Could I see that.
A. Sure.
Q. This is in a book called Your Health and Safety.
A. Yes.
Q. From 1957. And who used this book?
A. Cold I see it again?
Q. Yeah.
A. It was an approved textbook and I probably can tell you by looking at it. This is a high school textbook. It was one of several,
two or three approved by the Florida Department of Education, whatever official title it goes through, as health textbooks and
it was a mandatory health component to the curriculum.
Q. Let me see it, please.
A. Sure.
Q. What do the other ones say?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Here's another one. And again, I'm reading selectively. I'm either going for the strongest statements. No one has ever proved
that irritating -- irritation from smoking causes cancer of the lung, but the following figures are from medical records, thin the
over: 95 percent of the victims of lung cancer are heavy smokers. One half of 1 percent are nonsmokers. There has been a
marked increase recently in lung cancer, especially among men. Numerous experiments are being conducted on rats and mice
to see if there is a causative factor in tobacco.
Q. What year is that?
A. That is a different textbook, Modern Health, 1963.
Q. '63?
A. Yes.
Q. And in '63, it was said that experiments were being done in rats and mice to see if there's a causative factor?
A. Yes, that's what it says.
Q. Are you -- have you seen any of the documentation from inside the cigarette industry on whether or not this is an industry
statement accepted by 1953 and that there was a causative factor?
A. You said 1953.
Q. '63.
A. I believe you meant to say '63.
Q. The date of that.
A. The industry statements that I've seen from 1963 certainly indicated that these representatives did not believe that there was
a causation that had been proven by scientific experiments.
Q. So you are -- or it's your belief anyway that the public was being told through at least their textbooks in 1963 that it was still
subject to experiments with rats and mice whether there was a causative factor in cigarettes?
A. Would you repeat the question.
Q. Yeah. You thing that that -- what you just read to me was typical of the pronouncements that the public was receiving in 1963?
A. Well, I think it was the type of material that was appearing in textbooks. The reports and news magazines and newspapers
and from other sources of the experiments were of course even more timely, because textbooks are generally revised every
three or four years, and depending on when they're revised, material works their way in there. But certainly reports of the rats
and mice experiment were broadly available and widespread as soon as the results were mad public.
Q. I guess my question is then is your answer no, that the public was actually given more and complete information than what
you just read about the --
A. Yes, the public had more complete information that that statement that I just read.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. okay. I guess, you know, I was back on the '57, though. I think you said that this book was one of three that were approved,
right?
A. Usually, and, you know, again I'd have to go through all of the material to be exact, but usually there were several different
textbooks approved for use at any given period of time. Now sometimes there may have been only one for a high school and for
a middle school or some thinking, but there generally were several different ones approved. And that was one of the approved
textbooks in the state of Florida in that period.
Q. All right. So my question was what were the other ones in this period?
A. Okay. Let me -- I probably have those somewhere here, here is a textbook from 1954 that says many -- it lists a number
of harmful qualities of tobacco and says many doctors believe smoking may be harmful to adults, too. They recognize that it's
particularly harmful to people with heart disorders. They believe it leaves an irritating film on the mouth and throat and it may
lead to respiratory infections or to lung cancer. That's a 1954 textbook.
Q. Is that one of the other ones that was approved as of 1957?
A. Again, I'd have to -- it was an approved textbook from the 1950s.
Q. In Florida?
A. In Florida. The title is You're Growing Up.
Q. You're Growing Up?
A. Yes.
Q. But you said there were three. I guess I'm trying to pin you down.
A. Well --
Q. Is that one of the three or are there others?
A. That's three. I couldn't tell you off the top of my head whether there were -- exactly how many there were. I could attempt
to go through the materials and discover, but that's certainly three textbooks from the 1950s right there.
Q. How do you know that there were only three textbooks approved?
A. Well, I don't think I states that there were only three, but I have --
Q. May I see what you're looking at there.
A. This particular thing?
Q. Sure
A. Okay.
Q. Thank you.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I have in my materials a list of approved textbooks in the state of Florida going back to the early part of the 20th century
and moving forward. and so by reference to that list I can --
Q. where is that list? Would you produce it for us.
A. It may take me some time to do so, but I will try.
Q. please.
A. This is a list of stated and opened textbooks at various periods of time in Florida. I'm trying to make sure it's the only list
I have, but it is certainly a list.
Q. All right. So you had the Shacter book, the rest of the Shacter book on You and Others? You read something from it, but
I didn't see it here.
A. There's a different book by Shacter; You're Growing Up. Somebody changed the title. That might be it.
Q. I see. You'r Growing Up. You and Others I have this grade six book here; You and Others, and it says avoidance of tobacco,
page 157. So do you have that?
A. Is that not appended to the title page there?
Q. No. I don't see it. Let me had it back to you for your consideration.
A. What was your question again?
Q. Where is the section from Shacter, You and Others? I'd like you to find for me the reference to tobacco, if you have it. I
see it in the index, but I didn't see the actual text.
A. Can I see --
Q. What would you like?
A. The index that you're using.
Q. Okay. You and others is cited as a reference up here in the 1955.
A. I apologize that this is out of order, but some of it's been used before and it hasn't been refiled. I'll do my best to find that
in a timely fashion. what page are you looking for again?
Q. The citation to tobacco which is given on the index which is affixed to the second -- or affixed to the title page as page two
of your title page. All right. Let's look for that after we're done so we won't keep counsel.
A. Okay. I'm sorry.
Q. I understand. Let me ask you then just generally, do you purport -- let me see your index again, if I could. Do you say you
have all of these books?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. let me look at it again to make sure. Unless -- I certainly believe that I have all of these books to which there is a page
citation available.
Q. Okay.
A. Or I have copies form those books. I don't have the books themselves.
Q. Okay.
A. there should be in one of a couple of places all of those things.
Q. To which a page citation is available, what do you mean by that?
A. On the list that you were looking at, like you were able to look at a list there.
Q. Oh, you mean the page citation is supposed to -- this B 1908 or what --
A. Frankly, I haven't looked -- as you can probably tell, I haven't looked at this adopted list since before the Connor trial.
Q. Who prepared that?
A. this list was prepared by Dick Means, a retired professor of health education at Auburn University I believe who collected
this education material and shared it with me.
Q. All right. You were in the middle of looking for something. What does that column over in the right mean.?
A. Well, I can tell you if I can find my introduction. I'd have to go back through and read a substantial portion of the material,
but it's certainly my belief or my recollection that these page numbers -- I know a better answer would be that I'm not sure
what these page numbers indicated at this point. I have forgotten exactly what this right-hand column is. It's explained in the
information that I have here, but I'd have to read through it all to tell you.
This is a list of the adopted textbooks of those that Professor Means was able to locate. We have the material and I have all of
that material here in my files. The materials that I have for Florida, I have moved parts of it to different parts of my files and I
can't find all of it as readily as I would like, but I have no reason to believe that I don't have it all here in this material.
Q. Let me see that. All right. So the -- what this Florida -- this says Florida State adopted textbook and it gives the years?
A. That's right.
Q. Now the years are -- there are two -- there are two sets of years, one is printed without parenthesis and one is printed with
parenthesis, do you see that?
A. Oh, okay. It's my belief that one indicates the years that they were -- the book was published and then the years for which
the adoption -- textbooks are usually adopted for more than one year. They extend through a period of time.
Q. Well, you're not saying that the year that it was adopted, that it -- for instance, the 1941 Andress text, you're not contending
that 1943 was the only year that that textbook was used, are you?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. All right. That was just the first year that it was adopted as far as you know?
A. Yes, that's right.
Q. And it might have been in use --
A. And the -- I now know, I've now seen many motes here that the number beside the B indicates editions of the book, various
editions of the textbooks that are available.
Q. Okay.
A. I'm sorry. I should have remembered that. 1941 text that shows adoption in the year 1943, do you have any way of knowing
how many years it stayed in the schools?
A. Usually if you go through the whole set of material, yes, you can usually find that out, because textbooks are adopted for a
period of time and then there is evidence when there is a new round of adoptions and where some titles are simply continued
and others are replaced. And then the entire collection of materials that I have, I have that list. In other words, you can probably
assume that they were approved until superseded by something else, although it may have been an actual practice that some
books were used in some districts after they were out.
Q. Okay.
A. But that would be an unusual occurrence.
Q. Okay. So the question is here are you able to say -- let's take this book here called Modern Health by Otto. Okay. This is
dated 1954 or '63?
A. There's a -- there's a staple including the documents from several different textbooks there. You have to be careful.
Q. Okay. All right. Let's take this one here that's Shacter, You're Growing Up, from 1954, okay?
A. Mm-hmm.
Q. Now I see that on the list here as one of the textbooks in the 1954 to '55 period, You're Growing Up, right? Grade seven
I think it says.
A. Yes, if it says so, that's correct.
Q. And then it says B 1954. What does that mean?
A. That means that there's a 1954 edition of that textbook available as well.
Q. Well, isn't that the one we have?
A. It could well be, yes.
Q. All right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. It could well be.
Q. And it shows something like 1956 to '65 under this whole set, do you see that?
A. I mean you have my copy of that.
Q. I'm sorry. Do you see that?
A. 1956 to '65, is that what you're referring to?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. Doesn't that mean that those textbooks in that group were at least approved in that time period and might have stayed in
circulation longer?
A. It does show that they were approved for use in that time period, yes.
Q. And you couldn't tell me whether they stayed -- they might have stayed in circulation longer, you just simply don't have
that information?
A. It would have been rare for them to stay -- continue to be adopted for use. I mean schools can't use textbooks that aren't
adopted for use. They probably went into the school library or something at that point as older editions.
Q. And the indication you have there is that as of -- is that they were approved for use in 1955 to '64, right?
A. It says '56 to '65.
Q. '56 to '65.
A. There was an additional textbook -- well, yeah, that's the information that I have.
Q. Okay. And then in this book by Shacter, it states, “doctors are still not in complete agreement as to the full extent of
harm in tobacco. Some doctors and research workers think that smoking is fairly harmless to most healthy adults who smoke
moderately.”
A. I recall that statement. What year is that? Yeah, this is the 1954 text book.
Q. Right. Which was approved up until 1945?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So it could have been part of the curriculum of children who were sitting in class in 1965 who heard, who read the
statement that some doctors believed that smoking was not harmful, whatever it says, you accept that?
A. I accept the fact that this textbook from the materials I have in front of me at this moment seems like it could have been
in use during that period of time, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. And you agree, do you, that that statement about some doctors was typical of the information that was given to the public
in the years 1954 to 1965?
A. No, I wouldn't say that I could agree with that generalization, no.
Q. So you disagree with it, that information was not given to the public in 1954 to '65?
MR. KITCHEN: I'm going to object to the form of the question.
MR. WILNER: I'll withdraw it.
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) So the information was not typical of that which was given to the public in 1964 to '65 -- '54 to '65?
A. That particular statement there is not, I would say, a typical statement.
Q. Can you tell me from your own -- your knowledge of history what doctors they might have been talking about?
A. There was research going on being reported in the public press at the time this textbook was written which -- into other
-- let me restate the answer.
There were reports in the public press of leading research scientists who were not convinced that the link between cigarette
smoking and lung cancer had been proven. Some even thought it was a statistical anomaly caused by high correlation between
smoking and some other factor that was really the cause, and there was still research underway in the 1950s to try to determine
-- to try further understanding what people had on that issue.
Q. Well, who? Do you know the doctors?
A. I haven't made a great effort to keep track of individual doctors' names, but I think I can give you a few. I think Professor
McDonald from Southern Cal. There were studies -- there was someone at the Mayo Clinic at the same time who was raising
questions. There were doctors I believe at Johns Hopkins University who were raising questions. All of these questions were
reported in the public press. Their research and their criticism of the reports of other research were all duly reported.
Q. So the public press did reflect, in your opinion, the public press did state that leading physicians and researchers disagreed
that smoking caused disease?
A. The public press tended to focus on medical researchers rather than -- and they tended to be characterized in that way as
opposed to simply doctors. But, yes, the reports that medical research was ongoing by people who were skeptical of the findings
of other researchers about smoking and lung cancer, those things were certainly reported in the public press.
Q. And did the public in general believe that researchers had substantial disagreements about the cause of -- or the question
of whether cigarettes caused cancer?
A. I think the public was aware that there was an ongoing medical discussion and research into the question, that there was
something of a controversy. They were aware of the strength of the position that was being taken by statisticians and others
who were arguing that there was a connection. So I think the public was very well aware of this controversy, yes.
Q. And from the statement that you made, I take it you believe that the public was under the impression during that time that
it was statisticians who were making the argument that cigarettes were harmful?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I did not -- certainly did not -- there were -- I did not intend to restrict that to that -- restrict people who were taking the
position that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer to statisticians. There were certainly doctors and other medical
researchers who were taking that position as well.
Q. Now would you read the first two sentences of that textbook again. I want to ask you about them.
A. The textbook You're Growing Up is from 1954. “Doctors are still not in complete agreement as to the full extent of harm in
tobacco. Some doctors and research workers think smoking is fairly harmless to most healthy adults who smoke moderately,
but all authorities agree that smoking is harmful to growing boys and girls.”
Q. Now did the first -- the use or the first two sentences of that textbook to children, did they, in your opinion, convey to children
of the time the impression that cigarette smoking was hazardous?
A. Well, the statement suggests that what doctors were not in agreement about was the full extent of the harm, and the next
sentence even qualifies it to be fairly harmful to otherwise harmful adults who smoke moderately. That is a position, in my
view, that you might see taken more frequently in 1954 than you would have in say the early 1960s. So I think to the -- if your
question is to what extent that is a typical piece of information, I think it is probably more typical of information in 1954, but
not typical of the information environment as it evolved over the next decade.
Q. Well, you brought up these school textbooks as examples of what was being taught to children as an influence in public
health -- in the public awareness, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And so if that was being taught to children in 1965, that would have influenced public opinion in 1965, right?
A. It along with all of the other textbooks and pieces of information would in fact be influence, have influence on public opinion,
and of course the great bulk of the material even in this textbook, which is one of the ones that perhaps has less strong statements
about the harm than some others, are to the effect that nicotine and cigarettes are very harmful, especially to children.
Q. Well, I had asked you to produce citations to the effect that the Hammond, Horn and similar data were being taught, and
you produced I think the Clemmonson textbook and then also produced the -- I'm sorry. I forgot the name of that one.
A. You're Growing Up.
Q. You're Growing Up. Did you select the You're Growing Up as an example of textbooks that taught children the hazards
of cigarettes?
A. It certainly is a book that includes information about the hazards of cigarettes. It did not carry the specific reference to the
Hammond study as that other textbook which was originally published three years later did.
Q. And where is it -- where was it taught to children that the death rate from, premature death rate from regular use of the
product was 40 to 50 percent? Ever?
A. I can't recall. Especially since I haven't reviewed the more recent textbooks recently, I can't recall whether that very specific
piece of information phrased in that manner is ever -- is included in the textbooks.
Q. Where is it taught that the risk of lung cancer to regular users is elevated by a factor of 10?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Again, not trying to respond to a specific piece of information, but most of the stories which reach the public about the risk
of lung cancer contain within them figures based on whatever study they're referring to about exactly, you know, how figures
like, you know, cigarette smokers are at X number of times more risk than nonsmokers and so forth. Those things are regularly
reported in the public press. I'm not able off the top of my head to say what's the first year that a specific figure appeared.
Q. And I see that Clemmonson textbook mentions the Hammond study. Any others?
A. There are -- I don't recall whether any others mention it, but over time that type of information that is conveyed in that
textbook is conveyed in other textbooks as well.
Q. Any mention to the Winter and Graham Mouse painting study?
A. I simply can't recall.
Q. The best information, other than your the -- in your outline?
A. Yes.
Q. You have under part of your outline something called warning labels, and you've got some discussion here.
A. I gave up my copy. Where are you, Mr. Wilner?
Q. Page 14. Under warning labels, you say, “May 1964 industry imposes self-regulation with advertising code primarily to
avoid enticing youth, shall not represent that cigarette smoking is essential to social prominence, success and sexual attraction.”
Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have an opinion whether that was followed?
A. Well, there was certainly some controversy over whether that was followed. The industry argued that it in fact was doing
that. Critics of the industry claim that their self-regulation was not adequate, so there was -- I wouldn't attempt to evaluate it
myself, but there was certainly controversy over that self-regulation.
Q. Wouldn't it be important in determining what public opinion was, whether in fact the industry represented to children that
cigarette smoking is essential to certain performance or represented to anybody that cigarette smoking is essential to social
prominence, success or sexual attraction? Wouldn't that influence how people feel about the product?
A. Well, again I'm not really in a position to judge what the motives of advertisers were, but I can certainly tell you that
the response of people to advertisements in this period is that they're becoming more, even more aware of the health hazards
associated with cigarette smoking than they already were.
Q. And that's based on the polls?
A. That's based in part on the polls and on other evidence at my disposal.
Q. What other evidence?
A. Well, again the entire volume of material that I've reviewed.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Specifically what other evidence?
A. Stories in newspapers where there are interviews with people in the street about whether they're planning to give up smoking
or not, stories with people who are thinking about trying to quit. All of this suggests very strongly that the public is well aware
of the risks that are associated with it, and that's not polling data.
Q. Are you saying that stories that people say they want to stop smoking is evidence that those people understand and appreciate
the full risk?
A. Yes, I think that they are certainly part of the material that suggests that.
Q. So nobody would try and stop smoking unless they fully appreciated the risk?
A. No, I did not say that. I'm sure people attempt to stop smoking for a variety of reasons of which I would think the health
risks of whether they're aware would be important, but not necessarily the only people that might try to quit smoking.
Q. So the testimonials that people might be trying to stop smoking, how do they tell you that those people fully appreciate
the hazard?
A. In many cases the people, the reports on people who are trying to quit are in clinics would indicate why people were concerned
about smoking and willing to quit, and in many cases they suggest that health concerns loomed, loomed large. That's not to
say that that's the only reason people did try to quit.
Q. Did the cigarette industry publish the ingredients or contents of its cigarettes in times material to your analysis?
A. Would you repeat the question.
Q. Did the cigarette industry publish the ingredients that their product was composed of during times material?
A. Certain analyses of components of cigarettes were published in things like Consumer Reports and Reader's Digest, but I do
not believe the industry itself published that information.
Q. If a consumer in 1964 wanted to know the tar and nicotine content of a Winston cigarette, how would they knew it?
A. As I've said, I believe that information was available through Consumer Reports and perhaps republished in other magazines.
I don't recall that it was -- I don't believe it was furnished by the companies at that point.
Q. What was the general knowledge of the relative amounts of tar and nicotine in various brands and what is your justification
for your answer?
A. There had been lists published of various levels of tar and nicotine in the period that I studied. That information was available
to the public. I don't believe that I have any evidence, certainly not any evidence that I can recall, that would allow me to answer
what their knowledge of those varying levels would be.
Q. What lists are you talking about?
A. I forget the precise date, but Reader's Digest published their own -- I believe they hired a lab or somebody had hired a lab
to do the analysis and they published that list I'm thinking in 1957 or 1958 as I recall.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. What would that have to do with 1964:
A. Well, I mean it was certainly information that if it came out in '57 or '58, it was available in '64. That's what I thought you
were asking me.
Q. So you don't think the cigarettes changed between 1957 and '64?
A. I don't know whether they did or not.
Q. How about brands that came out in 1961?
A. It is my recollection that Consumer Reports was doing sort of an ongoing examination of those levels, but I honestly can't
recall whether the public had ready access to information about tar levels in new brands of cigarettes in 1964. I don't know
what the lag time was.
Q. Did you study that; the public's awareness of tar and nicotine levels in brands?
A. I studied the substantial public discussion about levels of tar and nicotine. Not being a scientist, I didn't study the levels.
I recognized that there was a controversy over how well such levels could be measured. I think at one point a government
agency, it might have been the FTC, argued that any such information, there was not a standardized enough basis for measuring
it and that needed to be developed.
So I studied the publicity surrounding those pieces of information, but I didn't try to study them in a comparative sense, a brand
versus brand.
Q. Well, I guess did you study the question of whether consumers had adequate information to make decisions between brands
based on tar and nicotine content?
A. I certainly studied the fact that there was a lot of publicity about tar and nicotine levels. There seemed to be considerable
disagreement over whether varying tar levels in cigarettes lessened or increased risk. There were people taking the positions
on both sides or certainly people saying that it made no difference, that any cigarette smoking was dangerous. I believe the
Surgeon General made that statement in about 1959. So, yes, I do believe that there was a public awareness of tar and nicotine
as components of cigarettes.
Q. My question was was there -- on what do you base your conclusion, if you have one, that the public was informed of sufficient
information to make a decision between brands based on tar and nicotine information?
A. Well, I was trying to answer that by saying that there was much information out there that there was no -- no such decision
was going to lessen the health risk.
Q. So you -- it's your testimony that the public believed at times material that the tar and nicotine values of the product were
not relevant to the question of human health?
A. I don't believe that that's what I said. I believe that what I said was that there were substantial number of health officials
taking the position that smoking in any amount and any amount of ingesting of tars was dangerous. There were other people
certainly that were suggesting that low tar cigarettes would be preferable and I think the public was well aware of that discussion
and disagreement.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. And where would the public get the information as to how much tar and nicotine was in the product that they were buying?
A. The sources that I've already mentioned are the ones that I can recall off the top of my head.
Q. Consumer Reports and Reader's Digest?
A. Yes.
Q. What was the -- how many people subscribe to Consumer Reports?
A. I do not know the answer to that question.
Q. Could you ever determine why the manufacturers didn't publish the information on their product?
A. The question was why they did not publish?
Q. Yeah.
A. I do not know.
Q. Let me make sure we get this full index marked while we're here, if I could. Where was that book that we were reading
from? Let's mark that, too. We'll mark it at the end.
Okay. Do you know why Congress in 1965 voted to require a cautionary label on cigarettes?
A. The Surgeon General's report in 1964 had suggested that given the public health information available about the hazards
of cigarettes, that some sort of remedial action was needed. After some discussion and debate over this, Congress decided to
approve, require the warning label, and it's my judgment that that was a portion of what they believed to be appropriate action
in light of the new information.
Q. Do you know whether the cigarette industry as a whole speaking through Bowman Gray, the CEO of Reynolds, argued
against in position of a federal caution label in 1965?
A. Yes, they argued against the caution label. Ive forgotten the exact date of the hearings, but they argued against the caution
label.
Q. And do you know the reasons that the industry speaking through Mr. Gray used to argue against the caution label?
A. In arguing against putting the warning label on the pack, he argued that the industry was being required to put on a warning
when in fact the public was well aware of the health hazards. I think the word he used was redundant, that the information was
redundant and it was something that was already known and they opposed having to do it.
Q. Does it make sense to you as a historian that the warning would be objectionable because it was redundant and not on the
contrary because it would hurt business?
A. Well, it certainly makes sense to me that it would be something the industry would logically oppose, because it was
information that was already -- the public was already well aware of. That seems like a logical proposition to me.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. So you think that Bowman Gray and the industry was concerned about wasting ink, that they would have to put something
on the package which somebody already knew and that that would be a waste of ink?
A. I don't really have any way of knowing what the industry was thinking, but my recollection of his testimony was that that
was the argument he made against the label to Congress in the hearings that were held.
Q. Right. And does that make sense to you that they were concerned about wasting ink?
A. Well, the idea that -- again, I mean I can't -- I can't say what the industry was actually thinking. It certainly doesn't surprise me
that they would make that argument in opposing it. The public was well aware of the information in my view, the information
was going to be redundant, and that was a plausible position it seems to me for the industry to take.
Q. It was plausible that they would object to it because it was redundant?
A. That does seem plausible to me.
Q. And how would it hurt their business if it was redundant?
A. There's a sort of leap there in your question that I don't know that I can exactly follow. I think that there was, and as I recall
this was in the testimony, Gray was pointing out that the since the label was not providing information that people didn't already
know, that it was sort of unfair to single out cigarettes as a product and make them publish this.
The experience in Great Britain with published warnings which was already known at this time, as I recall, suggested that it
did not hurt profits of the industry very much, and that's my recollection.
Q. So --
A. So he -- but I can't really speculate on what his reasoning was. I can only tell you what he said at the hearings.
Q. Well, did Bowman Gray also say that if the warning were required on advertising, that they may stop advertising?
A. He did in fact say that, yes, or that they would have to consider, reconsider their advertising strategy.
Q. And why do you think he would consider stopping advertising if this warning were already known to the public?
A. Again, I mean I don't know what his reasoning was beyond what he outlined in his testimony. I believe he outlined in his
testimony that the company was likely to be less liable to -- less likely to spend money on advertising if that advertisement
included in it they were required to include in it a warning. And that was the position that he took.
Q. Well, did you -- you as a historian have considered this whole matter, have you not, as part of the -- as it indirectly or directly
reflects public knowledge?
A. yes, to the extent that I played a role in the public awareness.
Q. So what is your analysis of this situation? Do you -- can you give a reason for Mr. Gray's belief that -- or concern that he
would stop advertising if he had to put a warning on the advertising beyond that which you have suggested?
A. I'm really reluctant to speculate on what Mr. Gray was thinking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Well, let me ask you this: Do you feel that it is more than likely that the industry believed that the putting of the caution
label would hurt sales?
A. As I've said, I don't know what the industry was thinking. There was evidence from the, albeit not long-standing evidence,
but brief evidence from the British experience that warnings might not affect sales very much. It strikes me as certainly plausible
that the industry was concerned about its future given the Surgeon General's report, but I have no way of knowing exactly what
was going on in the minds of the industry.
Q. Well, do you know whether the industry opposed in 1969 the modification of the caution label to a stronger warning
statement?
A. Well, there was of course some debate at the time about whether or not the more specific statement was in fact stronger or
more appropriate, but it is my recollection that the industry opposed the changes.
Q. And the 1970 label as it was enacted said warning, the Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous
to your health, correct?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Why did they oppose that?
A. My recollection of their position, and it's only -- I can only testify the position that they took, was again that the public was
already warned, that the warning that was already on the package should have been sufficient.
Q. The warning on the package should have been sufficient, that was your understanding?
A. I mean that was a characterization of mine and not theirs, but my recollection, and frankly it's been a longer time since I've
looked at the discussion over the 1969 material, but my belief is that the industry defended the existing warning -- excuse me.
They took the position that there should be no change in the warning.
Q. Yes, that was part of my question. My question was why.
A. My recollection is that the industry did not believe that any change was needed and I can't -- I can't recall any deeper line
of reasoning that they gave.
Q. Do you deny as a historian who has studied this time period that the tobacco industry believed and stated both in 1965 and
1969 and in 1984 when another change was in the works, that the changes that were contemplated by Congress would hurt
their business, do you deny that?
A. No, I do not deny that.
Q. Okay. And have you looked then at -- well, let me ask you this: Do you feel that the tobacco industry is and was a huge
enterprise in this country, correct?
A. Yes, it's a -- the various companies that manufacture cigarettes are a large sector.
Q. And when it comes to the issue of cigarettes, in other words the subject that they're most concerned about, do you deny that
their attitudes, their beliefs and their actions have an impact on public opinion?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. Well, my answer to that question would be that regardless of the position that the tobacco industry has taken, there is no
evidence that they have served to diminish the public's high increasing level of awareness that cigarette smoking was a health
hazard, and so there is a sense in which I do believe that the level of public awareness which was my concern in this study was
high in rising regardless of what positions the tobacco industry was taking on various issues along the way.
Q. Well, how do you know what the position of the -- what the level of public awareness would have been in 1954 had the
industry come out and said we agree cigarettes are hazardous, cigarettes cause cancer, cigarettes are the leading cause of cancer,
how do you know?
A. A historian couldn't answer a scholarly -- with scholarly seriousness a counter factual question like that. The public was
well aware in 1954 of the studies that had been conducted showing that cigarette smoking was harmful to their health. Their
level of information on that was high. They were abreast of the leading recent developments and that has remained the case
over the subsequent 40 plus years it seems to me.
Q. If in 1954 32 percent of smokers think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, how many of those people
-- how many more would have believed that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer had the cigarette industry
admitted it in 1954, can you answer that?
A. That's a purely speculative question which I can't answer and I'm not sure that anybody could.
Q. You can't answer that, that was your testimony?
A. As I understood the question, yes.
Q. All right. When was the first time that the word cancer appeared on the packages of cigarettes?
A. I believe that came in with the rotating warnings in 1984.
Q. Did the proponents of the rotating warnings in 1984 believe that it was necessary to specify the word cancer on the warning?
A. I have not studied in detail the warnings, either warnings as a separate issue or the warnings debate in '84 since the bulk of my
research for awareness here was focused on the pre-1969 period, and I don't believe that I have read any of those proceedings,
so I simply don't have the information to answer that question.
Q. Well, as an expert in public opinion, as you have stated you are, why is it beneficial to mention the disease cancer on the
package?
A. Again, I think that the design of labels, of packaging, is not something I claim to be an expert in.
Q. So the effectiveness of the warning label as conveying information is not an area of your expertise?
A. I'm certainly able to judge what the public was aware of in terms of health hazards of smoking. It's not as readily possible
to break it down and say how much of that awareness they got from this piece of information and that piece of information. As
I already testified, awareness levels were high even before warnings went on the package, and it's not possible, at least I don't
know a way to try to break awareness down to this factor or that factor or the other factor.
Q. And are you able to testify when there was any awareness that the regular use of cigarettes would produce irreversible changes
in various organs that would not -- that would produce a state wherein cancer could be caused many years after cessation?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
A. I am certainly aware of information that was available to the public that while stopping smoking might improve one's chances
of not coming down with cancer, that it was not a guarantee. The specific details that you're talking about I couldn't recall off
the top of my head when I first saw that.
MR. WILNER: Why don't we take ten minutes, you start on your if you'd like, and I'll be done unless I have some further
things that I forgot.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Wilner) Advertising and advertising expenditures, have you accumulated knowledge of how much money was spent
to advertise the product?
A. I have seen that information. I do not have it in the top of my head, but there was a substantial amount of revenue spent
on the advertising.
Q. And what is the best index of advertising coverage? And let me try to explain my question. Is it -- or not necessarily the
best, but what are valid indices of advertising coverages; is it expenditure or hours on the television or amount of printed copy
or how would you go about estimating the force and power and extent of advertising?
A. Well, I think that I don't have the expertise to tell you what the best measure of advertising is, which thing you should be
concerned about. There are advertising or marketing people who would know that. My concern with advertising was on its
ultimate impact on public awareness, if any, and that was what I tried to gauge --
Q. Well, let me --
A. -- rather than make these various distinctions that you drew in that question.
Q. I understand. Well, remember we talked about the difference between awareness and belief?
A. Yes.
Q. Could it be or is it perhaps your opinion that the difference between awareness and belief as we find in many of these polls
is due to the effect of advertising?
A. I have seen no evidence to suggest that that's the case. Belief levels, even though they were lower than awareness levels at
times, increased over time even as awareness levels did, even as advertising continued and sometimes dollar amounts of that
spent on advertising increased, so it certainly from the evidence I have at hand does not appear to be the case.
Q. What you're saying is that the fact that awareness levels or belief levels gradually increased over time is evidence that
advertising had no effect on influencing awareness or belief?
A. It seems to me that advertising did nothing to deter the growth of awareness and I've seen no evidence to suggest to me
that that's the case.
Q. Well, what evidence would you -- do you have that it is not the case?
A. The evidence, as I understand your question that I have that it's not the case, that even though -- is that awareness and
belief remain high and increase even as advertising continues, even as television becomes more common in American life and
advertising goes to television, I see no evidence that awareness levels diminished even as advertising continues.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Well, let me ask you this way: If in 1958 33 percent of smokers think that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung
cancer, had there been no advertising of cigarettes, can you testify what that number would have been?
A. That's a counter factual -- would require a counter factual answer. I don't think anyone could testify to that answer.
Q. The answer is you can't?
A. The answer is that that would -- that would require counter factual speculation on my part.
Q. And let me get this straight --
A. And as a historian, I can't --
Q. What is a counter factual speculation?
A. Counter factual speculation is you're asking me to speculate on what one thing might have been if something else hadn't
happened, and that's not something as a historian I Could do.
Q. All right. So, for instance, you can't say what would have happened had the cigarette industry put warnings on its product
in 1954, because that would be counter factual?
A. It would be counter factual, it would be purely speculative on my part, and as an expert, I don't think I should speculate.
Q. So you can't tell me what the affect of public opinion would be or what the effect on any individual would have been?
A. Would you repeat the question.
Q. You can't tell me what the affect of public opinion would have been or what the effect on any individual would have been?
A. I can't -- the levels of awareness were high. It seems to me that the public was fully aware and informed of the health hazards
of smoking. I see no reason to believe that that would have been substantially changed by anything, that it would be even purely
speculation for me to say that it would or would not have been.
Q. Okay. Now I want you to assume that in 1981, the FTC stated, as I have quoted and you have read in the expert witness
disclosure, that as of 1981, the FTC, the statement is “the current warning is not effective. The number of persons who understand
that smoking is a health problem has increased in the last decade. However, surveys show that the public still lacks enough
information about the risks of smoking to appreciate how dangerous it is.” Do you agree or disagree with that statement?
A. I disagree with that statement.
Q. Okay. Do you know whether the FTC ever changed its opinion about the effectiveness of the warning?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you have any -- are you aware of any government agency which agrees with you and disagrees with the FTC on that
question?
A. No, I'm not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
Q. Are you aware of any published literature in academic literature that agrees with you and disagrees with the FTC?
A. On the --
Q. On this question.
Would you rephrase that.
Q. Well, it concerned the effectiveness of the 1970 to 1984 warning that said the current warning, being the 1981, “is not
effective. The number of persons who understand that smoking is a health problem has increased in the last decade. However,
surveys show that the public still lacks enough information about the risks of smoking to appreciate how dangerous it is.”
A. Again, I think that I'm not an expert on the specifics of warnings and how they should be phrased. What I am an expert on is
how aware of the dangers of cigarette smoking the public was at various points in time through history, and I think in the time
of the FTC report in 1981, the public was extraordinarily well aware of the dangers.
Q. I understand you feel that way. My question was can you cite me to any literature, any published literature of anyone who
agrees with you?
A. I'm not sure that anyone has undertaken to study the question, particularly with regard to the areas in question that I have.
I do not have a citation to give you off the top of my head, no.
Q. Are you aware of any studies that have gone into the effectiveness of the cigarette warning label in terms of conveying
information?
A. In fact, I have seen -- I believe the FTC report in question is in part directed to that, if I recall, from looking at it. There is
one study, I forget the title of the book, called -- I believe it's called Smoking which I reviewed very early in my research that
would suggest that the public, based on sort of econometric models, that the public actually believes that cigarette -- is more
aversed to cigarette smoking and the health risks are greater than they are, and I know that there are other studies that dispute
that. Viscusi is I believe the author of that.
Q. Hired by the cigarette industry?
A. To my knowledge, the introduction of his book acknowledges that he used some polling data obtained from the industry,
but he maintained that he was not working for the industry in publishing that study.
Q. Do you know that Mr. Viscusi has testified that the premature death of the citizens of various states is a benefit to the society
because it relieves the healthcare apparatus of caring for these people in old age?
A. I was not aware that he had testified.
Q. I guess my question was directed specifically at whether you're familiar with the studies done by DiFranza and Fisher and
Krugman and Cohorts about the effectiveness of the warning label in communication hazards.
A. I'm not familiar with those studies, and again, I think that my expertise is not in warning labels and communication. That's
another type of expertise.
MR. WILNER: I think that's all. I thank you for your time. Do you have anything?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Joann S. KARBIWNYK, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 1997 WL 34672161...
MR. KOETHE: No.
MR. WILNER: Okay.
(Deposition concluded at 2:40 p.m.)
(Whereupon, the reading and signing of the deposition by the witness was reserved.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57
