The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34662921 (PDF)
1997 WL 34662921 (E.D.Tex.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, E.D. Texas,
Texarkana Division.
The State of Texas,
v.
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company; Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation; B.A.T. Industries, P.L.C.; Philip Morris, Inc.; Liggett Group, Inc.; Lorillard Tobacco
Company, Inc.; United States Tobacco Company; Hill & Knowlton, Inc.; the Council For Tobacco Research
- USA, Inc. (Successor to Tobacco Institute Research Committee); and the Tobacco Institute, Inc.
No. 5:96CV91.
July 24, 1997.
Videotaped Oral Deposition of Otis L. Graham, Jr.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> False Advertising
Jurisdiction: E.D.Tex.
Name of Expert: Otis L. Graham, Jr.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances.
Mr. James A. Morris, Jr.
Provost & Umphrey Law Firm, L.L.P.
2901 Turtle Creek Drive
Suite 201
Port Arthur, Texas 77642
Appearing for the Plaintiff.
Mr. Allen R. Purvis
Mr. John C. Monica, Jr.
Shook, Hardy & Bacon, L.L.P.
801 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Suite 600
Washington, DC 20004-2615
Appearing for the Defendant Lorillard Tobacco Company.
Mr. Thomas W. Stoever, Jr.
Arnold & Porter
1700 Lincoln Street
Suite 4000
Denver, Colorado 80203-0428
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Appearing for the Defendant Philip Morris, Inc.
Ms. Janet L. Johnson, Esq.
Ms. Julia J. Tyler, Esq.
Johnson & Tyler, P.C.
2127 R Street, NW
Washington, DC 20008
Appearing for the Defendant Philip Morris, Inc.
Also Present: Mr. Guy Tubbs
American LegalTech El Paso, Inc.
201 East Main, Suite 1708
El Paso, Texas 79901.
This transcript has been prepared for you by Fuller & Parker Certified Court Reporting Records Retrieval Video Civil Process
Service
400 Premier Place
5910 North Central Expressway
Dallas, Texas 75206-5136
ANSWERS AND DEPOSITION OF OTIS L. GRAHAM, JR., produced as witness at the instance of the Plaintiff, taken in
the above-styled and -numbered cause on the 24th day of July, 1997, before Jamie K. Israelow, a Certified Shorthand Reporter
in and for the State of Texas, Registered Professional Reporter, at the offices of Shook, Hardy & Bacon, L.L.P., located at
801 Pennsylvania, Suite 600, Washington, D.C., in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the agreements
hereinafter set forth.
PRCEEDINGS
THE REPORTER: Are there any agreements for the record?
MR. MORRIS: We'll just take it pursuant to the Federal Rules. And as I understand, the Rules that are in place are no objections
can be made other than those as privileged.
As far as reading and signing his deposition --
MR. PURVIS: We're --
MR. MONICA: They're reserved.
MR. PURVIS: We'd like for him to read and sign.
MR. MORRIS: Okay.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the videotaped deposition of Otis Graham, taken by the plaintiff in the case of the State of
Texas versus the American Tobacco Company, et al. Cause Number 5-96CV91, filed in the United States District Court, Eastern
District of Texas, Texarkana Division, taken on July 24th, 1997 at the time shown on the video screen.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
The court reporter is Jamie Israelow.
My name is Guy Tubbs, and I am the legal video specialist.
Counsel, now please introduce themselves.
MR. MORRIS: This is Jim Morris for the Plaintiffs.
MR. PURVIS: Allen Purvis with Shook, Hardy & Bacon for Lorillard Tobacco Company.
MR. STOEVER: Thomas W. Stoever., Jr. from Arnold & Porter for Philip Morris, Incorporated.
MR. MONICA: John C. Monica, Jr. for Lorillard.
MS. TYLER: Julia Tyler of Johnson & Tyler for Philip Morris.
MS. JOHNSON: Jan Johnson of Johnson & Tyler, Phillip Morris.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The court reporter will now swear the witness.
OTIS L. GRAHAM, JR., the witness hereinbefore named, having been first duly cautioned and sworn to testify the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, testified on his oath as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. MORRIS:
Q Please state your full name for the record.
A Otis L. Graham, Jr.
Q Where do you live, Mr. Graham?
A I live in [DELETED]
Q And how are you currently employed?
A I am a visiting professor at the University of North Carolina, Wilmington.
Q How long have you been there?
A This -- I completed my second year.
Q Where are you visiting from?
A They call me a visiting professor. That doesn't imply visiting. I guess the answer to that is University of California, Santa
Barbara.
Q All right. Are you a tenure profession at the University of California, Santa Barbara?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I'm an emeritus professor.
Q What does that mean?
A It means you are retired.
Q Okay. All right. Where were you born and raised?
A I was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Q All right. Where did you go to high school?
A After a period of years in Texarkana, we moved to Nashville, Tennessee and that's where I went to high school.
Q After your -- what year did you get out of high school?
A 1953.
Q What did you do after you got out of high school?
A I attended Yale University.
Q What did you study at Yale?
A A lot of things, but my major --
Q Okay.
A -- was history.
Q All right. And did you receive a degree in history from Yale?
A Yes. I received a BA degree.
Q Okay.
A With a major in history.
Q All right. Following Yale where did you go to school?
A Following Yale I went in the Marine Corps.
Q Okay. What years were you in the Marine Corps?
A '57 to '60.
Q What did you do in the Marine Corps?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I was an artillery officer.
Q During those years, did you continue any study, active study, in the field of history?
A Yes.
Q Was it any formal type of study or were you just reading things on your own and researching on your own?
A I was an avid reader, and I visited museums, but I was an avid reader.
Q All right. Did you receive any postgraduate degrees following Yale?
A Yes.
Q From where?
A Columbia University.
Q What degree did you receive from Columbia?
A Two degrees.
Q All right. What were they?
A My master's in 1961, and my Ph.D. in 1966.
Q And what discipline was your Ph.D. in?
A American history.
Q What was your dissertation topic?
A The Old Progressives and The New Deal.
Q In terms of your study for your dissertation topic, how many years did you spend researching The Old Progressives and The
New Deal before you actually completed your paper?
A I think three years would be a good guess.
Q What sources did you go to in terms of compiling the information that formed the basis for your dissertation?
A As is accepted practice, I went to secondary sources, and then as quickly as possible, went to primary sources.
Q Would you describe the difference between a secondary source and a primary source in terms of the research of history?
A A secondary source would be a history written by someone who was not there.
Q All right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A A scholar or someone, an attempt to get an interpretation and a narrative.
Q Okay.
A A primary source would be an account by someone who was probably there or close by, almost an eyewitness or contemporary
document.
Q In terms of looking at secondary sources, do you take into account the theoretical or philosophical event of the writer before
you utilize that particular source?
A If you mean by utilize, before you even pick it up, no, but in the course of absorbing it and making use of it, yes of course.
Q Are you familiar with different types of historians, some that are referred to, for instance, as revisionists of history or some
that are called postrevisionist historians?
A Yes.
Q Do you fall into any of those categories?
A I think I -- I don't think I've been called either one of those terms.
Q All right. There are terms that are applied to certain historians that may look back at history with a particular philosophy or
particular event, other than the revisionist and postrevisionist or their other labels?
A If I understand the question, there are Marxist historians.
Q Okay.
A There are -- the term “radical historians” is sometimes heard.
Q Okay.
A Then there are feminist historians, if this is what you're asking.
Q Okay. And when we discuss those different types of historians, would you agree that the reason they are given these labels
is at least some people feel that when they look back at history and write it today, they don't do so in an objective manner, they
do so with a particular intent in mind to shade history to meet their philosophy?
A That was a long question. There's -- that that is an assumption some people make. Was that --
Q Yes.
A I think the terms that you mentioned are used by whoever uses them to indicate a -- that a person has a somewhat -- possibly
has a predisposition to look at things from a certain angle --
Q Okay. 1625 A -- that perhaps make the person's work stand out or --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Is that also done from time to time to influence public opinion? In other words, if you wanted the public to believe a certain
thing about an event in the past, if you can shade it with the correct -- or with your own personal philosophy, maybe you can
influence public opinion with regard to that particular event.
Will you agree that that could be one of the intents of the writer?
A I'm sorry. That's very complicated. Could you do that again?
Q Let me ask you an example. For example, Oliver Stone. You're familiar with Oliver Stone, aren't you?
A Yes.
Q Oliver Stone has a way of looking back at history and seeing a conspiracy almost of any public event that's taken place over
the last 50 years. Will you agree with that?
A Well, I'll agree that Oliver Stone has a special Oliver Stoneish way of looking at history.
Q Will you agree that the fact that he is able to portray certain events in the past in conspiratorial terms maybe influences the
American public to believe that maybe a conspiracy really did exist?
A That's a very interesting -- historians talk about that amongst themselves, and we are -- we wonder how much influence he
has. I'm not sure of the answer to that.
Q Let me ask you in reference to that, and we'll keep along the same lines talking about Stone. Stone published most of his
works in motion pictures. Would you say that the films that he produces are seen more widely or viewed more widely by the
general public than, say, a book that might be written?
A He has an enormous audience and few books have an enormous audience like that.
Q Okay. Let me shift gears a little bit with you, Doctor, and I want to ask you a little bit about your prior testimony. Have you
ever prior to today given testimony in any type of lawsuit involving the cigarette industry?
A Yes.
Q When?
A It was 19 -- I believe 1991.
Q And who retained you to offer testimony in 1991?
A Lawyers for The American Tobacco Company primarily, as I recall.
Q And what was the nature of that litigation in 1991?
A The nature of the litigation?
Q Yes.
A It was the Kotler case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q All right. And what opinions were you asked to provide or what type of research were you asked to provide for that litigation?
A I haven't looked back at that in a while, but I was asked to conduct research, and then in testimony to testify about the history
of tobacco, in particular the rise of the cigarette and its social reputation.
Q Okay. Back in 1991 when you gave that testimony, did you give it in a deposition format like you're giving here today?
A No.
Q Did you testify live at trial?
A Yes.
Q Did you ever give a deposition prior to your testimony at trial?
A At that trial?
Q Yes, sir.
A I was not deposed as I recall.
Q Do you recall how long you were on the witness stand?
A I think it was three days and over a weekend, but not the whole day necessarily, but involved, as I recall it.
Q Prior to 1991 in the Kotler case, had you ever given testimony in a deposition or trial before?
A No.
Q Since 1991, have you given any depositions prior to today?
A Yes.
Q When?
A Earlier this year, I believe, February.
Q And who were you testifying on behalf of in February?
A I was retained by lawyers from Latham & Watkins, and the firm was Liggett, I believe.
Q Okay. As far as that testimony is concerned, how long were you deposed that day? Do 2125 you recall?
A I think we started about the 9:00 o'clock, and I think we went to 2:30 or 3:00 o'clock.
Q Did you render a report for that testimony back in February?
A Did I render a report?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Yes, sir.
A No. I just was deposed.
Q All right. And was it relative to a particular case arising from one of the states?
A Yes.
Q Which state?
A Oh, no. Not one -- not one of the states.
Q Okay.
A From a particular case.
Q All right. What case was that?
A Janice Sackman.
Q And the Sackman case, was that a case of an individual smoker that had brought suit against the tobacco industries?
A Yes.
Q And once again, what was the area of testimony that you gave?
A Pretty much the same as I said before.
Q Dr. Graham, I've been provided a preliminary report that has at the top Otis L. Graham, Ph.D., and it goes through a little bit
of your personal history, and it talks about what you're expected to testify about.
Have you seen a copy of this?
A Yes.
Q And is -- is this particular report that I've been provided a report that you personally prepared?
A Yes.
Q Did you actually type this report yourself or have someone do it?
A No. I didn't type it.
Q Who typed it?
A It was typed in the lawyer's office.
Q And how was the report prepared?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A When it came time to do the report?
Q Yes, sir.
A We talked on the phone, and we talked -- I -- I summarized my -- what I had done, what I was prepared to speak to.
Q Okay.
A And they -- we had a little discussion 2325 about this and that, and then they did a draft.
Q All right.
A Called me back later, as I remember, read the draft. I -- as I always do with drafts, I fixed -- I changed parts.
Q All right.
A Not that. Do that. And then I -- then they typed -- we may have done that twice.
Q Okay. So the initial draft was actually prepared by the lawyers?
A The initial draft was my verbal.
Q Okay. But when we talk about draft in terms of the written word actually being on paper or on screen --
A Yes.
Q -- that was actually first prepared by the lawyers?
A Yes.
Q And then you said, you know, these are some changes that I feel need to be made. They 2420 made those changes and,
ultimately, this draft was arrived at; is that correct?
A Yes.
Q Okay. Have you ever been confused with Otis Graham who is a professor of African-American studies at Fordham University?
A I never knew there was one.
Q Okay.
A Spelled the same way?
Q Spelled the same way with that same middle initial. Are you familiar with that Otis L. Graham?
A No.
Q As far as your father is concerned, what did he do for a living?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A He was a Presbyterian minister.
Q Okay. Do you have any relatives that are active in the field of history other than yourself?
A (Witness nods.)
Q Who?
A The principal relative that's active in the field of history is my brother Hugh.
Q Where does he work?
A He's a chaired professor at Vanderbilt University.
Q If someone was to look back at your career prior to 1991 and try to put in synopsis terms the significant historical research
that Otis L. Graham, Jr. had done, what would they focus on?
A Prior to 1991 I had four books and many articles, so they might have said different things, but I would think the answer to
that would be, he has been interested in reform movements, reform ideas, reform impulses and attempted to change America
in the direction it's going to something else.
Q All right. In terms of the four books that you've written prior to 1991, can you tell me the names of those books?
A 1991, it would be three, plus I'm speaking of what we call real books.
Q Okay.
A I have 10 or 11 anthologies that I had 2615 published by that time, but I was speaking of the books that I alone had my
name on and I did the entire book, and I -- now I would like to correct what I said. My fourth book was published in 1992,
so I had three books at that time.
Q Can you tell me the names of those three books, chronologically if you can, with the first that you wrote to the last, and the title.
A The first was -- arose out of the dissertation and was called An Encore For Reform.
Q What was that book about?
A That book was about the progressive movement, progressive reformers and how they responded to those who lived long
enough to the second reform movement of the Twentieth Century in the '30s.
Q What were they attempting to reform?
A Everything in sight. That's a little broad. It was in a -- the progressive movement was an enormously broad-ranging set of
impulses, not entirely consistent with each other, but they attacked and wanted to change aspects of American life from child
labor to the role of women.
Q Who would you consider the reformed leaders to be during that time period?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A There were so many. It was a nationwide reform. There was not a state or city that wasn't touched by it, then national politics
was touched for -- for an entire generation, three presidents. So there's so many --
Q Who would be a national figure that we would recognize as a reformer?
A Anyone would recognize, I hope, the two reform presidents, Woodrow Wilson and Teddy Roosevelt.
Q Okay.
A Then there were other national leaders quite well-known. William Jennings Bryan ran for president four times and was a
very known American. His name comes to mind. Robert LaFolette, a very well-known senator from Wisconsin. Then there
were journalists, and there were --
Q Did you ever do any writing on Bryan and the Scopes monkey trial?
A I may have touched briefly on it in my book on the '20s. Brennan?
Q Yes, William Jennings Bryan.
A Bryan. Oh, yes. I did in fact. I in fact -- I had something to say. I have written -- I don't know how long it is -- about the
Scopes trial in the '20s.
Q Okay. Let's talk a little bit about your second book.
A That was --
Q What's the title of it?
A The title was The Great Campaigns.
Q And what was it about?
A The subtitle was Reform and War in America 1900 to 1928.
Q Given that time period, I assume you discussed not only World War I, but did you discuss the Mexican-American war or any
other conflicts that occurred during that time -- the Spanish-American, I guess I should say.
A The book is a -- opens up when the Spanish-American war is over, but I think it connects to it. But it's mostly about the
progressive movement, what happened to it, as American politics and American public issues moved in '20s as the '20s moved.
Q All right. And then the third book that you wrote, what was it?
A That was a book called Toward a Planned Society. It was a book about the idea of national planning in modern American life.
Q Planning about what?
A The idea of planning is a big large idea and it touches a lot of things, but it was primarily a study of how the planning impulse
from American cities, to some extent, business and regions became a national planning impulse.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q All right. I'm still a little vague on what we're talking about. When we're talking about national planning, are we talking about
the way the cities are going to develop in terms of their economic basis or where people are going to live? Is it a book about
white flight from the inner cities? What -- what exactly is the book about? I'm having a hard time getting a grip on this.
A I shared that when I -- as I worked through the book --
Q All right.
A -- and it's a -- it's understandable feeling about a somewhat vague idea and complicated idea. I think the briefest answer would
be there emerged in the '30s, under Franklin Roosevelt, with roots earlier, and Roosevelt was a great expounder of this, frankly.
The idea that instead of the government taking individual issues one by one, there ought to be a more long-range prospective,
a long-range idea of what America should be and the government should have goals.
Q Okay.
A This is an interesting idea, I found, and I tried to pull it all together.
Q Is that a -- is that a concept that you embrace, that the government should have goals?
A I -- I wrote the book because I was interested in the idea.
Q Uh-huh.
A And of two or three minds about it, and when I finished, it was just a narrative of the idea, and I didn't vote one way or the
other really, but you could read the book and be the judge.
Q Do you feel that throughout periods of history, and let's take specifically the Twentieth Century if we can, that the government
has indeed had goals for certain projects that have improved society here in the United States? For instance, the space program.
A All governments have goals. I -- the idea of planning was that we would have long-term goals and take them more seriously
and knit together little goals into larger goals, if that makes sense.
Q Once again my question is: Do you believe that government during the Twentieth Century has embraced certain goals that
have produced beneficial effects to American society? And I mentioned the space program as a particular example.
A As I understand the question, I would agree that that has been sometimes the case, and the space program is a case of a
goal achieved.
Q Right. And many resulting by-products that have been beneficial to society, both from the standpoint of science and
technology, and I guess aesthetically from the better understanding of our universe. Will you agree with that?
A There are many examples of that.
Q Do you feel that government as one of its goals should embrace programs that benefit the health and safety of Americans?
A As a citizen, as a person you're asking?
Q Yes, sir.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Yes. That's -- that's -- that's one of the main things government is there for.
Q All right. And that if there are things that exist in American society that are harmful to the health and well-being of Americans,
that government has the right to -- to take a hard look at it and regulate it within reason. Will you agree with that?
A Certainly to take a hard look at it, and sometimes regulation is indicated. And certainly “within reason” is a good phrase.
Q A good example would be, for example, illicit drugs, things like cocaine, heroine, PCP, whatever, marijuana. Will you agree
that those are substances that can be abused and can be harmful to the American public, and especially not well-understood
among teens? Would you agree with that?
A I would agree with that.
Q And that government has a role in regulating those particular substances in order to protect teens from doing things to
themselves that they might not know any better about?
A Would you mind the list of substances again just so I --
Q Yeah. Heroin, cocaine, PCP, marijuana.
A Yes. I'm not sure personally about marijuana, but I think yes. I'd say yes.
Q And I -- I should have asked you this earlier and I didn't ask you. Are you a smoker?
A No.
Q Have you ever in the past smoked cigarettes?
A No.
Q Never have your whole life?
A No. Polly Anne Trabue tried to convince me to do it, but I didn't.
Q All right. Fair enough. Have you smoked cigars?
A Yes.
Q Do you still smoke cigars?
A No.
Q When did you stop?
A When I married Dolores.
Q All right. Why did you stop?
A Dolores would prefer no smoke.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay. Have you ever smoked a pipe?
A Yes.
Q Do you still smoke pipes?
A No.
Q When did you stop smoking pipes?
A I think sort of in the Marines. It's -- early.
Q Years ago?
A Years ago.
Q Okay. We've gone through, I believe, the three books that you wrote prior to 1991. Is it fair to say that prior to 1991, you had
undertaken no significant research into the issue of the cigarette industry and its impact upon America?
A No.
Q You had taken significant --
A Yes.
Q You had done some significant research prior to 1991?
A Yes.
Q When did you first do research with regard to the cigarette industry and its impact upon America?
A I began, I believe, in 19 -- about 1988.
Q And at whose behest did you begin in 1988?
A At the behest of two lawyers.
Q And who were those lawyers?
A Jan Johnson and Allen Purvis.
Q And they're seated here today --
A Yes.
Q -- Mr. Purvis and Ms. Johnson? Who did they work for at that time in 1988, if you recall?
A Jan Johnson worked for Arnold & Porter.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay.
A And Purvis worked for Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q Where did you first meet Mr. Purvis and Ms. Johnson?
A In my office in the history department at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Q Now, that's where you're a visiting professor currently, correct?
A No.
Q Where are you a visiting professor currently?
A University of North Carolina, Wilmington.
Q Okay. I apologize.
A There are 16 campuses.
Q I understand. How many times -- or how long did you work at Chapel Hill?
A Nine years.
Q From what year to what year?
A 1980 to 1989.
Q During the period of time that you worked at Chapel Hill, was any of your fund -- any of your research or study funded by
any grants or scholarships or anything else from the tobacco industry?
A In the last year I was there, I began to do some research, and I submitted my bills to lawyers.
Q To Mr. Purvis and Ms. Johnson?
A As I recall -- I don't recall which one.
Q Okay. Let's go back to 1988. Do you have any idea how -- who contacted who first? Did they contact you or you contact them?
A They contacted me.
Q Do you know how they found out about you?
A I think they told me that my name had come up among informed historians. I --
Q Okay. Do we know who might have suggested your name to them?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A They may have told me in order to indicate that they had talked to historians and knew historians, but I can't remember if
they told me exactly who had recommended me.
Q Okay. Let's go back to my previous question. Prior to 1988 and being contacted by Mr. Purvis and Ms. Johnson, had you
ever done any significant research on the cigarette industry in America?
A No.
Q Prior to 1988, did you have any opinions regarding the extent to which the cigarette industry had influenced American public
opinion?
A I don't remember having professional opinions.
Q Okay. In 1988 when they contacted you, where did the initial conversation take place between you and the lawyers?
A It came -- it took place on the telephone.
Q Then did you meet?
A Yes.
Q Where?
A In my office.
Q Do you recall what time frame in 1988 you first met?
A I seem to remember patches of snow, so it must have been February.
Q Okay. And what did you-all discuss in that first conversation with each other?
A It was almost a decade ago, but why they -- what -- what -- why they came to see me.
Q Okay.
A What were their interests in history.
Q All right.
A What they -- what they imagined that I might do for them --
Q All right.
A -- in the way of research and --
Q What type of research did they suggest to you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A As I recall, they suggested that I begin research on the history of tobacco in the United States with particular emphasis on the
rise of the cigarette and the role of the cigarette, and a cigarette as an item in American life, and push on in the area to determine
whether I enjoyed the research. It was somewhat unfocused, an invitation to read --
Q Okay.
A -- and to turn my mind, some of my hours in this direction.
Q As far as the research that you did during your last year at Chapel Hill, you mentioned that some of that was funded, or at
least the bills were sent to the lawyers. What particular research was being done during your last year that lawyers paid for?
A I don't have a diary of exactly what I did in the last year, but I passed quickly from secondary sources into primary sources
to get a feel for the public, what was being -- what was being done in the media.
Q Those primary sources are actually the folks that might have been close to the events, correct?
A They are written by journalists close to the events about people who are in the events.
Q Who are some of the primary sources that you went to back in 1989?
A I remember going to the New York Times, which is a -- not only a fine newspaper, but easier to use than many newspapers
because it is indexed among other things. You can go to it and use it for readily -- I know that I went to that. And then there are
national magazines then as there are now all the way through the Twentieth Century. I started to go to them.
Q When you talk about going to them, you went to the actual source itself, the written source and reviewed old Time magazines,
old New York Times, correct?
A Yes.
Q All right. Did you ever have any meetings with any editors or actual writers at the New York Times or Time magazine
regarding the articles that had been written?
A No.
Q Okay. As far as the source material that began to compile, did you store it in any particular place?
A I stored it in my house.
Q Did you provide a copy to the lawyers of the material that you were obtaining?
A I don't think so.
Q In this litigation that we're here about today, the State of Texas has brought suit against the cigarette industry over Medicaid
claims. Are you familiar with that?
A Yes.
Q All right. Have you had an occasion to review any of the pleadings in this case? By “pleadings,” I mean the Plaintiff's
complaint that was filed or the answer that was filed by the tobacco companies.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I -- I briefly saw -- I don't know the legal language for the document you're mentioning. I have seen that somewhat quickly.
Q Okay. Have you seen a copy of the deposition notice that was served upon your lawyers and should have been given to you
regarding this particular litigation?
A I haven't -- I don't think I've seen that.
Q All right. Let me show you a copy of it and see if this rings a bell at all. Have you seen that, Dr. Graham?
A I have not seen this.
Q All right. Have you seen the subpoena duces tecum that was attached to it that asks you to bring certain documents with you?
A I have not seen it --
Q All right.
A -- I don't think.
Q You haven't seen the subpoena duces tecum? Let me go through it with you and just ask you, you and I here together whether
or not you have provided any of these things to us here today?
MR. STOEVER: Jim, just let me state for the record that with respect to the subpoena duces tecum, we have already registered
our objections to the service of that subpoena with Grant Kaiser. The subpoena was served late. It is overly broad. It's vague
and ambiguous, and it goes well beyond what's called for in the --
MR. MORRIS: But Dr. Graham and I are having a good time dealing with overly broad, vague and ambiguous.
MR. STOEVER: I understand, and I would like to make my objection to the record. In addition, we have produced over four
boxes to you that Dr. Graham has relied upon.
MR. MORRIS: Okay.
MR. STOEVER: I will also mention the subpoena duces tecum on the subject of continuing conversation between Grant Kaiser
and myself, and we expect that they probably will be withdrawn.
MR. MORRIS: All right. Fair enough.
Q (By Mr. Morris) That will save us a little time, Doctor. I won't have to go through all these with you.
Let me ask you a question about something Mr. Stoever did mention. He mentioned the over four boxes of documents that were
furnished to my office last week. Did you have an occasion to review the documents that were furnished to me?
A Yes.
Q Have you reviewed all those documents?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q At one time or another, have you read all of those documents?
A Yes.
Q Many of those documents reference -- well, let me back up and ask you this way. Many of those documents have Bates
stamps on them, Bates stamps. Are you familiar with Bates stamps?
A No.
Q All right. A Bates stamp is a number that someone puts on a document so that we can track the document and we can tell
somebody down the road, this is document 400,000, or this is document 400,001, that way we can track documents.
I am sure that in your past you have reviewed documents that have Bates stamps on them; have you not?
A I guess I have. I don't know the term.
Q Okay. Well Bates is the name of the company that makes the stamp. All right? And that's the reason that I use it. I suppose
there are other people that make stamps also other than Bates Manufacturing Company. I'm just not familiar with them.
Many of the documents that I received are Bates stamped, do have a number on them, and there are many that don't. Do you
know why certain documents would not have a stamped number on them?
A No, but I -- no, I don't know why, but I have --
Q Okay. Is your answer no?
A I don't know why some might and some might not.
MR. PURVIS: Jim, I can perhaps clear this up. In the interest of time that some documents only had the first page Bates stamped
in a series of documents. In other words, we considered them to be a single document, and that's why the succeeding pages may
not have numbers on them, but they -- if you have a first page that has a number on it, it's my understanding you can assume
that the following pages without numbers belong as a single document to that first one --
MR. MORRIS: Okay.
MR. PURVIS: -- and then the next Bates stamp that was done.
MS. TYLER: And that was done in the interest of getting you the documents in that timely fashion.
MR. MORRIS: That's fine. Thank you.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Well, yeah, let me ask you that. Do you know when those stamps were initially put on the documents,
Dr. Graham?
A My documents were stamped when I was involved in the ABC case. They were shipped to the lawyers. They sat in Richmond,
Virginia for two weeks, my documents.
Q Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A And when they came back, they had these stamps on them.
Q All right. Now, when was that timewise?
A That would have been the summer of '90 -- the ABC case -- '4 or '5. I'm sorry that I --
Q That's okay.
A It was the summer of '94 or '5.
Q As of that time, had you reviewed the Time magazine articles?
A Oh, yes.
Q Had you reviewed the Life magazine articles?
A Yes.
Q Had you reviewed the Newsweek articles?
A Yes.
Q Had you reviewed the Reader's Digest articles?
A Yes.
Q US News & World Report articles?
A Yes.
Q What about the Texas reports?
A At that time?
Q Yes.
A Of the ABC case, the stamping?
Q Yes.
A The Texas reports?
Q Yes. Or the Texas report. It would be Bates Number 402162 through 402178.
A Let me think. I'm not 100 percent sure. I had reviewed several state reports, but I'm not sure about Texas.
Q Did you gather the Texas state reports yourself?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A No.
Q Who gathered those?
A Professor Richard Means.
Q Professor Richard Means. And where is he a professor?
A He is an emeritus professor at Auburn University.
Q When did he gather the Texas documents to the best of your knowledge?
A I'm not sure, but it was within the last -- I don't know really. There -- the historical documents, you can't tell. I'm not sure.
Q When did you first see them?
A The Texas?
Q The Texas documents.
A Probably this year, probably April on --
Q All right. April of 1997?
A Probably. I may have seen them before. I've long had an interest in Means' work.
Q What work has Means done that you have an interest in?
A Means is a -- he focuses on -- he's a specialist in health education, the history of health education.
Q Has he been retained in the past by attorneys for the cigarette companies?
A I don't personally know.
Q Have you ever asked him that question?
A No.
Q Have you ever talked to him personally?
A Yes.
Q Have you ever talked to him personally about your testimony on behalf of the cigarette companies?
A No.
Q How is it that he provided his information on Texas to you? Did he mail it to you?
A He mailed it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Did you call him?
A I called him.
Q All right. And what did you ask him?
A As I recall, I asked him if in his research he had done a Texas study. And the answer was yes. And I said, I would like
to see that.
Q All right. And so he just mailed it to you?
A Yes.
Q Who paid for the cost of that mailing?
A I don't know. I didn't.
Q Did you submit a bill to the cigarette companies saying that this assisted you in your research and that, therefore, you should
be reimbursed?
A For what?
Q For the cost of the copies?
A I don't remember exactly, but I don't think I was charged.
Q So Professor Means just gratuitously sent you a box of what may be, you know, two or three boxes of documents?
A He sent me two or three -- he sent me one big box.
Q Did the cigarette company lawyers have anything to do with you getting those documents from Professor Means?
A I have no firm -knowledge, but I think it is safe to say that he has done some work for them. I have no personal hard knowledge.
Q Have you ever reviewed any depositions Professor Means has given?
A Never.
Q Have you ever reviewed any trial testimony that he may have given?
A Never.
Q Have you ever worked in the State of Texas?
A Worked?
Q Yeah.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I don't think so.
Q All right. Ever been employed in the State of Texas?
A No.
Q Have you ever had a residence in the State of Texas?
A No.
Q Have you ever attended a university or college in the State of Texas?
A No.
Q Do you have any relatives that live in the State of Texas?
A Yes. I had some that have died.
Q All right. Have you ever been to the State of Texas?
A Oh, many times.
Q Have you ever been to the State of Texas for the purpose of reviewing historical information?
A Yes.
Q When were you last in the State of Texas for that purpose?
A June.
Q June of this year?
A Yes.
Q What were you there to review?
A I was there to visit archives, to review Texas newspapers, files, to research.
Q On what?
A On, you know, Texas materials on the question of smoking and health.
Q Who paid for the trip?
A I submitted a bill to the lawyers.
Q Lawyers for the cigarette industry?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q How long were you in Texas in June of 1997 doing this research?
A In June -- on the June trip?
Q Yes, sir.
A Two and a half days.
Q Where were you in Texas?
A Austin.
Q At which research facility did you do your study?
A Most of it in the Center of American History at the university library. I went across to the LBJ briefly, and I used the
undergraduate library a bit.
Q Did you obtain any documents during the trip in June of '97 that were part of the disclosure that was given to me, four and
a half boxes or so?
A I can't recall what I brought back.
Q Did you bring anything back?
A Yes. I brought -- I brought back a small amount. Mostly my trip was to familiarize myself with archives there and to get a
personal feel for what was there and to -- and to read in the microfilm itself some of the newspapers I had received in Xerox form.
Q How many documents would you say that you brought back with you, Dr. Graham?
A Personally on that -- from that trip?
Q Yes, sir.
A Oh, I can't say. Fifty or 100.
Q Okay. Maybe a stack maybe half an inch thick?
A No.
Q An inch thick?
A I can't recall. The purpose of the trip was not to wag back a lot of documents because I had the documents -- many documents
already.
Q What was the purpose of the trip if you could say what the purpose of the trip was?
A See some things for myself that I had greater curiosity about. I wanted to check and be sure that the newspaper clippings that
I had received from my researcher were, in fact, exactly where my researcher said he found them.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Who is your researcher?
A In Texas, principally Mark Barringer.
Q And where does Mark Barringer work?
A He works at Texas Christian University.
Q TCU in Fort Worth?
A Yes.
Q All right. And what is his expertise?
A He has a Ph. in history.
Q Has he done work also on the history of cigarette -- the cigarette industry in Texas?
A Yes.
Q Has he been paid by the cigarette company lawyers for the work that he's done?
A I assume so.
Q How long has Mark Barringer been working with you on this project?
A About four months.
Q When was he first hired? Do you know?
A No.
Q Who hired him?
A My information that he had begun work on this subject. He's a historian of Texas in the southwest.
Q Right.
A But intense work on this subject, it's my understanding that he began in connection with some work with Professor Ben
Procter.
Q Is Professor Ben Procter also working on the cigarette industry and its influence in the State of Texas?
A I don't know for sure.
Q Where does Professor Ben Procter work?
A I believe he is at TCU.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Is he a Ph.D.?
A Oh, yes.
Q What leads you to believe that Barringer would have been hired by Procter?
A When I became interested in doing research in Texas I learned that Barringer and Procter had commenced some work and
that Barringer was knowledgeable, and that I -- if I wanted someone who had a head start and who had good credentials, that
Barringer was possibly available. I didn't have a --
Q Who suggested that to you?
A Who suggested that to me?
Q Yes.
A I can't recall exactly.
Q Was it one of the tobacco company lawyers?
A Could have been.
Q Okay. What about Ben Procter? Have you ever met him?
A No.
Q Do you know if his research is being paid for by the cigarette companies also?
A I don't know.
Q Do you know of any other historians in the State of Texas that are curious about this particular issue and are doing research
on it right now at the behest of the cigarette industry?
A In the State of Texas?
Q Yes.
A No one. I don't think I do.
Q Prior to June of 1997, had you ever visited the State of Texas for the purpose of doing cigarette research?
A Yes.
Q When?
A Once before. I think it was April, late April.
Q April of 1997?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Yes. Or it could have been early May. I'll have to look at my calendar.
Q Okay. Where did you -- where did you go on that occasion?
A I went to Austin.
Q Did you have an occasion during the April trip to meet with either Mark Barringer or -- Mark Barringer?
A Yes.
Q Did he meet you in Austin?
A Yes.
Q How many days did you remain in Austin on that trip?
A I think that was a two- or three-day trip.
Q What did you and Mark do during that two to three days?
A Talked.
Q All right.
A Got acquainted, got plunged into the subject.
Q Did you meet with any cigarette company lawyers?
A Yes.
Q Who did you meet with?
A There was a brief meeting at the office of Maroney, Jack Maroney. And the rest of his title, I don't recall --
Q Okay.
A -- in Austin.
Q Did you meet with Mr. Maroney himself?
A He was there.
Q Were there any other tobacco company lawyers?
A Yes.
Q Who else?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I'm sorry. Two other males, and I could get you their names, but I don't have it in my memory.
Q Any of the folks that are here today, were they there?
A Allen Purvis may have been there.
MR. PURVIS: Jim, could we take a break? I've got an emergency call. It's been about an hour.
MR. MORRIS: Sure. Sure. Yeah.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're off the record. The time is 10:01.
(A recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're back on the record. The time is 10:13.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Doctor, before we took the break, you and I were discussing a meeting you had in Austin back, I believe,
in either late April or early May. You said you had met with Jack Maroney. You recall that Allen Purvis may have been at
that meeting.
What was discussed back in Austin in late April?
A At that meeting?
Q Yes, sir.
A The purpose of that meeting --
MR. PURVIS: Steve, I'm going to object to this as being privileged, and I believe that's an objection we need to make at this
time and instruct the witness not to discuss what we, the lawyers, talked to you about at any of the meetings.
MR. MORRIS: All right. In as much as he's been retained as a consulting, quote, unquote, expert or testifying expert in the
case, what privilege are you asserting over his testimony because, clearly, it can't be 415 lawyer/client. And to the extent that
he is not an employee of the tobacco industry, I'm just curious which privilege.
MR. PURVIS: Work product.
MR. MORRIS: All right. Okay. Well, I assume, then, for now you're instructing him not to answer any questions regarding
whatever discussions he had with you-all?
MR. PURVIS: That's correct.
MR. MORRIS: Okay.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Prior to the April meeting, had you ever met Mark Barringer before?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q During the two or three days that you spent in Austin back in April of '97, did you and Mr. Barringer do any independent
research at any facility in Austin?
A Yes.
Q Where?
A Basically the three that I mentioned to you, and he went off for a few hours and may have gone to the Texas State Library.
Q What was the focus of your research?
A The smoking and health issue in Texas.
Q Was it that broad? I mean, were you looking for any article at all whatsoever that touched on the smoking and health issue
in Texas?
A In the first place, I was interested in the major newspaper coverage --
Q Okay.
A -- which is a big job.
Q All right. Now, did you obtain some documents during that April visit, you and Mr. Barringer?
A As I remember, Mark handed some documents over to me that he had already obtained.
Q Okay.
A So now sinces he -- he had a -- some documents that I -- I think I carried back from that.
Q How would you characterize those documents in terms of the size of them? One inches, two inches, eight inches, maybe
12, 14?
A Over -- I don't remember exactly at that time, but he shipped me things by mail, but I don't remember exactly that -- but
it was -- on the airplane, it was --
Q And have you reviewed all those documents?
A Yes.
Q And what were those documents that he provided to you?
A They were a wide variety of copies of documents that he had found. I found some too.
Q Can you describe them more specifically?
A Since there were so many, I'll give you some examples.
Q Fair enough.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A The -- there is an archive in the Center for American History derived from the Americans for nonsmoking smokers rights,
which is rich in materials on TeXas on this issue, reports of State legislation discussions -- legislative discussions.
Q All right. Did you furnish those documents to me in the disclosure that you made?
A Yes.
Q As of 1997 when you were looking through the documents at the Texas archives, did you come across reported news articles
regarding the Brown & Williamson documents?
A My reading in the newspapers has not reached the '90s quite yet. I'm -- I'm moving through the '80s.
Q I'm sorry. I misunderstood you. I was under the impression that your research would have gone up to the current date if you
were going through the archives there --
A Let me be clear.
Q Did you cut off your research?
A No. No. Let me be clear. In the newspapers --
Q Yes, sir.
A -- I am moving toward 1994 or -- if I have time, and the newspapers that I have read, I think 1988 is as far as -- I'm not
finished. I've got more work to do.
Q So in terms of your study of these cigarette industry's influence in Texas, what would you consider to be your current cutt-
off date for the date that the information is good through?
A I'm not -- my topic is not the cigarette industry's influence in Texas. 010 Q Oh, it's not?
A That was your phrase.
Q Okay. What would your phrase be?
A My phrase would be the issue, debate, discussion, controversy of smoking and health, what to do about smoking and health.
Q All right. Well, let's take your definition, then, and let me ask you when your research cutt-off date is for that particular
area of study.
A In the newspapers, I'm going to go as far into the '90s as I can. In the other documents that are not newspaper documents,
but pamphlets, leaflets, correspondence, little news letters, that sort of thing, these materials often come into the '90s. There's
no cutt-off date.
Q Okay.
A I don't have a cutt-off date.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q We know that the Brown & Williamson documents were published in 1994. Have you had occasion to review those
documents?
A The Brown & Williamson documents?
Q Yes, sir, that were left with the University of California, San Francisco back in 1994.
A No.
Q Have you reviewed any other cigarette industry documents, internal documents, relative to this issue of health and cigarette
smoking?
A I may have.
Q When do you think you may have?
A If they were reported in the newspaper or a national magazine, then I probably saw them.
Q Can you cite me any specific examples of industry generated studies that you have reviewed relative to the issues of cigarette
smoking and its effect on a person's health?
A Industry --
Q Uh-huh.
A -- generated studies?
Q Studies, yes, sir.
A I can't recall any of these files. There's a lot of pamphlets in these files. There could be something.
Q All right. Can you specifically refer to any industry generated studies on the addictive properties of nicotine that may have
been published during this time period?
A Can I cite you?
Q Yes, sir.
A I can't.
Q Do you recall seeing any industry generated studies regarding the addictive qualities of nicotine when you were doing your
study of the documents either provided to you by Professor Means or that were obtained by you in your two trips to Texas?
A Industry generated studies of addiction, I can't recall any.
Q All right. Have you reviewed any industry generated studies -- and I'm talking about the cigarette industry now.
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Just so that we're clear -- any cigarette generated industry studies regarding cigarettes as a cause of emphysema?
A I don't think so.
Q Have you reviewed any industry generated studies of cigarette smoking as a cause of cancer, lung cancer?
A In the course of my research, I have read -- read and reviewed many articles, the reporting medical research. Sometimes I
read an article about medical research, and I don't know if it's industry generated.
Q Well, prior to 1994, did any of the medical articles that you read reference a cigarette industry study that had been done that
had provided information to the medical community that they relied upon in reaching their conclusions?
A Would you rephrase?
Q Yeah. Sure. In the course of your research, did you run across any medical articles that might have been reported in JAMA,
or even in Time magazine or even in Newsweek that referenced a cigarette industry generated medical report as a source of
information?
A It's quite possible that such a reference was in some of the articles I read, quite possible.
Q Do you remember any specifics --
A No.
Q -- sitting here today?
A No.
Q Do you agree with the proposition that manufacturers of products should test their products to determine whether or not there
are any potential hazardous circumstances that might be generated by those products in a general sense?
A I'm a historian. That's outside my expertise. I'm not a lawyer.
Q Well, you're here today, though, to testify about the health consequences of tobacco in the State of Texas or the amount of
information that was published about those --
A Yes.
Q -- right? With regard to the issue of health consequences, have you not run across material suggesting that the government
from time to time regulates products to determine, you know, whether or not there -- they're injuring the public?
A In the discussion as I review it there is, of course, discussion of the government's regulatory roles. It's part of the discussion.
Q All right. We had discussed that earlier. And did any of your research focus specifically on the role that the government has
played in attempting to regulate tobacco in the State of Texas?
A Yes.
Q And to what extent has Texas been successful in regulating the use of tobacco in the State of Texas?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A To what extent has the State of Texas been successful? I'm not sure that my expertise reaches to that, but I am -- I have
become -- I have -- I am aware of some public policy efforts in the State of Texas, and I recently saw some figures that suggest
that the rate of smoking in Texas is below the national average. I don't know --
Q Where did you see these figures?
A I can't recall, but I could produce it for you.
Q All right. I'd like to ask you --
A At 23 percent.
Q All right. Twenty-three percent of Texans smoke?
A That's the way I remember the data.
Q Where did you see the data?
A I'm sorry. I'd have to go to my files to get that for you. I could do that.
Q Who provided the data to you?
A Oh, it was in the materials that I -- that I have gathered. I think it was a State government document.
Q Was it something that was provided to you by the lawyers?
A No. No. No. No. I got this out of the archives. It's a part of my materials. It's in the boxes somewhere, but --
Q All right. And you seem to think that that was a -- a percentage that was generated by a government study?
A I think it was a government figure.
Q Prior to April of 1997, had you ever reviewed any articles in the San Antonio Express?
A Prior to April of '97?
Q Yes.
A No.
Q What about the Dallas Morning News, newspaper articles, for the purpose of reviewing the cigarette smoking issue?
A I began my work in late March, so --
Q All right. Prior to late March of 1997, had you ever reviewed any articles in the Dallas Morning News?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q What about the Texarkana Gazette?
A No.
Q What about in the Brazos Periodicals?
A No.
Q Amarillo Daily News?
A No.
Q Beaumont Daily Journal?
A No.
Q Corpus Christi Caller?
A For this research?
Q Right.
A No.
Q The Center for American History, had you reviewed that prior to 1997?
A The Center for American History is a -- is an archive.
Q Okay. And they produce documents that summarize whatever -- whatever their research is?
A An archive -- the Center for American History is a library.
Q Okay.
A They have research materials.
Q All right. Would they put their own name on them?
A If you want to make copies, they will make copies and they put their name on it.
Q All right. Prior to March of '97, had you reviewed anything at Baylor University Larriat?
A The Baylor University Larriat, is that a publication?
Q Yes, it is.
A I did not.
Q Have you ever reviewed anything from the Baylor University Larriat?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I don't recall that I have.
Q Okay. During the time that you were at Chapel Hill, were you familiar with the historian named Augustus M. Burns?
A I have been in this profession a long time. I may have. I may have.
Q Have you ever done any work with Dr. Burns?
A Done any work?
Q Yeah. Joint work research?
A Joint work research, no.
Q Okay. Have you ever consulted with him --
A Yes.
Q -- on any particular issues?
A Yes.
Q What issues have you consulted with Dr. Burns about?
A We had a phone conversation.
Q What about?
A His research on smoking and health.
Q When did that phone conversation take place?
A I can't recall. I would say this year.
Q Prior to this year, had you had any contact with Dr. Burns regarding the cigarette industry's historical background?
A I don't remember for sure whether we talked before.
Q Have you reviewed the deposition that he gave in the State of Florida versus the American Tobacco Company?
A No.
Q No?
A No. No.
Q Are you familiar with Dr. David Sansing?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I have heard his name. I'm not familiar with him.
Q Have you ever talked to him?
A I have not.
Q Ever had a phone conversation with him?
A I don't think so.
Q Have you reviewed his deposition testimony in the State of Mississippi tobacco litigation?
A No.
Q He's a professor down at the University of Mississippi. Have you ever been down there and visited with him?
A I have been through the University of Mississippi. Oxford, isn't it?
Q Yes, sir.
A I've been through.
Q Ever stopped and visited Dr. Sansing?
A No. I don't know him.
Q What about Dr. John Skates? Do you know him?
A No. I don't think so.
Q Have you ever reviewed any deposition testimony that Dr. Skates may have given?
A No.
Q What about Dr. Steven Ambrose? Do you know him?
A I know him.
Q How do you know Steven Ambrose?
A We are colleagues in the profession of history. One knows a lot of colleagues.
Q Sure. Have you and he ever had any conversations regarding the issue of tobacco in the United States?
A I don't think so.
Q Have you and he consulted together with regard to this litigation?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Have you reviewed any deposition testimony he's given in the past?
A No.
Q Any trial testimony?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with Dr. Julian Pleasants?
A No.
Q Did you author an article that dealt with the Immigration Act of 1965?
A Yes, probably.
Q You were critical of the Immigration Act and its influence of American history?
A Of '65?
Q Yes, sir.
A Probably you could characterize it that way.
Q And if my recollection of the article serves me, is it fair to summarize your conclusions that the Immigration Act of 1965
allowed a greater amount of immigration into the United States than would have occurred otherwise?
A No, not exactly.
Q Okay. Can you clarify that for me then?
A My -- my position on it, my position on that piece -- this piece of public policy --
Q Right.
A -- was that though it greatly, by a factor of four, increased the number of immigrants entering the US and was, therefore,
demographic policy of great significance, that it was not discussed. The authors and the sponsors did not either know or did not
tell the American public the enormous changes that they were making, so that as a piece of public policy, it's a bad example of
doing a big thing and not having full discussion of the big thing that was being done. That's my --
Q When you were preparing that research, did any of your review of the literature suggest to you that illegal immigration was
also a problem in American?
A There's much literature to that effect.
Q And what two states, if you could limit it to two states, have had the majority of illegal immigration in the United States?
A I wouldn't limit it to two states.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay. Where would you say they are?
A I would say -- I would say either California -- or of five states.
Q All right. What five states?
A California, Texas, Florida, Illinois and New York.
Q All right. Would you think that Texas runs a pretty close second to California in terms of illegal immigration?
A In terms of the volume?
Q Yes. Say, over the last 20 years.
A That probably is a good guess.
Q Do you know whether or not Texas would actually rank ahead of California if we looked at it, say, over the last 30 years?
A As a former Californian, I would doubt that.
Q You've never lived in Texas, though, have you?
A No.
Q Okay. Now, with regard to the illegal immigrations that's occurred in Texas, are you aware of whether or not the illegal
immigrants that establish their home in the United States are entitled to Medicaid benefits?
A I'm not -- that's not an area I'm knowledgeable about.
Q So you don't know one way or the other?
A No, not for sure.
Q Okay. Well, assume with me that illegal immigrants that establish themselves in America are entitled to certain Medicaid
benefits, in other words, they get cancer and they have to go to a hospital, we don't just let them die, we take care of them.
We take care of them with public money.
Assuming that to be the case, okay, will you agree that many of those folks would not have been exposed to any of the information
that you provided to me in the four-plus boxes had they spent a good portion of their lives in Mexico?
A No. I wouldn't agree because I have no knowledge of what they would have been exposed to in Mexico.
Q And by “exposed to,” I mean exposed to in terms of what they read.
A In Mexico, I have no knowledge.
Q Okay. So you haven't done any independent study to determine what either illegal immigrants into Texas or legal immigrants
into Texas may have known with regard to cigarette smoking and its health effects prior to the time that they came to Texas?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Prior to the time they came to Texas, no. I've done no research in Mexico.
Q And assume with me that that is at least a significant number of the population in the State of Texas, at least as far as those
persons are concerned. Prior to the time that they got to the State of Texas, you can't say what they knew one way or the other
regarding cigarette smoke and health, can you?
A What they knew in Texas -- I mean in Mexico?
Q Right.
A I can't say.
Q Okay. Fair enough. Will you agree with me that at least some of the periodical material that was provided to me doesn't have
anything to do with smoking and health?
A I would agree that it was -- when you do research, you sometimes gather an item or two that isn't exactly on point, that it's
inevitable in any large effort, but --
Q So you would agree?
A There might be some that would have -- though, it would be a small amount. It would be very small. I'd rather gather a little
more than not enough.
Q Do you personally believe that smoking causes cancer?
A I believe that it's a causing factor in cancer, but as a citizen. I'm a historian and it doesn't derive from that.
Q I'm just asking as a citizen.
A As a citizen.
Q Do you believe that cigarette smoking causes heart disease?
A It is associated with a causing factor in heart disease.
Q Do you believe that cigarette smoking causes emphysema?
A As a citizen, I'm persuaded of that
Q Do you believe that nicotine is an addictive agent?
A As a citizen, I use the term addiction as a citizen, not as a pharmacological expert.
Q Okay.
A And of course, of course I believe that nicotine is habit forming and addictive, habituating.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Have you reviewed any industry generated materials which suggest that the cigarette companies knew that smoking caused
lung cancer?
A I don't recall -- my research is not into industry sources.
Q All right. So the answer to that question would be no?
A I doubt very much if I've seen.
Q Have you reviewed any information generated by the cigarette industry that suggests that they knew that smoking caused
heart disease?
A The same answer. I don't -- my research is not in industry sources. If it -- if it came out in the public media in a newspaper
article, a magazine article, I may have seen it.
Q Can you cite to any specific newspaper or magazine article that cites the tobacco companies as a source of information that
cigarette smoking caused emphysema?
A Cigarette companies as a source of information that --
Q Right.
A -- cigarette smoking causes emphysema?
Q Right.
A I can't remember anything like that.
Q Can you remember anything like that relative to lung cancer?
A Same question?
Q Yes, sir.
A I can't remember that.
Q Anything like that in reference to heart disease?
A Same question, same answer.
Q No?
A No.
Q All right. What about with regard to the addictive nature of nicotine?
A There have been -- in the materials that I have reviewed, there are news reports.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q But do any of those news reports cite to the cigarette industry or the cigarette companies as a source of information that
nicotine is an addictive agent?
A That nicotine is?
Q Yes.
A Cigarette companies as a source that nicotine is an addictive --
Q Yes.
A I don't think so.
Q Okay. Does any of your research suggest that the tobacco industry manufacturers produced their cigarettes in a composition
to provide a specific amount of nicotine?
A There is a controversy about that in the materials that I have.
Q Okay. In that controversy, are the cigarette manufacturers quoted with regard to that?
A On that controversy, they were quoted.
Q And what did they say?
A As I recall, they said we -- are you -- are you referring to the issue that is under the ABC also?
Q I am actually not talking about any particular litigation issue. I'm just talking about whether or not the cigarette companies
took a particular position on whether or not nicotine was placed in cigarettes in a specific amount.
A There is an issue in the newspapers and in the magazines and in public discussion in the '90s.
Q Right.
A Rather a big issue for a while.
Q Right.
A About adding nicotine.
Q And what to you recall the cigarette industry's response was?
A They denied that they added in the sense -- as I recall, they denied that they added -- in the sense that they added extra.
Q All right.
A It's a manufacturing issue.
Q Did you have an opportunity -- you've provided several videotapes to me. Did you see the videotapes that you provided to me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Yes.
Q Have you reviewed all those videotapes?
A Yes.
Q Did you see the videotapes in 1994 of the cigarette industry executives appearing before Congress and swearing that they
did not believe that smoking was addictive?
A I think so.
Q Okay. Did they also swear that there was no established link between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
A I can't recall.
Q Okay. Did any of that information provided by the cigarette company executives who swore to tell the truth in front of
Congress in 1994, did any of that form the basis of any of the opinions you're offering here today?
A The opinions I'm offering here today are formed on the basis of an enormous range of material. Everything that I've seen
goes into my thinking, so that was in the news, I saw it. Like everything else I saw, it's in the mix of things that I assess.
Q Have you reviewed information which suggests that the cigarette companies through a campaign of advertising attempted to
influence public opinion on the -- on the truth about cigarette smoking, smoking and its health consequences?
A I'm sorry. If you could do it again.
Q Yeah. Right. And let me apologize. I'm getting a little dry in the mouth. But have you reviewed any information which suggests
that the cigarette industry through their advertising means attempted to influence public opinion as to the health consequences
of cigarette smoking?
A There are materials in the media in which the industry makes comments on the controversy about heath and -- of smoking
and health. They're there. I've read them. I read them when I found them.
Q Will you agree with me that there have been instances in the past where the cigarette industry has advertised their products
as low tar or low nicotine in an effort to give the public some sense of -- of security that they're getting a healthier cigarette?
A I agree with you that they advertise with respect to low tar and low nicotine. Their motives I don't know for sure, but I can
assume as a citizen --
Q All right.
A -- that they're attempting to respond to public worry.
Q Okay. And to some extent would you agree that advertising of that nature does have an impact upon public opinion and might
make people feel a little more secure, a little safer?
A That's a good question. And my answer is that as I have worked with this material, I see no evidence, no credible evidence in
my research that the -- these ads you're speaking of influenced public thinking or public debate. There are some who argue that
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
an ad that says your throat won't hurt if you smoke our cigarette like it does when you smoke the other cigarettes, that that itself
is a re -- reinforces. And I find that plausible, but it's impossible to determine what the American people derive from ads or --
Q Let me make sure I understood what you just said. You said it is impossible for the American public --
A It's impossible to determine with absolute precision and total confidence what the American public took from an ad.
Q Okay.
A In my opinion.
Q All right. Would you say that that is also true relative to magazine articles?
A The way I stated it with absolute precision, but you can certainly gain a sense of how an issue is progressing in public discourse.
Q Will you also say that that's true with regard to newspaper articles?
A When you say that is true, state again what I'm agreeing.
Q You said that it's impossible to determine what American public opinion is with regard to an advertising ad or how they're
impacted by an advertising ad.
A With absolute precision.
Q Okay. And then you qualified it with absolute precision, correct? Will you agree that that's true with regard to newspapers,
magazines and periodicals, et cetera?
A No. There is a difference.
Q Okay. What is the difference?
A With respect to news reports and articles and television broadcasts and radio broadcasts and the ongoing discussion of
cigarettes and health, you can tell very -- very well how the argument is going, and who is -- who is being listened to, who is
having influence, what messages are being heard.
Q So you think that -- are you here to state that you believe that news magazines, periodicals, newspapers and television, to
the extent that they are factually reporting something historic, for instance, or a report, have more influence than an advertising
campaign, for instance, say the Joe Camel advertising campaign? Do you think that those things have more impact than an
advertising campaign waged by the industry using Joe Camel?
A Yes.
Q Okay. Now, have you done any poll to arrive at that --
A Done any polling?
Q Done any polling to arrive at that opinion?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Have you done any polling at all whatsoever with regard to the issue of smoking and health in the State of Texas?
A Personally?
Q Yes, sir.
A No.
Q All right. Has anyone at your direction conducted any polling in the State of Texas to determine what Texans' attitudes are
with regard to cigarettes and health?
A No.
Q Have you done any canvassing in terms of making telephone calls and taking down responses from just citizens there in the
State of Texas regarding smoking and health?
A No.
Q Has anyone at your direction?
A No.
Q Is it fair for me to assume that the opinions that you're offering in your report are based solely upon your review of documents
that you feel like reference smoking and the health issue that have been disseminated in the State of Texas?
A And in the nation.
Q And in the nation?
A And in the nation.
Q Fair enough. Okay.
A Texans obviously read national magazines.
Q Sure.
A Travel.
Q Have you done anything to determine what percentage of Texans, for instance, read Time magazine?
A No. I don't have that percentage.
Q All right. Have you done any research to determine what percentage of Texans read US News & World Reports?
A No.
Q Have you done any study to determine what percentage of Texans read any of these publications?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A No.
Q You can't testify today or even September 29th when we go to trial in this case to what extent an article on medicine and
health out of Reader's Digest, to what extent it may have made it to -- to a farm worker in south Texas, for instance?
A I have a -- yes, I could -- I'm not agreeing with you. I'm disagreeing. I don't know which farm worker you're talking about.
Q Okay. Let's assume that it's a farm worker that immigrated to the United States, either legally or illegally in the '70s. To what
extent do you think he reads articles in Reader's Digest on cigarette smoking and health?
A If he doesn't read Reader's Digest, there's so many other sources, the church, the family.
Q Are there any articles that are in the materials that you provided to me that are from the churches?
A Yes. Yes.
Q Okay. Can you reference which ones? What church?
A For example, the largest Baptist church in Dallas is the First Baptist Church in Dallas.
Q All right.
A Very popular minister there, W.T. Chriswell, '40s and '50s --
Q Yes, sir.
A -- is reported more than once in the documents that I found as an avid opponent and an outspoken opponent of smoking and
tobacco. That would be an example.
Q What kind of impact would that have on Catholic folks?
A I don't know. Possibly they have friends who are Baptist.
Q Isn't it hard to say, though, Doctor? I mean, really, in terms of public opinion, aren't people influenced differently by different
mediums? There are some people that never read news magazines, correct?
A I'm sure there are.
Q There are some people that never watch television as hard as that is to believe.
A There may be.
Q All right. There are some people that absolutely would not pick up a newspaper if it were shoved in their face?
A That may be.
Q All right. And you have done no independent study to determine what level of any of these materials are read by teenagers,
have you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A You see guesses about that.
Q Have you done any research to determine it?
A Not directly.
Q Do you have an opinion -- and I'm going to ask you not an expert question. I'm going to ask you a lay opinion. Do you have
a lay opinion as to whether or not a teen is more likely to be influenced by television ad or US News & World Reports articles?
A Lay opinion?
Q Yes.
A Lay opinion. As the father of teenagers more than once.
Q Yes, sir. Of course, your kids may have been exceptional. Who knows?
A We're all Americans.
Q Right.
A We talk to each others.
Q That's right.
A We talk to our neighbor's fathers. We're influenced by the rabbi and the minister and the priest. In the school -- in the school,
there is mandated instruction at many grade levels in the State of Texas as in many other states. There has been for years. It
is impossible for me to imagine a person whether they read the newspaper or not escaping the reputation of tobacco and its
intense feelings about that product.
Q Will you agree that there were articles that were published in advertising which could have led people to conclude that
cigarette -- cigarette smoking wasn't as bad for you as everyone was saying?
A I can't speculate about --
Q For instance, the ads regarding Skoal when it first came out, did you review any ads regarding Skoal?
A I occasionally see them.
Q Do you remember how it was referred to as the safe alternative of cigarette smoking?
A It may have been.
Q All right. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not that's true?
A Personally?
Q Yes, sir.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A That Skoal is --
Q A safe alternative to cigarette smoking?
A I wouldn't use it.
Q Okay. Will you agree with me that an ad of that nature can mislead a teenager into a false sense of security that the product
that they were using couldn't harm them?
A My own view is the ads are ads, and the American people know what an ad is. It's a message from the manufacturer to buy
his product, and that other information has much more impact.,
Q Well, don't you agree, though, that manufacturers have an ethical responsibility to be truthful in their advertising?
A I suppose so. I'm a historian, but as a citizen, that sounds like what manufacturers could do, should do.
Q All right. And if they were untruthful in their advertising and withhold that information, withhold information that is contrary
to what they're saying in their advertising, can that affect public debate on a particular issue?
A If they're untruthful, they're in trouble with the FDC.
Q Okay. Well, did you have an occasion to review the newspaper a couple of days ago when the chairman of Liggett gave
testimony in the case down in Florida?
A I saw a couple of newspaper articles. They were brief.
Q All right. And his name is Bennett LeBow, and he testified that the industry was aware that cigarette smoking causes cancer,
and that it was addictive. Did you -- did you see that?
A I can't remember if it was exactly as you say, but --
Q Well, he said -- and let me quote, We believe from many people smoking is very addictive. He was then asked, Does smoking
cause lung cancer, heart and respiratory disease and emphysema? And he said, The answer is yes.
A I'll take your word for it.
Q All right. Isn't that exactly contrary to what he said back in 1994 when he testified in front of Congress?
A I don't know. I don't remember.
Q Isn't that directly contrary to what the other industry representatives testified to in front of Congress back in 1994?
MR. PURVIS: Just for the record, I'm going to object. I don't believe Mr. LeBow testified in front of Congress in '94.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Okay. As for the other industry executives that did testify before Congress in 1994, isn't that directly contrary
to what they said?
A I don't know. They testified on addiction, and you have to have definitional problems, so I don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q I asked you earlier whether or not you had reviewed any internal industry documents regarding their cover-up of information
regarding the health consequences of tobacco, and let me make sure that I'm clear about this. Have you reviewed any newspaper
accounts or periodicals or magazine accounts that specifically discuss the conspiracy to cover up information by the tobacco
industry?
A Thousands of articles. There may have been -- I don't know. I'm not testifying that I've seen those records exactly.
Q All right.
A There are articles that complain about not having enough information from an industry, but that's -- that's part of the discussion.
Q Do you believe that the conspiracy or their cover-up of the information, assuming it is true, just assuming that for the moment,
had any impact on what the public received as common knowledge during the '60s, '70s, and '80s?
A That question is so complex.
Q Yes, it is.
A Could you rephrase one time?
Q Sure. And maybe I can break it down for you.
In your study of history, are the pivotal events that occur that serve as a marker for the beginning of an era, the end of an era, the
beginning of a time frame? For instance, when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor that was the introduction of the Americans
into the World War II, correct?
A Yes.
Q Do you have a particular date that you set as the date that the public was first generally aware in the State of Texas smoking
causes lung cancer?
A There's no date of that -- that -- that smoking might cause, among other things, lung canner.
Q I didn't say might cause. I said smoking does cause.
A Does cause.
Q Does cause.
A I believe that it does cause. That belief, that suspicion?
Q Yes.
A -- has been a part of American life for 200 years, Texas as well as Alabama, Mississippi, Michigan.
Q Okay. So you're saying that 200 years ago, it was common knowledge among Texans that cigarette smoking causes cancer?
A There wasn't any Texas then.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay. Fair enough. Two hundred years in a territory that was under the control of either the Indians or the Mexicans, would
you say that that territory knew that smoking caused cancer?
A My research has been on the United States of America, and I'm not sure about the pre-United States of America part of
the southwest.
Q Well, let's talk about Texas when we weren't part of the United States of America, from 1836 to 1845. During that time
period, do you have an opinion as to whether it was common knowledge in Texas that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
A I have an opinion.
Q What is your opinion?
A My opinion that Texans in that time frame at that time were fully aware of, and some of them believed, and some of them
may not have, but they were fully aware that there were many prominent Americans that have been alleging all sorts of fatal
and nonfatal, semi-fatal, moral, economic ills that tobacco smoking would bring or tobacco use would bring, and that was a
part of the culture that those people took into Texas when they went from Arkansas or wherever they came from.
Q What about the ones that came from Tennessee?
A Same. It's America. Same. I believe there's --
Q Were they growing tobacco in Tennessee in 19 -- or 1836?
A I rather imagine so.
Q All right. And do you think that those former tobacco farmers that moved to Texas thought that that was bad for their health?
A In the state of North Carolina, we had both friends of tobacco and enemies.
Q All right. Do you think in 1836 to 1845 that Texans were aware that smoking caused emphysema?
A Same answer. There was a broad, wide, deep historical critique of tobacco. It alleged everything you can think of. If the word
emphysema was in the vocabulary, it would allege that. You could find it. It was there in the culture.
Q Okay. And you're saying that this information went back 200 years?
A More.
Q How far back did it go, Doc?
A Ah--
Q Is there anything mentioned in the Bible about it?
A Tobacco? I think not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay. All right. So we can at least say 2,000 years ago, there probably wasn't anything talked about in terms of health
consequences of tobacco?
A We're not sure.
Q We're not positive, are we?
A Because the American Indians were using tobacco 8,000 years ago, and their discussion I can't get information on.
Q Did they just not leave a specific enough record for us to review in terms of whatever they scrolled on cave walls or whatever?
Is that why we don't know?
A I can't find it.
Q Is that a yes?
A That's a yes. I can't find knowledge of American industry discussion of tobacco. There's reliable knowledge about how much
they treasured it, and it was used and grown all the way from Brazil to Canada. So we know that. We know they treasured it,
they carried it around, they grew it, they used it. But what they said about it, I can't get much information.
Q When is the first medical report -- when was the first medical report referencing a link between smoking -- cigarette smoking
and emphysema that you recall?
A Medical?
Q Yes.
A Emphysema?
Q Yes, sir. And you can give me a century.
A Oh, well, I would -- I would not be surprised if the late Nineteenth Century. I am certain we could find a growing literature
in the inner war years in the '20s and '30s, emphysema, probably in the Nineteenth Century.
Q What about with regard to heart disease?
A Oh, much earlier. Much earlier.
Q When was the first medical report released linking cigarette smoking with heart disease?
A I don't know the first, but I -- I would nominate, as a prominent early one, Dr. Benjamin Rush, the signer of the Declaration
of Independence published a book, more than one book. He was very into this, but he published a book in 1806, and he alleged
50 ills in which heart -- with various forms of heart ailments. It's a long time ago.
Q Did any of your research discuss the number of Americans that smoked cigarettes at its height?
A Yes.
Q What percentage of Americans smoked cigarettes at the height of usage?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I think the percentage would be 42 percent of adults, which is very close to half, not quite. A little under half.
Q What year would that have been?
A I could be off a little. The peak is probably -- percentage now, now just percentage.
Q Right.
A Sometime in the '60s.
Q Sometime in the '60s. All right. With regard to that percentage of Americans that smoked cigarettes, do you know how many
of those folks began smoking in their teens?
A I don't know.
Q Have you read --
A As I sit here today, I don't know.
Q Have you read any reports that suggest the percentage of regular smokers that began smoking in their teens?
A Yes. I read it.
Q And what does your review of the literature suggest to you is a fair number?
A Of people who start?
Q In their teens.
A A large number.
Q All right. Have you read reports that suggest that maybe 80 percent of regular smokers began smoking in their teens?
A I can't recall that figure exactly.
Q Well, can you recall a figure of percent?
A No. I think that's outside the bounds of what I remember, but a large number.
Q Okay. Do you have any explanation for why in the world 42 percent of Americans, over 100 million people, would be
engaging in such a deadly habit if the information that you suggested was so widely known to all of us, as far as 200 years ago?
A Or before.
Q Or before.
A Yes. In the rich mounds of material I've read, there are many people who ask that important question. I think a clue would be in
the concluding page in Jerome Brooks' fine book The Mighty Leaf, written in 1950 before the lung cancer square became quite
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
what it was, and he said, To half the world, tobacco was abomination, to the other half, a cherished necessity. That statement
holds for the entire history of review. People fall into two warring camps on this product.
Q Will you agree that another explanation or an explanation that's not necessarily different from his explanation might be that
the reason people fall in love with it is because the pharmacological properties of nicotine?
A It's obvious in the history people have written many, many things, poems, songs about both for and against. So there's as
much evidence in these boxes and the whole larger world of discussion of tobacco, there's much discussion of why people do
it and why people -- they hate people that do it -- the doing of it.
Q Well, actually my question was: Do you believe that people fall in love with it primarily due to the pharmacological effects
of nicotine?
A As a historian, I can tell you that there's much in the record about that. They like -- clearly or repeatedly tobacco has nicotine,
and nicotine does things that some people like.
Q Have you reviewed documents that suggest that nicotine is an addictive agent much like cocaine or heroine in terms of its
influence upon the central nervous system of the brain?
A I read that argument.
Q Do you believe that Americans are influenced by the position that the Surgeon General takes on a particular health issue?
A The Surgeon General's statements on this, as well as other issues, but especially on tobacco, which is my subject --
Q Yes.
A -- have been widely reported by the media, which is the media's way of saying, this is of interest to our readers.
Q My question was, though: Do you believe that Americans are influenced by the position that the Surgeon General takes on
a particular issue?
A I'm sure his voice has influence.
Q All right. Have you reviewed the Surgeon General's reports, the reports of the public health system from, say, 1964 to the
present?
A Yeah.
Q Do you recall which Surgeon General's report first suggested that there was a causative link between cigarette smoking and
lung cancer?
A Suggested that there was?
Q Yes, sir.
A Or might be?
Q Yes, sir.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A That would be -- you said the Surgeon General -- the first Surgeon General's report?
Q Yes, sir.
A If you define as a report a statement by the Attorney General of the United States --
Q Uh-huh.
A -- Surgeon General, it would be 1957.
Q Okay. What did he say in 1957 that leads you to believe that the government concluded that there was a cause --
A That there might be.
Q -- a causal relationship?
A There might be.
Q Okay. You're saying “might be.” I wanted to ask you when the government had actually determined that there was a causal
relationship.
A The best statement -- the best date would be 1964.
Q Okay. When was the first time that the Surgeon General determined that cigarette smoking was addictive due to nicotine?
A I -- I'd like to review, but I believe that -- that position is taken in the Surgeon General's report of 1979.
Q Would it surprise you to learn that that position was not officially embraced by the Surgeon General until 1988?
A Now that you say it, I like that year better.
Q Okay. Now, will you agree with me that in reviewing public opinion or common knowledge that one of the sources that
we would like to go to determine what was common knowledge may include government records, things like the Surgeon
General's reports?
A As evidence of what is common 320 knowledge?
Q Yes, sir.
A If the Surgeon General's report is read and discussed, it becomes a part of a large -- a larger discussion, then -- then -- I
forget the end part of the question.
Q Well, you will agree that the Surgeon General's report of 1964 certainly was reported in Time magazine and Newsweek
magazine?
A Certainly.
Q US News & World Reports and a number of other magazines?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Yes, sir. Widely --
Q All right. And as such, then it is one of the -- one of the contributing factors to public opinion?
A Yes. It certainly shaped public opinion.
Q All right. Will you agree that the Surgeon General's report is an extensive and authoritative study of the issue of cigarette
smoking and health?
A It's extensive.
Q Yes.
A And the most authoritative thing the government had yet said.
Q Okay. Have you ever seen, for instance, a report that was subjected to more peer review than the Surgeon General's report
on cigarette smoking?
A I don't know. There may have been reports, but it was much peer review.
Q Will you agree with me that the Surgeon General's report is relied upon by medical practitioners, editorialists, news agencies
and other people who are not experts in smoking and health?
A I would agree that it has considerable influence.
Q For instance, if you're a small town practitioner in Tyler, Texas, or Texarkana for that matter, and you deal with the day-to-
day coughs, colds and runny noses that might come through your office, but you just don't know a whole lot about the ill effects
of cigarette smoking, would the Surgeon General's report be a good place for you to go to find out?
A It would be a -- it seems to me if you were a doctor, you should be acquainted with the publication of the Surgeon General.
Q Okay.
A Just be acquainted with them.
Q Do you believe that the government has given careful consideration to the issue of smoking and health over the last 20,
30 years?
A It's given a lot of consideration.
Q Do you believe that the Surgeon General report -- Surgeon General's report accurately reflects the accepted state of -- of the
art of medical opinion when it's rendered?
A In general?
Q Yes, sir.
A I don't -- I don't know. I'm not an expert in the general state of medical opinions, so whether any Surgeon General's report --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Well, do you feel like the Surgeon General does his best or his staff or the public health service and the numbers of doctors
that work on compiling that report, do you feel like they do their best to review information that is as current as possible?
A I'm sure they do.
Q Okay. Along those same lines, do you believe that the public health service has provided information to the public in a timely
fashion when those conclusions are reached?
A I don't know what timely fashion means. I'm aware that the public health service produces many reports and circulates them
widely.
Q Have you reviewed any information which suggests the federal government consciously withheld pertinent information from
the public regarding health consequences of smoking?
A The federal government?
Q Yes, sir.
A Any part of the federal government?
Q Yes, sir.
A Withheld?
Q Yes, sir. Consciously withheld information regarding the health consequences of smoking from the public.
A There are a couple of words that I'd like you to repeat, so could you do that sentence again?
Q Yeah. Are you aware of any information whatsoever that suggests that the federal government consciously withheld pertinent,
relevant information from the public regarding the health consequences of smoking?
A I can't recall such an occasion. I can't say that -- there's so much that is said out there. Someone might have alleged it. I
can't remember.
MR. MORRIS: Why don't we take a break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're off the record. The time is 11:18.
(A recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the start of tape number two. We're back on the record. The time is 11:34.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Doctor, I'm going to get back to discussing with you the Surgeon General's reports in just a minute, but
I'd like to digress for just a minute.
Earlier we had a brief discussion, and I apologize if I wasn't as detail-oriented as I should have been with you regarding your
opinion regarding the state of knowledge regarding cigarette smoking and cancer, and we stretched it back at least 200 years,
and you say it may have been before that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
And I believe you answered that question after I had asked you whether or not there was any pivotal point where cigarette
smoking and cancer, their causal link became common knowledge to the folks in the State of Texas. Let me -- let me see if I
can back up and go through this with you one at a time and see if I can get some precise dates from you.
Have you establish a precise date as to when the link between cigarette smoking and cancer was common knowledge to the
citizens of the State of Texas?
A A possible link between cancer -- any kind of cancer?
Q No. Lung cancer.
A Lung cancer.
Q And cigarette smoking.
A Let me see how to answer that. There -- there are two answers, two sides, two sides to one answer.
Q Okay.
A I tried to give the first answer before.
Q And that is that we've known about it since the beginning of time?
A It had been alleged for a very long time.
Q Okay.
A I mean, back in --
Q And I'm not talking about an allegation. I'm talking about reasonable information based on studies that a person could rely
upon.
A Medical?
Q Yeah.
A Scientific?
Q Medical scientific to conclude that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
A The -- the medical opinion that cigarette smoking causes, among other things, cancer, among other things, lung cancer, could
have been found in the Nineteenth Centuries, but the level of medical science does reach a new point in 1950, right around
1950 with respect to. lung cancer, yes.
Q And at what point was that study disseminated to the folks of the State of Texas to such an extent that you would believe
that it's common knowledge to Texas --
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q -- that cigarette smoking causes cancer?
A It was disseminated immediately. And if I were pressed for a date when I can see that this is common knowledge in Texas,
as elsewhere, I would say there's a Gallup poll in 1954 in which people asked if they had heard that cigarette smoking could
cause lung cancer, and 88 percent of the Americans asked said yes, they had heard. I'd call that common knowledge.
Q Okay. They had heard that it could cause it, but will you agree with me that as of the mid-1950s, there was still a controversy
in the medical and scientific community as to whether or not, in fact, it did cause cancer?
A I agree with that.
Q Have you established a date which you believe that that controversy no longer existed, or does it still exist?
A I wouldn't -- I couldn't offer a date at which a controversy could be said to be simply not there.
Q Would you agree, then, that there is still some controversy regarding whether or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
A Not much.
Q Are you aware that there had been experts retained in this litigation by the cigarette industry companies who suggest that
cigarette smoking does not cause lung cancer?
A I'm not aware.
Q Have you reviewed any of their reports?
A No.
Q Have you spoken to any of the medical doctors that have been retained by the cigarette industry?
A No.
Q Have you spoken to any scientists that have been retained by the cigarette industry?
A No.
Q Have you spoken to any epidemiologists?
A No.
Q Okay. So that we're clear, and let me digress one more time. I apologize for doing this, but this is for the sake of trying to
get through this as quickly as we can. You will agree with me that you're not here today to offer any what are termed expert
opinions in the area of psychiatry?
A I agree.
Q In the area of psychology?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I agree.
Q In the area of medicine from the standpoint that you have been professionally trained?
A I agree.
Q And let me ask you the question that way. Have you been professionally trained in psychiatry?
A No.
Q Psychology?
A No.
Q Medicine?
A No.
Q Biology?
A No.
Q Public health?
A No.
Q Epidemiology?
A No.
Q Sociology?
A No.
Q Pharmacology?
A No.
Q Communications?
A No.
Q Political science?
A Professionally trained?
Q Yes, sir.
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Lobbying?
A No.
Q Okay. What about polling? Have you ever conducted polling yourself?
A No.
Q Did Mr. Barringer conduct any polling in this case for you?
A No.
Q Did anyone else conduct any polling in the State of Texas at your behest or the cigarette company's behest, to the best of
your knowledge?
A No.
Q Okay. Getting back to this discussion of time lines. So you say that in the early '50s, the information was becoming available
that there might be a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, correct? Is that what your testimony is?
A No.
Q What is your testimony?
A That's -- that sort of information was available before, but that was in 1950, is that the -- a new -- epidemiological studies
began to mass and point in this direction. It's a new form of evidence in the medical discussion.
Q All right. What about the Wynder report?
A That's what I'm thinking of.
Q Are you thinking of that report specifically?
A I'm thinking of the Graham Wynder reports that began verbally in '49 and were published in JAMA 1950 and then continued.
Q You're not here to testified today, though, that a large portion of the citizens of the State of Texas read JAMA, are you?
A No. I wouldn't testify that a large, number of the citizens in Texas read JAMA.
Q Okay. You mentioned the Gallup poll of 1954. Were there any other polls that were released in that time period that dealt
with cigarette smoking and the consequences of cigarette smoking?
A Yes. Many.
Q Can you cite to any of those specifically for me here today?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Oh, there are so many polls. The Gallup people started to poll on tobacco -- I'm not sure the exact year when they started,
but they never let up. They added tobacco questions. The same thing true with Roper, so that the polls just -- the file on poll
-- polls are just enormous number of polls.
Q Have you reviewed any of those polls in arriving at your conclusions here today?
A Yes.
Q Do you have any of those polls available for review by the plaintiffs in this case, since they weren't furnished to us in the
disclosure?
A The --
MR. PURVIS: Point of clarification. They were disclosed to you in the box. The Gallup poll he's referred to is produced.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Are you aware of any other polls that were produced other than the Gallup poll of 1954?
A Yes.
Q What other polls were produced?
A As I said, the Gallup poll publishes its polls -- publishes it for anyone who wants to read it every -- quarterly. Roper does the
same so that there are just so many polls it's hard to answer a question about a --
Q I asked you whether or not you were aware of any other polls that were produced to us?
A Oh, there should be -- you should have a -- you should have the polling -- the summaries of polling in the Surgeon General's
report in 1989, which is very, very, very, very full review of polling data all the way back.
Q Okay. I didn't see it, and --
MR. PURVIS: You have to get to the Bates stamp number to refer to it?
MR. MORRIS: Yeah. If you could do that, then I could probably at least satisfy my own curiosity because I don't recall seeing it.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Okay. All right. So we know that at least your opinion here is that in the early to mid-1950s, you believe
that it was common knowledge in the State of Texas that there was a link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, correct?
Is that your testimony here today?
A People had heard that there was a link.
Q Okay. All right. Would you state -- say that the matter was still a matter of controversy at that time?
A Yes.
Q Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the citizens of the State of Texas were also aware that cigarette smoking could
cause heart disease during that time period?
A Yes. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q To the same extent that they were aware of the link between smoking and lung cancer or to a lesser degree?
A The polls on that, and there may be a slightly -- one may be slightly ahead of the other. At this time, cancer historically, and
especially lung cancer, but cancer and especially lung cancer were emerging rapidly in the -- in the concerns of Americans.
Cancer was becoming a leading killer. It was passing heart disease just about at this time, or approaching. So there's an intensity
about cancer and a newness about the cancer scare that sets it a little apart from the heart, which was a somewhat more -- it
had been an issue that had been there before.
Q What about relative to emphysema?
A I'm not exactly sure when the emphysema -- what to say about when the emphysema issue -- there's no date. It starts to appear
as a chronic disease. It's a chronic disease. And as a killer, and as a respiratory problem, it starts to emerge. I don't have a date
in which I can say anything striking about emphysema. It appears as a worry.
Q So you don't have a particular date --
A I don't have a date.
Q -- on emphysema of common knowledge in the State of Texas?
A Well, I'd say by the mid or late '50s, a cluster of respiratory and heart illnesses are beginning to be -- larynx --
Q Okay.
A -- are beginning to be widely discussed, and you see these words by the mid to late 50s, and then continuously.
Q Do you have a date that you would set as a pivotal time when most Texans considered, as a matter of common knowledge,
smoking -- cigarette smoking to be addictive due to nicotine?
A From the beginning of Texas?
Q Okay. Now, I'm speaking relative to -- let me back up. Let me be clear about this. Do you have an opinion as to when it was
first common knowledge in Texas that cigarette smoking was addictive due to nicotine?
A I would say that the addiction, the habit-forming, the hard-to-quit quality of tobacco, general, cigarettes in particular, is a
part of common knowledge.
Q Well, you say that's been a matter of speculation for a long time?
A Speculation.
Q Correct.
A Yes.
Q Now, I want to draw a distinction between the speculation about cigarette smoking as an addictive habit and knowledge of
the public that that addiction was caused due to nicotine. Do you understand the distinction that I'm drawing?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I think -- I think that I do.
Q In the course of your research, did you analyze the state of common knowledge with that specific inquiry in mind?
A Yes. Among others.
Q Okay. And at what point in your opinion was it common knowledge among Texans that the addictive nature of cigarettes
was due to nicotine?
A I can't find a time when the -- in the discussion of tobacco's qualities and cigarette smoking's qualities that there wasn't a
public -- widespread public carried about slang, carried about all the media that we talked of that I talked of -- that I can't
remember when there wasn't a time when there wasn't a recognition that nicotine in the cigarettes was associated with the hook.
Q Why in the world, then, would it take the Surgeon General until 1988 to conclude that the addictive quality of cigarettes
was due to nicotine?
A I think the answer to that is he and everybody else knew that it was addictive by a general common understanding of addictive,
but the Surgeon General is a scientist, and the scientific, pharmacological definition of addiction is a more complicated matter,
a much more complicated matter, so I have no trouble understanding why to bottle that one out, among the scientists took that
long, but Surgeon General's great-grandaddy knew that it was habit-forming.
Q So from a scientific standpoint, you're saying that his ability to conclude that the addictive nature of cigarettes was due to
nicotine, although we may have suspected that, may not have been proved until 1988, to his -- to his satisfaction?
A It's a medical -- it's a medical issue. I'm not a medical doctor, so I don't think I could answer that question.
Q Well, you agree that medical practitioners in the State of Texas rely upon scientific information in order to treat their patients?
A I don't really have an opinion on --
Q Do you hope that your own personal doctor --
A I sure do.
Q -- relies upon scientific information --
A I do.
Q -- in order to treat you and your family?
A I do.
Q Okay. And will you agree that if your own doctor had been provided with information back in 1964 by the Surgeon General
of the United States that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, that it would be reasonable for him to tell his patients that?
A Well, I -- I'don't know what's reasonable for doctors to do, but it doesn't sound unreasonable.
Q Okay. If -- if in 1964, though, he was not provided with scientific data that the addictive nature of cigarettes was due to
nicotine, then he couldn't have provided that information to his patients, could he?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I just can't -- I don't have an opinion about scientific data and what doctors should do.
Q Well, I'm getting back to this common knowledge because one of the places that we rely upon common knowledge from
is from sources that are authoritative from people that we trust, people like our doctors and our schoolteachers and preachers,
people that you've mentioned earlier, correct?
A Is that a question?
Q Yes, sir.
A I'm sorry. I didn't get it.
Q Okay. Let me ask it again. Will you agree that we, in forming our common knowledge regarding topics often rely upon
authoritative figures such as our doctors, our preachers, our schoolteachers in forming our opinions?
A I have no expert opinion on that. I don't object to it.
Q Okay. In terms of your expert opinions regarding common knowledge, are you limiting your opinion today about the common
knowledge of cigarette smoking and its harmful effects only to the literature that you have reviewed, or are there other factors
that contribute to public opinion beyond just the videotapes that you have furnished to me and the articles that you have supplied
to me?
A I'd like that question again. I'm sorry.
Q Okay. In -- certainly the opinion that you think that cigarette smoking and its hazardous effects are common knowledge at
some point in American history, are you relying solely upon the periodicals and the videotapes that you have rendered to me,
or are there other things that you're additionally relying upon?
A I'm relying upon the materials you've received.
Q Okay. Have you read the Cigarette Papers, which was published by Stanton Glantz?
A I know of it I have not.
Q Have you read Smoke Screen that was published by Phil Hilts?
A Yes.
Q All right. In that book, he discusses the cigarette industry and their advertising approach after the Graham Wynder report
was released in 1953 or so. Do you recall that?
A I think so.
Q He discusses a campaign on the part of the cigarette industry to influence American public opinion regarding the health
consequences of cigarette smoking through advertising. Did you read that?
A I don't remember it very well, but -- I don't remember the book very well.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Did you read anything about the fact that they employed a public relations firm to spearhead their campaign to hopefully
stimulate sales?
A Well, that sounds consistent.
Q Yeah. Have you read any other books that are historical in nature about the cigarette industry and its response to this whole
area of controversy regarding cigarette smoking and health?
A Yes.
Q What other books have you read?
A Jordan Goodman, Tobacco and History is a good book.
Q When was that authored?
A '92.
Q So it would have been released prior. to the time that the Brown & Williamson papers --
A Yes.
Q -- were released?
A There are not many history books that come right up to the present.
Q Do you have an opinion as to whether or not the Brown & Williamson papers are influential in your determination of what
was common knowledge to the public during the '50s and '60s?
A I really don't know anything much about the Brown & Williamson papers.
Q Did anything in Phil Hilts' book, Smoke Screen, influence your opinions as to whether or not certain things were a matter
of common knowledge during the '50s and '60s?
A I can't recall exactly what I derived from that one book.
Q Will you agree with me that the cigarette industry attempted to influence American public opinion regarding the health impact
of cigarettes during the '50s and '60s?
A You know, I've not done research on what the industry was trying to do.
Q Did you read in the book Smoke Screen, that filtered cigarettes were offered by the tobacco companies in an effort to give
people a sense of security that the cigarette was not as harmful as it had been in the past?
A I can't remember whether we said that or not, but -- I can't remember whether he said that or not. It doesn't sound inconsistent.
Q And of course, what he was saying was based on his review of certain tobacco company documents that had actually come
from their executives. You're aware of that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I remember that -- I think I remember that way in his documentation.
Q Did you review the parts of the book or do you recall reading the parts the book where the cigarette industry advertised
their products as being low tar and low nicotine to give the public a sense that cigarette smoking wasn't as harmful as they
had previously thought?
A I don't remember whether he put it quite that way or not.
Q Are you aware that the cigarette industry was able to stimulate sales again through this advertising and marketing campaign
that began in the 1950s that promoted their product as a more healthy product than people were beginning to believe?
A I have no opinion about whether their campaign was successful.
Q Did you read the part of the book that discussed the Camel advertising campaign and the fact that Camel cigarettes were
marketed primarily in convenience stores that were close to school yards and playgrounds?
A I don't remember, but I read the book. If that's in the book, I read that.
Q All right. Will you agree with me that advertising campaigns that take place in convenience stores that are frequented by
teenagers and children can have an -- can have an impact on the common knowledge of teenagers and children regarding
whatever product is being advertised?
A I don't know. I have no opinion about that.
Q You've never done any polling with regard to that?
A No.
Q Ever consulted a psychologist or psychiatrist about whether or not advertising has an impact on children?
A I never did.
Q All right. You will agree with me, though, as a matter of common knowledge, advertising does have an impact on children
that kids want to buy things that their peers have, a real peer factor among children, teenagers?
A I don't agree with that whole sentence.
Q You don't?
A Not that whole sentence as I heard it.
Q Let's talk about Nike products for a minute. Are you familiar with Nike products?
A Yes.
Q Will you agree that their advertising campaign and the fact that Michael Jordan as one of their pitch men has had a fair impact
on the youth of America in terms of basketball shoes they buy?
A I don't know anything about that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q You don't? You never studied that? You've never seen --
A I never studied it.
Q Have you ever reviewed that in popular literature?
A Not that.
Q Do you read US News & World Report?
A Frequently.
Q Do you read Time magazine?
A Frequently.
Q Do you read Newsweek?
A I read all of those.
Q All right. You care to guess whether or not they've ever had articles on Nike and it's success in marketing its products?
A I can't -- I have no opinion about whether -- whether they've had such articles or not. I didn't -- I don't remember them.
Q Okay. Well, will you agree with me that a person in the '50s or '60s could have said the same thing regarding articles about
cigarette smoking and health that you just said about Nike?
A Said the same thing, I said I don't remember whether I saw it.
Q Yeah.
A Would I agree that a person might have said such a thing?
Q Yeah.
A A person might have said such a thing.
Q Okay. Will you agree with me that Phil Hilts in his book and some of the other things that you may have read since 1994
suggest that there were internal documents and studies that were conducted by the tobacco industry on the health consequence
of cigarettes independent from research that was done by universities, professors, et cetera?
A I don't remember whether he did or didn't.
Q Well, don't you recall the part of the book where he talks about one of the cigarette manufacturers taking cigarette or nicotine
and tar and rubbing it on the back of mice and seeing tumors evolve from that? Do you recall anything about that?
A I don't recall that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q You don't recall that?
A Rubbing it on mice?
Q Yeah.
A Right in his office?
Q Right.
A I should have remembered that, but I don't --
Q No. In the laboratories when they were doing studies.
A Vaguely maybe. I --
Q Do you recall any of the studies that he suggests the tobacco industry did from their own reports injecting nicotine into the
eyelids of rabbits?
A No.
Q Anything like that?
A No.
Q Okay. Do you recall any of the medical studies that he says the cigarette manufacturers did on their products during the
'50s, '60s, '70s?
A No.
Q No? You don't recall reading that?
A It's -- it's vaguely consistent with the themes of the book.
Q Okay.
A But the individual studies don't stand out in my mind.
Q Assume with me that they had done these studies, and I think that there will be evidence at the trial of this case that they, in
fact, did these studies. Do you think that that information could have assisted the Texas public policy makers in establishing
rules and regulations governing the State of Texas and our use of tobacco if we had known about those studies?
A Could have assisted is a hypothetical speculating about something that didn't happen, and I -- as a historian, I have just 30
years, maybe 35 of working with things that did happen, so I don't have any expert or professional --
Q Certainly part of the study of history looks back and says, What if? What if certain things had happened? And many historical
books at least offer some opinions as to how history might have changed had things happened.
A I agree with that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Okay.
A They're a very big Madison Avenue, I think still Madison Avenue, public relations firm.
Q Are you aware that they have worked on behalf of the tobacco industry for a number of years?
A I am aware.
Q All right. So getting back to the question that I had asked about the time frame when you think it was common knowledge
in the State of Texas that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, you would set that somewhere in the early 1950s. Is that your
testimony?
A Yes.
Q Would it be reasonable to conclude that the cigarette manufacturing companies had access to the same information and should
have concluded that in the early '50s also?
A I have no opinion about what they had access to or what they might have done with it.
Q Will you agree with me that the cigarette company executives and the people that worked in the cigarette industry were
more sophisticated regarding the content of their cigarette, the harmful effects of the cigarette than the average citizen during
the 1950s?
A Of course, I don't know. I have no evidence. But they're the executives of the industry. They must know more than the
average citizen.
Q Well, since they know a little more than the average citizen then and had access to the same information that you say
establishes common knowledge in Texas back in the early '50s, isn't it reasonable for us to assume that they should have
concluded the same thing back in the early '50s, that smoking causes lung cancer?
A Well, people who had access to the information concluded that there was a danger, but some of them concluded that they
were going to disregard the danger and -- and either not believe it or not -- run a risk. And others concluded they would believe
it and act on that belief, so you had all sorts of different behavior patterns in face of the knowledge.
Q Well, will you agree with me that the cigarette companies may have exactly taken one of the paths that you just mentioned
and ignored it or not believed it and chose not to accept that information as being true back in the early '50s? Is that possible?
A Disciplined asking about things that might have happened. What is the thing that could have happened again?
Q If they had known about the studies that the tobacco industries had done on their own that suggested that cigarette -- the
products of cigarettes cause cancer?
A Well, I haven't speculated about that thing that didn't happen, so you're -- I don't have a settled or professional opinion about
that would have been the result if such a thing had happened.
Q Do you have any idea what they would have learned if they had had access to those documents?
A No. I don't know those documents, so I don't.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Do you have any idea what the regulators would have learned if they had had access to those documents?
A Same answer.
Q Do you have any idea what smokers would have learned if they had had access to those documents?
A I don't have the documents.
Q Do you have any idea what nonsmokers would have learned if they had had access to those documents?
A I don't know the documents.
Q Do you have any idea what teenagers would have learned if they had had access to the tobacco company documents, the
internal company documents?
A No.
Q Prior to your testimony here today, have you reviewed any documents from the consulting firm of Hill & Knowlton?
A No. No documents from Hill & Knowlton.
Q Have you reviewed -- have you talked with any of the folks with Hill & Knowlton?
A No.
Q Any of their advertizing people talk to you prior to you giving testimony?
A No.
Q At any time, all the way back to 1991?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with who they are?
A Yes.
Q Who are they?
A You know, I don't have intimate knowledge of the decision-making process of the cigarette companies at this period or any
other time, really.
Q Isn't that true, too, with the State of Texas? You don't have intimate knowledge of what any of the people in the State of
Texas knew about any of the documents that you published to me?
A Oh, yes. Yes. I can tell you what they were reading and hearing, but I can't tell you what the tobacco industry executives
were reading and hearing. I don't know what they were --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q You can't tell us sitting here, Doctor, today what they were reading and hearing. All can you testify to is what was being
published; isn't that true?
A No, that's not -- that's not true. That's partly true. There is abundant evidence that people reported that they had read, and
the public opinion polls showed changing opinion in response to the information, so there's much evidence that reinforces the
view the information was being heard.
Q What information have you furnished to us in your disclosure that shows that someone within the State of Texas heard or
read any of the information that you have given us?
A Oh, goodness, it's shot through with the polls we've talked about, and the polls start high and then rise. And then people's
behavior. There is this enormous shift to the low tar and the light cigarette and the low nicotine cigarette, a shift that caught
the industry by surprise, apparently, in some of the things that I had read. People switch. There's also a lot of quitting, a lot
of quitting, a lot of quitting.
Q Well, so then if we assume that all of that information that you say made its way to the folks of the State of Texas, we can
assume that that same information made its way to the cigarette companies, can't we?
A They live in America. They --
Q And so if we're going to hold the State of Texas responsible for having the common knowledge that smoking caused cancer
in the early '50s, we ought to hold the cigarette companies responsible for having that knowledge too, shouldn't we?
A I never said anything about holding anybody responsible.
Q Well, why in the world else is your testimony being offered in this case? Do you have any idea, any earthly idea at all?
A Why my testimony is being offered?
Q Right.
A To provide historical background, I suppose, to the court.
Q Well, don't you suspect that your testimony is going to be relied upon by these cigarette manufacturing defendants to suggest
to the jury that they should not be held responsible because this was a matter of common knowledge as Dr. Graham has testified
to and, therefore, we shouldn't be held liable in a products liability because everybody knew it was bad for you? Don't you
expect them to make that argument to the jury?
MR. STOVER: Jim, I'm going to object at this point. I realize that we're not allowed objections except with respect to privilege,
but you're getting argumentative with the witness. You posed a very long question that includes asking him to -- to surmise
legal theories, which he is not here to do, and I'm going to -- I'm going to suggest that the question is improper. If Dr. Graham
understands it, he can try to answer it, but I -- I really think it's not only improper form, it's just an improper question of this
witness.
Q (By Mr. Morris) Do you understand why your testimony is being offered in this case?
A That's the question now?
Q Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A In order to get historical background into the court.
Q Do you understand that your testimony is going to be offered to assist the tobacco companies on their side of the litigation?
A You know, what their thinking is, I do not know.
Q If we assume that it's your position that the State of Texas commonly knew that cigarette smoking caused cancer in the '50s,
and emphysema later on at some point, whenever it got into the literature, and that nicotine was the addictive agent in cigarettes
at some point, can we assume that every time the State of Texas knew through the dissemination of all this information that
the tobacco industry new also?
A Without responding to the second part of your question, the first part I don't agree with.
Q Okay. What -- what about the first part do you not agree with?
A I -- I'm -- it's my position, my opinion, that it was common knowledge that from many respected people, doctors, moral leaders,
educational leaders, athletes, from many quarters and many people there was a -- there was a -- an impressive indictment, an
impressive range of charges which would have -- it was common knowledge that those were -- some people were immediately
persuaded, some people seem not to have been persuaded. It's hard to tell what people were, but I'm not arguing that people --
everybody in Texas that it was common knowledge that it did. I'm arguing that it was common knowledge that it was alleged
that it did.
Q Okay. So you're saying that the only common knowledge that you're prepared to testify about, then, when this trial begins
September 29th is that it was common knowledge that these things had been alleged?
A In the '50s, the polls ask about have you heard. Later on, the polls ask if you believe.
Q And when was that asked?
A I don't have the first wording of -- I don't have the date of the first wording of the polls at all.
Q Can you give me your best guess?
A Late '60s.
Q Okay. So are we up till the -- to the late '60s in our position that it wasn't until the late '60s that people -- that we can show -- at
least through the documents that you've provided, that we can show that the public commonly knew that there was a causal link?
A The question -- could you reword, I'm sorry.
Q Can we agree that it's not until the late '60s that the State of Texas commonly knew that there was a causal link?
A No. I wouldn't say that. In the absence of polls, which is a form of data. Polls aren't perfect.
Q Uh-huh.
A In the absence of polls, there's still a lot of evidence that's not at the level of polls. It's not polls. There's a lot of evidence that
there was common knowledge and that was commonly believed. How many people actually would answer “I believe” other
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
than “I heard that.” I can't make an answer as to what the percentage of people is that would fit in either one of these categories
until the polls start sharply asking the question in a different way. I don't -- I don't know whether common knowledge -- it's a
mixture of I heard it and I believe it, and I've heard it and I -- I'm not going to say whether I believe it or not.
Q Well, will you say that if -- if all the polls show is that I've heard it, then we don't know what the person believes one way
or another. Will you agree with that?
A Any individual person, you know that there is this -- some people quit.
Q Well, you can answer that question simply. If all the polls says is, Well, we've heard about it, we don't know what that person
believes one way or the other?
A We don't what that -- I don't know what person you're talking about.
Q I'm talking about any person.
A We know that so many people believe it that they attack the product, they ban together in groups, they admonish their children
in firm tones. That's belief, that parental belief, the clergy, the educators who spend hours in classroom when they should be
doing arithmetic, some would say, are -- are talking about the evils of tobacco. I'd call that belief. A lot of rich evidence of belief.
Q They are advocates. Will you agree with that?
A They are advocates of don't spoke that stuff.
Q Okay. And will you agree that there were advocates of do smoke this stuff during the same time period?
A I'm sure. Yes.
Q And won't you agree that the principal advocate of that were the cigarette industry itself?
A I'm sure they were in favor of people smoking.
Q And in order to try to get that point across to the general public, they published things like ads that smoking a particular
cigarette was more healthy than another one?
A Industries advertise their products.
Q All right. And in fact, will you agree that there's at least some evidence that the tobacco industry pampered to teen smokers
and children in their advertizing campaigns using things like Joe Camel?
A I have no opinion about that. I've seen the controversy. I have no personal opinion.
Q Did you do any study to determine what portion of the population in the State of Texas are either illegal immigrants or legal
immigrants?
A I may have seen some figures. I don't remember them.
Q Did you furnish those figures to me in your disclosure?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A I don't know whether figures on illegal immigrants and immigrants generally in the State of Texas are in those files or not.
I don't know.
Q Sitting here today, can you give me an estimate percentagewise how many Americans -- how many Texans are illegal
immigrants or legal immigrants?
A Or legal immigrants?
Q Or legal. Legal or illegal.
A Themselves legal, not yet naturalized?
Q Right.
A That's not my expertise.
Q Will you agree with me that as far as the material you furnished here today, you can't testify as to whether or not any of that
material ever reached any illegal or legal immigrants?
A I can testify that the State, as well as private nonvolunteer -- “Volags,” “NGO” made strenuous efforts, or they made many
efforts -- it looked strenuous to me -- to produce Spanish language materials with respect to tobacco and its hazards and to
distribute those.
Q Will you agree with me that you haven't reviewed any significant amount of Spanish written materials regarding tobacco
and its health consequences?
A I don't know what “significant” means. There -- I have reviewed many.
Q Well, Doctor, in the box that you provided, the six boxes, four and a half that you produced to me, there was only one
reference that I could find, it's Bates Number 408525, that had anything in Spanish. And that's called The Smoking Habit.
Have you seen this document?
A I have.
Q All right. Other than this document, are you aware of any other box -- other document within the six boxes that you provided
to me in the disclosure that talks about smoking?
A Yes. In Spanish, yes. You missed some.
Q I missed some?
A Yes.
Q Okay. I'll look again.
Who are the other articles published by?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A They're published by the State Department of Health or the State Department of Education or the American Cancer Society
has Spanish language publications as I recall, maybe the American Lung Association. In our research, we found it difficult to
recapture the documents that the State sent out because the State doesn't keep good archives, but we did the best we could,
and we saw many Spanish language. What they represent is hard to determine. They represent an effort in Spanish, but I can't
say more than that at this time.
Q Okay. Were you required to obtain any type of approval from your university before you began this project?
A No.
Q All right. Back in 1991 when you first started talking to the cigarette industry and it may have been before that, I forget
which state you said was the first time you talked to the lawyers of the cigarette industry, but at that time, did you go speak
to anyone at your university and say, look, these guys are asking me to do some research for them, will it present any type
of conflict of interest?
A No.
Q Do you have any guidelines regarding conflict of interest at University of North Carolina?
A There are broad guidelines which are broad.
Q Okay. And did you conclude that there wasn't anything wrong with you doing this research and the case on behalf of the
tobacco industries?
A Yes. Professors consult.
Q Is UNC Wilmington to any extent supported by tobacco money?
A I don't know.
Q What about UNC Chapel Hill?
A I don't know, but it's -- I don't know. It's in the State of North Carolina. I don't know.
Q Does the tobacco industry contribute fairly heavily to both of those institutions?
A I don't know, but --
Q In terms of grants and --
A I don't know. I don't know.
Q You've never seen that in any advertisement?
A I'm sure they contribute. You said “heavily.” I don't know what “heavily” means, but I'm sure they contribute. They're a
big industry in the state.
Q Okay. And so would it be fair for us to assume that UNC Chapel Hill and Wilmington may receive some funding from the
tobacco industry for research that's done there, albeit not your own?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A You said is that reasonable?
Q Yes.
A It's not my expertise, but I think it's reasonable.
Q All right. Do you feel like there's still a controversy regarding whether the cigarette industry manufacturer of cigarettes in
such a composition to provide a specific amount of nicotine --
A I don't --
Q -- do you think that's still a matter of controversy?
A Of course, I don't know anything about what they do.
Q From your review of the historical data?
A Yeah. Historical discussion of that question?
Q Yeah.
A I think that's receded in the discussion that I read. It was very -- it was a big issue in '94. It's not as big as it was.
Q It may not be as big an issue, but would you say that there is still a controversy about whether or not the tobacco industry
cigarette companies provide cigarettes with specific amounts of nicotine?
A That the cigarettes are manufactured to have nicotine in them?
Q Specific amounts of nicotine.
A I don't know. That's manufacturing. I don't know about manufacturing.
Q Would you say it's still a matter of controversy in the literature as far as from a historical perspective looking back at the
literature?
A I don't know whether it is or not. It was in '94.
Q Okay. Would you say it's still a matter of controversy as to whether or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? Would you
say that's still a matter of controversy in the American public?
A In my materials that I read in the '90s recently, most recent materials, I don't -- I can't say there's no controversy, but it's --
that's not a big issue of debate. There are bigger issues of debate.
Q Would you say that the opinion of most -- would you say that there are any credible sources out there suggesting that cigarette
smoking does not cause lung cancer?
A I couldn't cite one.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q Can you cite any credible sources out there that suggest cigarette smoking does not cause heart disease?
A May cause.
Q Who?
A May cause.
Q May cause.
A Right now I couldn't cite one.
Q Okay.
A This is medical -- you're speaking of medical?
Q Right. But I'm asking you of your historical review. I mean, is --.
A In the historical, I couldn't cite one.
Q All right. Can you cite any credible source that has suggested recently or that has popularly accepted recently that emphysema
is not caused by cigarette smoking?
A None comes to mind.
Q Okay. In reviewing your information, the six boxes or so of documents that you compiled over the last several months, have
you prepared any handwritten reports regarding those documents?
A Occasionally I will write out something for a day or so to read the next day --
Q Uh-huh.
A -- to fix in my mind and then throw it away.
Q You throw it away. So you haven't kept any of your handwritten notes?
A No. I throw them away after I've fixed it.
Q Have you prepared any charts or diagrams which will summarize the documents that you have reviewed?
A No.
Q No?
A Charts or diagrams, no. I haven't done that.
Q Do you anticipate doing that between now and the time of trial?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Well, based upon my one experience at trial, I believe that I will -- I expect to be asked to select some material for display.
I mean, that's what happened before.
Q When you say selection of material for display, do you mean pull out particular articles, have them blown up and show
them to the jury?
A That's what we did before.
Q Okay. I'm talking about an independent summarization of material into a -- into a diagram or into a chart.
A I don't know if I'll be asked to do that or not.
Q Who would ask you to do that?
A The lawyers.
Q Okay. The lawyers for the cigarette companies?
A Yes.
Q All right.
A I guess. I'm not a lawyer. Somebody else might ask me.
Q Okay. Between now and the time of trial, do you intend to conduct any polling in Texas?
A No.
Q Between now and the time of trial, do you intend to ask anyone to conduct any polling in Texas?
A No.
Q Mr. Barringer included?
A Right. Right.
Q Okay. The last kind of area of inquiry I'd like to go through with you, we talked about the three books that you published
prior to 1991. Have you published any books since 1991?
A Yes.
Q Okay. What books have you published?
A Two.
Q Okay. Can you tell me what the title of those books are?
A In 1992 I published a book called Losing Time, The Industrial Policy Debate in the United States.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q The Industrial Policy Debate?
A Yes.
Q And what was that about?
A It's was the question about whether the United States should, in order to become internationally competitive or remain
internationally competitive, adopt, develop an industrial policy along the lines that the Japanese are said to have.
Q Is there anything in that book that relates to smoking?
A I don't think so.
Q What was the next book?
A The next book was A Limited Bounty, a History of the United States since 1945.
Q And what was that about?
A That's a history of the United States since 1945. It's kind of a textbook.
Q How long is that book?
A Three hundred forty-five pages.
Q That's pretty short for the entire history of the United States?
A Oh, it's very --
Q 1900 to 1945, will you agree --
A I'm sorry. I gave the wrong dates. Perhaps I gave the wrong dates. It's 1945 to the present.
Q Okay. But still a short book?
A I agree with you about that, and we're -- the market niche we're aiming at dictated a somewhat compact book.
Q Okay. What was the market that you were looking at?
A People who want to adopt or read a relatively short well-written history of the United States since World War II that pays
significant attention to all main themes, including the environment, and many other things. This is my book. It's my book.
Q Okay. Including the environment. Does -- does it discuss the cigarette industry?
A The cigarette industry. It discusses the smoking and health controversy. I don't think the cigarette industry as much.
Q And who is this book published by?
A McGraw-Hill.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q When was it first published?
A 1996.
Q Where would it be for sale?
A I wish I could tell you in any book store.
Q Okay.
A That's not true.
Q Is it a Texas relied upon by university students or --
A Yes. And I hope in Texas there have been some adoptions, but I think you'd -- a book store would order it, but --
Q Do you have any coauthors?
A No.
Q And how much of the book was devoted to the cigarette controversy in America?
A I haven't looked at it for that, but I think you'd find a discussion of it in '64.
Q okay.
A And you might find another discussion of it later on toward the end. I don't remember But it's there once or twice.
Q Was this textbook peer reviewed?
A Yes.
Q. Were any of the papers that you have furnished to me in your disclosure re relied upon in forming the opinions that you
state in your textbook?
A My research on this subject clearly informed what I wrote in that book.
Q And who peer reviewed that book for you?
A They sent it out to six or seven people. They kept them anonymous so that I don' know.
Q Do you discuss this -- this review of what was common knowledge to most Americans in that textbook?
A I can't remember how I handled the issue. I often can't remember until I open the book myself.
Q Have you done any evaluation whatsoever as to whether or not documents you furnished to me in your disclosure would be
documents regularly -- regularly reviewed or read by teenagers?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Have I done any evaluation?
Q Yes, sir.
A I've done no evaluation, but --
Q I understand you have an opinion about it?
A Yeah. Right.
Q But I don't want you opinion about it.
A Okay.
Q I just want to know whether you performed any evaluation.
A Okay.
Q Did anyone on your behalf perform an evaluation as to whether or not any of those documents reached teenagers?
A No.
Q Okay. Now give me your opinion. What do you think? Do you think that the documents that you furnished to me are documents
that likely would have been read and reviewed by teenagers at the time that they were published?
A The documents reflect a broad public debate discussion about smoking at every level. I make the assumption that teenagers
inhabited that world and very soon encountered parental, school, religious leaders, athletic coaches, that they very soon
encounter that very same warnings.
Q Okay. You mentioned the word “warning,” and that's the first time that that's come up today.
Will you agree with me that many of the documents that were furnished to us are not documents that warn anyone about the ill
effects of cigarette smoking but are merely informative articles about smoking and self-consequences?
A The question was many of the documents?
Q Yes, sir.
A Many being -- many are informative, and many are informative and carry a clear warning, and many are mostly warning.
I -- I don't know how to respond to the question.
Q Okay. Will you agree that there are other things that are in the public domain that are not contained in your disclosure to me
that took a different position with regard to cigarette smoking and its hazardous effects?
A There are certain other things in the public domain that I didn't give you.
Q Okay. For instance, there -- I didn't get to see a copy of any -- any of the ads where tobacco was talked about, especially
smokeless tobacco, as a safe alternative to cigarettes, but you will agree that that was in the public domain?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A There may -- I think there are some there scattered about in the newspapers. If you looked in the newspapers, I think you'd
see some.
Q Okay. And certainly athletes like Earl Campbell, a Texan, Walt Garrison, a Texan, were used to influence the public to begin
using smokeless tobacco. You will agree with that?
A If the question is, Am I aware that athletes were -- appeared in advertising, I'm aware.
Q Yeah. And you will also agree that certain people in the entertainment industry have been paid by tobacco to advertise their
products?
A I don't know that they were paid, but I know from my research that some celebrities in the entertainment industry appear
occasionally in ads. I know that.
Q Well -- and you've reviewed literature that suggests that Sylvester Stalone, for instance, was paid half a million dollars to
smoke a particular brand in cigarette in all of his movies?
A I saw that, I think.
Q Do you think that was done to influence the public to smoke the same type of cigarettes?
A I have no direct knowledge of why they did it.
Q But it is a historical piece of information that we've not been supplied with, correct?
A I don't know whether in that -- we, you mean, in the disclosure --
Q Yes, sir.
A I don't know whether that story is in there or not. I saw it, which suggests that it might be in there. Maybe I saw it in my
general reading. Maybe I saw it.
Q Okay. Do you attach any historical significance to the testimony that was given by the chairman of Liggett a couple of days
ago in the Florida case?
A I try not to attach historical significance to things that are so close to the present.
Q Okay. Well, when the Japanese surrendered to Admiral Nimitz at the end of World War II --
A That was immediately obviously of historical significance.
Q That was of significance, historical significance?
A I would have agreed.
Q Yeah. When President Nixon resigned from office.
A I immediately agree.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
Q All right. Are you aware -- aware of any act by any tobacco company executive that is of greater significance than the
admissions made by the chairman of Liggett earlier this week?
A I think that this will take time. This is the historian. I think that this will take time to know the significance of any of that.
This is not in the category of Nixon resigning and flying off or the category of Admiral Nimitz taking the sword or whatever.
It's in the category of it's going to take some time to know that.
Q How did it hit you as a historian? And being that you've been testifying now for the tobacco industry for five years or longer
and, you know, they're the folks that have retained you to be involved in this enterprise, when one of the chiefs comes out
and says, you know, we've been withholding information and we've been doing things that I guess someone could say looks
unethical from a business standpoint. Does that concern you at all?
A The question is does it concern me or -- is that the question?
Q Yes.
A I don't know what concern.
Q Well, from the standpoint of whether or not you're doing the right thing by testifying here today?
A Well, that has nothing to do with that. No, it didn't evoke those feelings in me.
Q Okay. Fair enough.
MR. MORRIS: I believe those are all the questions I have.
MR. PURVIS: Jim, I'm advised that the 1954 Gallup poll that Professor Graham referred to and which was produced is identified
as Bates Number 404065, and I hand you that number.
Could we take just a couple of quick minutes and caucus and see if we've got anything?
MR. MORRIS: Sure.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're off the record. The time is 12:39.
(A recess was taken.)
(Deposition Exhibit 1 was marked.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We're back on the record. The time is 12:49.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. PURVIS:
Q Professor Graham, I just have a couple of questions.
Do you recall at the beginning of the deposition when Mr. Morris asked you about a document title Otis L. Graham, Ph.D.?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83The State of Texas, v. THE AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34662921...
A Yes.
Q And I'm handing you what I've marked as Graham Deposition Exhibit 1 and ask if that is the same document you and Mr.
Morris were discussing earlier?
A Yes.
Q Do you recognize that as your expert disclosure in this litigation matter?
A Yes.
Q Does that expert report accurately reflect the opinions you anticipate giving at the time of trial in this matter?
A Yes.
Q Does it accurately describe the materials that you have relied on in arriving at that opinion?
A Yes.
MR. PURVIS: No other questions.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This concludes the deposition. The time is 12:50.
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84
