Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34673167 (PDF)
1997 WL 34673167 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
11th Judicial Circuit, General Jurisdiction Division.
Dade County
Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs,
v.
RJ REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY, et al., Defendants.
No. 94-08273 CA (20).
July 16, 1997.
Telephone Deposition of Lacey K. Ford, Ph.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Dade County, Florida
Name of Expert: Lacey K. Ford, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
1500 One Peachtree Center
301 Peachtree Street
Atlanta, Georgia
Taken before Jack Lee Moore Court Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of Florida at Large, pursuant to Notice
of Taking Deposition filed in the above cause.
[Note: 2 illegible in original document]
Thereupon:
LACEY K. FORD, Ph.D. a witness named in the notice heretofore filed, called by the plaintiff, was first duly sworn in the
above cause by court reporter PAMELA WITHROW, and testified on his oath as follows:
DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. HOAG:
Q State your name for the record, please.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Lacey Ford.
Q Have you been deposed before?
A Yes, I have.
Q How many times?
A Once.
Q What were the circumstances when you were deposed the one other time?
A I was deposed in the Clark versus Liggett case as an expert witness.
Q Clark versus Liggett?
A Yes.
Q How long ago was that?
A That was in September of last year, September 1996.
MR. HOAG: Off the record.
(Discussion held off the record.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q September of 1996. That is when you were an expert in the Clark versus Liggett case; is that correct?
A I was deposed in September of 1996.
Q Who hired you to be a witness in this case?
A I was working with Latham and Watson law firm in this case.
Q Where were they from?
A The attorney that I worked with was out of the New York office.
Q When did you first start to work on that case?
A I believe that I first started to work on that case in February of 1996, but approximately February in any case.
Q What was your role in that case?
A I was designated as a historian and as an expert on public awareness issues.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q When you say “public awareness issues,” what do you mean?
A I'm sorry. They are strong public awareness of smoking and potential health hazards arising from smoking.
Q When you say “potential health hazards,” what do you mean when you use that word?
A As I did my research I was on the lookout for--I was looking to find any-- well, there were various levels of what level of
public awareness there was at various periods of time throughout American History of health problems that are attributed, or
possibly attributed, or alleged to be as a result of cigarette smoking. Actually that included other kinds of smoking as well, but
my focus was on cigarette smoking.
Q Did you research when any members of the American public became aware of the fact that smoking actually does have health
hazards rather than potential health hazards?
A Well, since I am not a medical expert, what I could do with that is what I say as an example the level of awareness, the things
that were covered, not to determine the accuracy of any particular piece of scientific or medical research, but can only serve
as an expert as to what is reported, or what awareness was, and what information was available. If it is medical information I
would not be in a position to judge the quality of that from a scientific standpoint of accurate information.
Q When did you first become aware that smoking was an actual health hazard?
A Let me ask for clarification. Do you mean when did I, as an individual in my lifetime, become aware that there was information
out there suggesting that smoking causes certain health problems?
Q No. My question is when did you first become aware that smoking actually does cause health problems, if ever?
A Never.
MR. KOETHE: Are you referring to this connection with his work as an expert in this case, or in the Clark case?
MR. HOAG: No. I am asking him as a person when he first became aware that smoking actually is and does cause health
problems, if he ever did become aware of that.
MR. KOETHE: I object to the form of the question.
MR. MCCONNELL: This is Mr. McConnell, the phone connection is bad here. Is it all right if we just waive to co-counsel
to make objections?
MR. HOAG: Fine.
MR. MCCONNELL: Thank you.
THE WITNESS: The way I must answer your question is that since my earlier boyhood I received information from my parents
and from the public school system and a variety of other places that there was an abundance of evidence that cigarette smoking
caused health problems. My own personal decision is that there was enough evidence suggesting that I was unwilling to take
up smoking.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Have you been personally convinced that smoking causes lung cancer, for example?
A I am personally convinced that statistical evidence alone is suggestive of enough high risk that I am unwilling to take that risk.
Q That doesn't answer my question.
MR. KOETHE: I think it does, John.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well are you personally convinced that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? Is the answer yes or no, and then you can
explain.
MR. KOETHE: Again, he is not offered as a medical witness. I want to make sure that the record is clear on that point. He is
not proffered as a medical expert. He is not here to discuss those issues. Just to answer the question.
THE WITNESS: Again, the I am not a medical expert. I can simply say that I think that cigarette smoking increases significantly
the risk of contracting lung cancer.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Does cigarette smoking cause lung cancer?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I would like you to answer the question. Does cigarette smoking cause lung cancer, yes or no?
A I can't answer that as a yes or no question. Again, I am not a medical expert and I don't--I am not an expert on causation of
lung cancer. I already told you that the evidence is impressive enough that I don't want to smoke.
Q As you sit here today you don't know whether or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer; is that correct?
A Considering I wouldn't have a medical or scientific basis to state that declaration within the authority.
Q Based upon everything that you read and heard since you have been born, you don't have enough information in your mind
to know whether or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer; is that correct?
A That is not what I said. I certainly have enough information to be warned of the danger and make the decision that the risk is
too great for me to take. I am saying I am not a doctor or a biochemist expert to make a statement of causation. I already said that I
am a lay person and in terms of my own decision I think cigarette smoking carries risks, significant risks and I don't want to do it.
Q Does smoking kill people?
MR. KOETHE: Objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Does it?
A Well, again, I can't answer that question as a medical expert.
Q I am not asking you to.
A In my view, as a lay person, not as an expert anyway, there is significant evidence to believe that cigarette smokers shorten
their lives by their decision to smoke, but that is not anything that carries any special expertise with it.
Q Do you have enough information based upon all the information that you have been provided to decide whether or not
cigarette smoking kills people?
MR. KOETHE: Asked and answered. You can answer. That is not the question that you answered yet, sir.
THE WITNESS: 1 thought I answered that question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is your answer no, you don't?
A No. My answer is not no. I just--
Q Do you have sufficient information?
A I have enough--I have had and for a long time, enough information to know that there are risks which I personally--and this
is a non-medical person, but a believer that significant risks are associated with and including a variety of diseases associated
with cigarette smoking.
All I am trying to say is I don't have any medical expertise to make a medical or scientific causation.
Q I didn't ask you about risk factors, although that is also a medical term. What I asked you is in your opinion whether or not
cigarette smoking kills people. Do you have enough information to know whether or not cigarette smoking kills people?
MR. KOETHE: Asked and answered.
MR. HOAG: I haven't yet heard an answer to that question.
THE WITNESS: I keep restating my answer, that I certainly have seen enough information to convince me as a lay person that
people who make the decision to smoke are likely to shorten their lives as a result of that decision.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So you are convinced that cigarette smoking kills people?
MR. KOETHE: Asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You are convinced, yes or no, that cigarette smoking kills people?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I can't give a yes or no answer to that question because it would imply that I have certain medical or scientific expertise
to answer that.
I told you again and again that that is my personal belief as a lay person, that cigarette smoking is detrimental to your health
and that is why I decided not to do it. I want to make it clear that that is simply my personal opinion.
Q So you don't have enough information to know whether or not cigarette smoking kills people, but you do have enough
information to reach the conclusion that it is detrimental to health; is that correct?
MR. KOETHE: I am going to instruct the witness not to answer the question, John. You're asking the same question about ten
times. Now, lets get on with something else. He answered your question.
MR. HOAG: That is a different question that I am asking you and you know it. You also know that you can't instruct him not
to answer the question.
MR. KOETHE: I am instructing him not to answer.
MR. HOAG: There is no rule that says that you can do that. Show me the rule that says that you can instruct the witness not
to answer the question.
MR. KOETHE: It is harassing and you are asking the same question over and over again and it mischaracterizes his testimony.
MR. HOAG: If you want to suspend this deposition and go to the judge and say that I am asking a harassing question, feel free
to do that. You cannot tell him not to answer a question and you know that. You can't.
MR. KOETHE: John, ask your question. He is not answer that question.
MR. HOAG: I think you have take depositions in front of me before.
MR. KOETHE: I sure have.
MR. HOAG: You are the guy that said that you were always polite and followed the rules; right? You show me the rule that
says that you can tell him not to answer my question. What rule is that?
MR. KOETHE: I am not going to cite you the rule.
MR. HOAG: There aren't any rules and you know it.
Now, she is going to read back the question and he is going to answer it and he can say that he doesn't know if he wants to.
(Thereupon the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: I am going to object to the question on the basis of form and it has been asked and answered. It assumes that
that is what he testified.
Mischaracterization of the testimony as to whether or not he said he didn't have any conversation so it is a total distortion of his
testimony. Go ahead and answer the question if you can. If you understand it, Professor, go ahead and answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
THE WITNESS: Repeat the question one more time.
MR. HOAG: I would appreciate it if you stop giving the speaking objections that are solely for the purpose of coaching the
witness. I understand you told me that you followed the rules and you don't do that.
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: Same objection. You can answer.
THE WITNESS: Well, I feel like your question mischaracterizes my earlier response. I will try to answer the question in a
straightforward fashion as I can.
I certainly have abundant information to convince me that cigarette smoking shortens lives, or it is likely to shorten the length
of those who make the decision to smoke. I render that opinion with the understanding that I am not a medical doctor or a
scientist with expertise in medical causation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q What do you base your conclusion on?
A I based my conclusion on the abundance of information on--first of all, that I received as an individual growing up, and then
of course my research into the public awareness on smoking and health hazards of smoking issues as well. A survey of a wide
variety of information on all kinds of sources.
Q So prior to the time that you did the special research you hadn't reached that conclusion; is that correct?
A That is correct.
Q Well, you just told me that part of your basis for your conclusion was research that you have done; didn't you?
A Well, perhaps I should clarify that. Are you asking about my personal views on smoking, or about my basis for my expert
opinion in this case?
Q I was asking you the basis for your conclusions that you just gave a second ago, which was your response to my question
on whether or not smoking kills people.
MR. KOETHE: I would like the court reporter to read back the witness' answer to that earlier question.
(Thereupon the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: You may want to restate the question or re-read the question.
MR. HOAG: We need to re-read the follow-up question.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: We better have the witness clarify that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
THE WITNESS: I said that is incorrect. Incorrect.
(Discussion held off the record.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q After the court reporter read a couple of questions and answers and your lawyers response was that was read back where you
said was not your recollection of what you said; correct?
MR. KOETHE: We'll let the witness answer the question first.
THE WITNESS: I am afraid I have to ask you to repeat the question.
MR. HOAG: Do you want me to repeat the last one I asked.
THE WITNESS: No. The question that you wanted an answer to right now.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, the question I want an answer to right now is the last one I asked.
A I am asking you to repeat that one again.
Q When the court reporter read back your response was that the way you heard your response?
A No. It was not. I said that is incorrect. She read it out as that is correct.
Q What is your recollection was incorrect?
MR. KOETHE: If you understand what he is talking about.
THE WITNESS: I am not sure that I do because the questions and the answers, but I will try to clarify it for you as best as I can.
My awareness of the health risks associated with cigarette smoking sort of is in two forms. One is my personal story of what I
learned growing up and making decisions that I had to make and then that would be my own personal knowledge.
Then the research that I did would be--was into the public awareness of what the community knows, and not just what you had
experienced, but what other people and other time periods and other places would have known. Together both of those things
make up the information or the knowledge that I have to this point in time.
It is unclear to me whether you are asking for information about my personal decision or regarding my expert opinions that
I reached in this case.
MR. KOETHE: Before we move on I would like to make a statement for the record in response to an earlier question the court
reporter read back and the answer as correct and that is a transcription error. I am sitting here with the witness and his answer
was incorrect and I would like to ask Ms. Withrow to confirm it that the answer that the witness stated to that particular question.
MS. WITHROW: I have not been transcribing this.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: Do you recall that?
MS. WITHROW: I do.
MR. HOAG: I want to make sure that the record reflects not being here in person, what the actual response was and it must
have been garbled over the phone line.
MR. KOETHE: Yes. If you wrote down the answer as correct and the answer was incorrect to that particular question. I made
my statement.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Now, to clarify for you, the witness, or my question right now is about your awareness, or your personal knowledge, and
when you first became aware of anything that you would consider to be a health hazard attributable to cigarette smoking. So
now with that in context, did you, at any time, become aware if cigarette smoking kills people?
MR. KOETHE: Asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Well, again, I feel like that I already answered that question. I said that with the information that I had at my disposal I became
convinced that cigarette smokers shorten their lives by the decision to smoke.
Q So is that another way of saying that at some point you became convinced that cigarette smoking kills people?
A I think it is a way of saying that it heightens your risk of dying at an earlier age of a disease that would--might have been
preventable had you not smoked. That is a very clear statement, I think, of my position.
Q How long had you become aware of that?
A Well, certainly to the extent as a process where my parents taught me that at a very early age, and in health classes in
elementary school I received a message, so I don't know that I could put an exact date on it, but a certain time at a very early
age I became aware of that.
Q How old are you now?
A Forty-five.
Q Now, do you recall ever receiving any competing messages regarding whether or not cigarette smoking was healthful.
MR. KOETHE: Objection to the form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I never received any messages that cigarette smoking was a healthy thing to do.
Q Did you ever view any images that indicated that cigarette smoking was a healthy thing to do?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I never viewed any images that conveyed that meaning to me.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Have you ever heard the phrase, “Winston tastes good like a cigarette should”?
A Yes, I have.
Q You heard that as a child; didn't you?
A Yes, I did.
Q Did you ever hear the cartoon character Fred Flintstone say that?
A I do not personally recall hearing Fred Flintstone say that as a child. I have been doing my research for the case, seen
videotapes of the Flintstones showing Winston sponsored.
Q Are you aware that millions of children heard Fred Flintstone say every week, “Winston tastes good like a cigarette should,”
right?
A The Flintstone show was marketed as an adult comedy in prime time, so I know that it was shown primarily for adults. I don't
have any information about the actual viewership of the show.
Q You didn't bother to find out what the viewership of that program was when you did your research as an expert in this case;
correct?
A Well, as I said, it was a network show on prime time that had a significant viewership, but it was an adult comedy sort of
inspired by Jackie Gleason and the Honeymooners, and not a show, not a childrens show on a Saturday morning at the time
it was sponsored by Winston.
Q You were a child during the time that the show was on; weren't you?
A Yes, I was.
Q Did you ever watch it?
A Yes, I did.
Q Did you ever watch Beverly Hillbillies?
A Yes, I did.
Q Do you remember what cigarette company sponsored them?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I believe that Winston sponsored Beverly Hillbillies. That is from my more recent research rather than teen-age memories.
Q Do you remember Granny on the Beverly Hillbillies?
A Yes, I do.
Q She would say “Winston tastes good as a cigarette had oughtta,” and do you remember that?
A I frankly can't say that I remember that, but I am willing to accept that as your characterization.
Q You and I are in the same age group. I remember this as a kid. That is just my memory.
A I don't happen to remember that in particular.
Q Do you remember cowboy shows; right?
A A few, yes.
Q Do you remember Gunsmoke; right?
A Yes, I do.
Q Do you remember Jim Arness starred in Gunsmoke?
A I do.
Q Do you remember doing cigarette commercials during the show?
A Again, I think my recollection is that Gunsmoke, which was again an adult show rather than--it came on at 10:00 at night
and at that time it was on the air it was sponsored by cigarette companies. I forget which one.
Q You watched it as a kid; didn't you?
A Honestly I don't recall.
Q You don't recall watching Gunsmoke as a child?
A I don't recall whether I was allowed to watch Gunsmoke as a child or not. I recall having seen Gunsmoke, but it may have
been reruns at a later time.
Q So have you ever bothered to find out how many children watched Gunsmoke?
A I do not know how many children.
Q How many programs did cigarette companies sponsor during the time that you were a child, television programs?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I couldn't give you an exact number of the number of shows that they sponsored. Cigarette advertising was certainly permitted
on television at that time and cigarettes were a major national consumer product. Like others, these were advertised on television
including sponsorships of various shows. I can't give you a number, a precise number of shows, no, I couldn't.
Q Do you know how many children every week watched the programs sponsored by cigarette companies during the time that
television broadcast had cigarette ads?
A No, I do not.
Q Do you know how many jingles there were about ow good cigarettes tasted?
A No.
Q Do you know how many millions of dollars cigarette companies spent to get their message to children and other members
of the American public?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you?
A Off the top of my head I can't get you a figure for advertising. I have seen it in the media and the report and in the research that
I have done I have seen, from time to time, in the public press advertising figures. I can't recall what it was off the top of my head.
Q Do you know how many hours children spend watching television?
MR. KOETHE: When?
MR. HOAG: Pardon me, is that the witness?
MR. KOETHE: No. That is me. This is Koethe. The question is vague as to what time period you are referring to.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is there any time period in the history of television when you can answer that question, sir?
A I may have heard or run across that information for various time periods and some periods I covered and I couldn't, off the
top of my head, give you a figure, an hour figure for a particular time period.
Q Was it part of your equation as you are working as an expert, and by that I mean was part of the equation to figure out how
many thousands of hours children and adults were exposed to messages from cigarette companies?
A It was certainly part of my project to ascertain what impact advertising had on public awareness of health hazards of smoking
and I took pains to try to measure that impact knowing, in fact, that there was a significant amount of advertising undertaken.
I did not attempt to quantify a number of jingles or anything like that, but rather to measure the impact on public awareness
of health hazards related to smoking.
Q Have you ever done any research regarding that health effects of smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: Vague. Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Have you ever published any research about the health effects of smoking?
A Well, I stated earlier that I am not a lab scientist or a physician. I wouldn't be doing research into health, if that is your
question. I wouldn't be doing that kind of history and I wouldn't do that kind of research.
Q Have you ever heard of the Virginia Slims cigarette?
A Yes.
Q The name Virginia Slims, what does that denote, if you know?
A I honestly don't know.
Q Do you know what the word slim means?
A Yes, I do.
Q What does that mean?
A It means thin.
Q Did you know that Virginia Slims cigarettes was marketed to the women; correct?
A I realize that the Virginia Slims brand sponsored the professional women's tennis circuit, I believe, for a while.
Q They called that the Virginia Slims Tournament; is that right?
A Well, I believe it was the Virginia Slims was the tour sponsorship for the women's professional tennis at one point.
Q They would give at the end of the tournament, give the trophy to the young female tennis star after she won the tournament;
correct, the Virginia Slims trophy; right?
A I assume the tournament organizer gives the trophy to the winner.
Q Did you do any measurement of what kind of impact that kind of marketing would have on children and adults concerning
their beliefs about health effects of cigarettes?
A Certain studies show the impact that all types of information had upon the public awareness of health hazards of cigarette
smoking and found that the awareness of the potential health hazards of cigarette smoking were high and growing throughout the
period that Virginia Slims was sponsoring the professional tennis circuit. It was concluded from that evidence that potentially
there was no impact on certain--no impact towards lessening public awareness.
Q Was the number of women smoking going up at that time; do you know?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: What time period are you referring to?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I said the time that the Virginia Slims cigarettes were being advertised, in the time period when the tennis tournaments was
sponsored by Virginia Slims.
A To the best of my recollection the number of Americans smoking was declining fairly substantially during that period and
the rate of decline was lower among women than men, but that it was declining across the board is my recollection of the status
and the early 1970's, which I believe is the period of the Virginia Slims sponsorship.
Q Now, was Virginia Slims sponsorship before or after the broadcast ban on cigarette advertising?
A I can't recall. I don't know exactly when the sponsorship began. I couldn't answer that question.
Q Do you know when the broadcast ban on advertising began?
A Yes, I do.
Q When?
A That was in January of 1991, I believe.
Q It is your recollection that the Virginia Slims tournament started to occur somewhere around 1971; correct?
A Honestly I do not recollect exactly when the Virginia Slims began. I don't know.
Q Now, are you aware of whether or not the broadcast ban that began in 1991 had any impact on the people or the number of
people who became smokers, or continued to smoke cigarettes?
A Again, I think that I am not an expert on why individuals decided to smoke, or why individuals decided to quit smoking in
any particular point in time. I don't think that I can--certainly some history has expertise to pinpoint that sort of thing attributed
to some single thing. It varies very much from side to side. I am from the research and I have done--I can tell you that the
literature, there is millions of Americans quitting smoking during the 1970's and the overall percentage of Americans who
smoked declined rather substantially during that period.
Q It decreased rather substantially after the broadcast ban was put into effect; correct?
A The decline, as I recall, began before the broadcast ban went into effect and continued thereafter.
Q Have you seen graphs to show how the decline occurred beginning in the '70s and going down into the '80s? Have you seen
graphs that depict that?
A I don't recall specifically seeing graphs. I have seen a lot of information about the percentage of Americans who smoke at
various points. Again, in the late 1940's and continuing to the present.
Q You don't have an opinion as to whether or not that decrease in number of smokers was caused, in any way, by the ban on
broadcast and the advertising of cigarette ads; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I think this--it would be--in my expertise it would be impossible to attribute the decline to that single factor.
Q Well, do you attribute any part of that decline to the ban on broadcasting ads for cigarettes?
A I attributed in a great deal the decline to the public awareness of health hazards of smoking.
Q So it is just a coincidence that it went down dramatically during the period of time that broadcast ads were banned; is that
correct?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. It has been asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is that correct?
A I can't accept, off the top of my head, the proposition that you are stating. Again, my recollection is that there was--let me
start over and restate the answer.
I don't accept or reject the proposition included in the question. It is my recollection that the decline in the percentage of
Americans who smokes was already under way and had been under way for some time and at that time when the ban on cigarette
advertising on television went into effect.
Q My question, I will rephrase the question.
If you could answer it as best you can with a yes or no and then clarify all you want, I would appreciate it.
Did the ban on broadcast ads for cigarettes have any impact whatsoever on the number of people smoking in the 1970's and
the 1980's?
A I simply think it is impossible to isolate any single factor for some very specific things that you are trying to do and say that
it has this or that impact. I don't have as a historian, a way of measuring that one way or the other.
What I can measure is there were very high levels of public awareness on health hazards of smoking long before the ban on
cigarette advertising and substantially there was an awareness that people were to quit smoking and helped influence other
people not to start. Beyond that you're asking a question that is beyond my ability to answer with any precision.
Q Do you know whether there were any high levels of awareness of the content of television advertising that was ever advertised
related to cigarettes during the time that cigarette advertising was allowed on television?
MR. KOETHE: I am going to object to that question. It is unclear as to what you are referring to as to high level awareness
and by whom.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Can you answer?
MR. KOETHE: If you understand the question. I don't want you to speculate.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q I am talking about the same time, were you able to ascertain the level of awareness of whether or not there were health
hazards associated with cigarettes.
A In a sense, or any answer I would give on that would be speculation. I know that the shows on which cigarette advertising was
run had a viewership. Beyond that I do not know what the response of those viewers were to the advertisements that were run
in any way except that the advertisements did not diminish or even prevent the increase of very high levels of public awareness
that cigarette smoking was potentially hazardous to your health.
Q Do you know that the advertisement had any impact on individuals decisions on whether or not to become a smoker?
A I'm sorry, I missed that question.
Q Do you know whether or not advertising had any impact on any individual's decision on whether or not to become a smoker?
A I do not.
Q Have you ever done any research about that?
A Again, I am not a psychologist. I am not an expert on what factors go into people making individual decisions. My expertise
as a historian is in what the public was aware of at a given period of time, and while the television ads that you are referring to
were running, the public was very aware of health risks of smoking, and those levels of awareness even rose during the time
period that you are asking me about.
Q Were they aware that certain cigarettes had less tar and more taste during that period of time?
A They--I am generally aware that there was advertisement advertising less tar and more taste. Whether the consumer agrees
with that, I don't know.
Q What does that mean, less tar and more taste? Do you have any idea?
A I am not an expert in interpreting advertising either. I know less tar means lower tar content in cigarettes.
Q What is your understanding of the tar association or relationship to health hazards?
A Well, again I am not a chemist. I don't know that and I can't give you a precise answer on exactly how tar affects health. The
researchers of hazards of health smoking believe, at least according to public reports, that it would be desirable to reduce the
level of tar in cigarettes and some consumers, at least, seem to prefer cigarettes that are lower in tar.
In the later reports more scientists suggested--that I read--suggested that it was unclear that there were health benefits from
reducing tar. I am not an expert. I can't evaluate those various reports.
Q When did you read those reports?
A You mean when they were published?
Q No. When did you read those reports that you are referring to about tar and its impact?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Well, again, I guess I have to give a two-part answer to that. As an individual I read stories about tar and cigarettes from
the time I started reading the newspaper regularly at Age 10, but my testimony that is given in this deposition is based on the
research that I did concerning this case.
Q So your information about tar and the impact of filter cigarettes and things like that on tar, that comes from recent research;
correct?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Mischaracterization of the testimony.
MR. HOAG: Correct. I am asking him if that is correct, and he can say yes or no.
MR. KOETHE: I am objecting to the mischaracterization of the answer that he just gave you and I can't think that it would be
intentional. The answer was very clear and he based his response on two things. The paper that he was reading when he was
growing up at the beginning of Age 10, and his more recent research.
MR. HOAG: You just testified and now we should swear you in. What is the point here of your speaking objection? You are
trying to key in the witness on what you want him to respond to rather than give me an answer.
MR. KOETHE: The point of the objection is it is an improper mischaracterization of his testimony.
MR. HOAG: If the question that I asked him was not correct, all he had to do was say it is not correct and explain. You know
that so let me just try this again. I am going to read back the question and then the witness can respond in any way he wants
to, and if you cue him on how you want him to respond, we can see what he says.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Have you looked at the research at whether or not the research happened a long time ago or not?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Let me restate the answer that I gave a moment ago. My awareness of the tar issue comes in two parts. One simply as a person
growing up in the period of the 1950's and the '60s I recall, and the '70s I recall at that time, before I even became a professional
historian, reading stories related to tar content in cigarettes and some of the discussions that went on about that.
In terms of my testimony in this case, my opinions are based upon very substantial amounts of research that I did, especially
from the period from the 1950's down to the present, and the materials I reviewed in connection with that research.
Q Did you look at the internal documents of the tobacco companies?
A No, I did not.
Q So you haven't seen any internal documents of tobacco companys correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A It was my decision and methodology in doing the research not to request any internal documents from tobacco companies.
My purpose was to determine what the public was aware of and what the levels of public awareness were at given points in
time and the definitions of internal tobacco company documents were not documents that the public was going to be aware of.
They were not factored in to shaping public awareness. I was, however, shown a small number of company documents by the
plaintiff's attorney in the Connors case that I testified to in late April while I was being cross-examined, but prior to that point
I had not seen any internal company documents.
Q Now, does the message, “Less tar more taste,” indicate to you that a cigarette is less hazardous, yet provides more taste?
A I am not an expert in advertising and I preface my answer by saying that I am not any more capable of interpreting internal
messages of an ad than that of the average person. “Less tar more taste,” seems a straight-forward statement that cigarettes
contain less tar and still have or possesses a satisfying taste.
Q Does less tar have anything at all to do with health hazard.
A Again I don't--I am not an expert in marketing design and so I simply don't know.
Q Well, did the public, at any time, believe that less tar had anything to do with health hazards?
A I don't know that any of my research uncovered any evidence on public belief levels about tar. There were stories suggesting
that it would be desirable to reduce the amount of tar in cigarettes from a health standpoint, and other stories suggesting that
it would not, in fact, do much of any good.
Q So you don't know whether the public was aware one way or the other of whether or not less tar had anything to do with
health hazards; is that correct?
A I am saying that I do not--I did not uncover conclusive evidence, that I can recollect, on that subject at this point.
Q Do you know that when cigarette companies advertise less tar they are trying to make the public aware of the fact that their
product was safer; correct?
A I wouldn't have any way of knowing what the cigarette companies know about advertising design in particular.
Q Are you able to figure out definitively exactly what the public was aware of; is that correct?
A Yes. Excuse me. Let me clarify the yes in the area of public awareness of health hazards of cigarette smoking, which is the
issue that I researched for this case.
Q Do you know of any member of the public that purchased cigarettes advertised as having lower tar or less tar because they
believe that the health effects would be less?
A Are you asking me to speculate about an individual, assuming many, or a great multitude of people which I have no way
of discovering their individual motives.
Q What about the general public, the general public, the cigarette purchasing public, rather than narrowing down to individuals,
can you comment on whether or not the general purchasing public that purchased cigarettes that called for less tar, or low tar,
made their decision based in any way on health effects?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A I don't recall seeing any definitive evidence that I recall as definitive evidence showing that to be the case. I do recollect
stories in the press speculating that it might be the reason low tar cigarettes were growing in popularity. I don't know that I
would have any sort of hard data to confirm that.
Q Are you aware of how many millions of dollars the cigarette industry--
A I am not sure if I heard somebody come on the line--go off the record.
(Discussion held off the record.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I am going to rephrase another question now. Are you aware of how many millions of dollars cigarette companies spend to
advertise less tar or low tar cigarettes to the American public?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I think I testified earlier that I have seen figures on the amount of money spent on cigarette advertising.
I don't recall the exact figure off the top of my head. I don't recall that I have seen it broken down by brands or types of
cigarettes, but really--
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Are you aware of how many thousands of television messages advertised by the cigarette industry paid for that provided the
information concerning less tar or lower tar cigarettes?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I think that I stated earlier, and I am aware that low tar cigarettes and other cigarettes were advertised,
but I couldn't quantify the number of ads.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Were you aware of whether or not, or are you aware even now of whether or not the cigarette industry ever knew that the
“low tar or less tar,” cigarette were in fact no safer than any other cigarette?
A Again, I am not a laboratory scientist or a chemist and I just couldn't render a judgment on that.
Q When did you testify on the Connors case?
A It was the latter part of April of this year.
Q When you say testify, do you mean deposed to testify at trial?
A Testify at trial.
Q Were you deposed at all in that case?
A I was not deposed in that case. I was not--as I indicated earlier, I was deposed one previous occasion.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Who hired you to work on the Connors case?
A The Jones, Day law firm.
Q Who were they representing?
A Reynolds.
Q RJ Reynolds?
A Yes.
Q How many hours did you spend on that case?
A I would say approximately 120, 130 hours.
Q What is your hourly fee for that case?
A $100 an hour.
Q The same for trial testimony as any other research that you did?
A Yes, it was.
Q Is your fee still $100 per hour?
A Yes, it is.
Q Is that for all the consulting work that you do as an expert, including depositions and trial testimony?
A Yes.
Q Other than the Connors case, and the case that you worked on for Liggett, and this case, are there any other cases that you
served as a consultant or an expert in in the tobacco related issue?
A No, I have not.
Q Are there any cases where you served as an expert or a consultant on anything else?
A Anything else involving--let me ask for clarification. Anything else involving tobacco companies, law firm related with
tobacco firms as clients?
Q Yes. Let's start with that.
A None.
Q Is there any other times that you served as an expert other than those three cases which includes this case, the Engles case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A No.
Q When I say any other time, I am including not just tobacco, but anything.
A Yes. There was one occasion approximately seven years ago when I was asked by a lawyer, a law firm in Columbia, South
Carolina, to do a historian research on the navigatability of a river in South Carolina from a historical point in time relating to
a case that a law firm was handling. I believe I did about seven or seven-and-a-half hours of research on that issue. I cannot
recall exactly the date, but approximately 1989 or 1990. The case did not go to trial. I never testified. I turned in my research
and was paid.
Q You spent about seven yours on that case with the exception of the one case where you spent about seven hours, were there
any other cases other than tobacco related cases that you have served as an expert on?
A No.
Q How did you come to be contacted for the first tobacco related case involving Liggett?
A I am not sure that I know the answer to that. The lawyer from Jones, Day firm contacted me and said that I had been
recommended as someone who would be capable of conducting that kind of research.
Q You mentioned that you read the newspaper when you were ten years old; right?
A Well, at least a portion of it.
Q Does the average ten-year old read a newspaper?
A I do not know.
Q As a ten-year old did you read articles regarding health effects of cigarettes in the newspaper?
A I can certainly say that I can recall that I read articles about when I was 11 or 12, to be sure.
Q Do you have a specific recollection of reading those kinds of articles in the newspaper or other newspapers at the age of
11 or 12; correct?
A Yes, to the--yes, I did.
Q Do you recall whether or not you ever watched the Flintstones television program?
A Yes. I do recall that I watched that.
Q How many times?
A That I do not recall.
Q Now, do you remember what day of the week it was on?
A No, I don't.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Do you remember how many cartoon characters advertised for Winston?
A Again, as I think I stated earlier, I don't have a recollection from viewing of that show, when it was on originally in the
'60s, cigarette advertisements from it. I simply don't recall those. I have seen, in the research that I have done for that case, an
episode or advertisement that was shown and I recall Fred and Barney and Wilma and Betty all being involved in some way.
That is not a recollection from my childhood.
Q Did you watch any of the cowboy shows when you were a kid on television?
A Yes. I watched some of them.
Q Which ones did you watch?
A Give me a minute. Sky King I watched. I watched the Wild, Wild West. I don't know--I guess that would be classified as
a cowboy show.
I think there may have been others. I can't recall. It has been a long time.
MR. KOETHE: I need clarification as to what time period we are talking about.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q The time period when he was a kid. He knows what I mean. He remembers some of the same shows that I do, as a matter of fact.
What about Bonanza, do you remember watching that?
A I did not watch Bonanza. My family watched another show at the same time and I recall that. I recall that my friends watched
Bonanza, but I did not.
Q What about Have Gun Will Travel.
A Is that with Paladin?
Q Yes.
A The same show?
Q Yes.
A I wasn't probably a regular viewer of that, but I did view or see or view an episode.
Q What about The Rifleman?
A I saw episodes of that as well.
Q You said that you did see that?
A Yes. I did see that, The Rifleman.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Do you remember a cowboy show with Steve McQueen in it?
A Again, I recollect that there was one on the air. I did not watch that show.
Q He was a bounty hunter, and do you remember that at all?
A I really did not watch that show. I do recall the show.
Q How about Maverick?
A I did watch Maverick, yes.
Q How about a program called Cheyenne, do you remember that?
A Yes. I remember the show. Again, that was not one that I was certainly not a regular viewer of, as I recall.
Q How about Wagon Train, do you remember that?
A That is another show that I remember, yes.
Q That was another cowboy show, Wagon Train; right?
A Yes. I suppose that would be a fair characterization.
Q Wyatt Earp do you remember that one?
A I do remember that one, yes. I watched that show.
Q Have you heard of the Marlboro Man?
A Yes, I have.
Q What is the Marlboro Man?
A The Marlboro Man is part of the Marlboro advertising.
Q A cowboy; right?
A Yes. A western figure.
Q Out of those shows that we have been talking about, all the cowboy shows, they were on in the 1950's, right and the early '60s?
A Well, again, I don't--I don't recall exactly when those shows were on. I remember that they were on.
Q You remember you saw them when you were a child; correct?
A I recollect or I remember that I saw them as a child and a teen-ager, but I don't know exactly when or what shows were on,
off the top of my head. I recollect or I remember that I saw them as a child and a teen-ager, but I don't know exactly when or
what shows were on, off the top of my head.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q You were born in 1952?
A Correct.
Q So for you to have seen them as a child or a teen-ager in the '50s or '60s; right?
A Yes, but you're asking about a lot of shows and many of them weren't on the air for--were on the air at very specific periods of
time. I couldn't say which shows I watched, which some were early and some were later. I am trying to indicate that I couldn't,
off the top of my head, give you a specific time frame for each of the shows.
Q Do you remember back in the 1950's, many, many cowboy shows on television; correct?
A It would probably be more accurate for me to say by about 19601 remember I was watching some cowboy shows on television.
As a child I am not sure that I was aware that there was a lot of, or I have learned since that there were more westerns, as they
were called on TV, in that period of television evolution than now. I am not sure that I was aware of that as a child.
Q Are you aware of when the Marlboro Man depiction began on billboards in America?
A From my research I believe that the Marlboro Man was certainly part of that advertisement in the 1960's. I don't know exactly
when they first appeared on billboards. You are talking about television; right?
Q Television, radio in the 1960's and the 1950's for the Marlboro Man, right.
A Well, I am trying to be as accurate as I can from my memory. I remember the Marlboro Man was an advertisement in 1960.
I don't remember the exact date the Marlboro Man first appeared.
Q The advertisement showed the Marlboro Man riding on a horse on television having a good time smoking a cigarette; right?
A Again, let me clarify are you asking if I remember that from childhood?
Q Sure. You do remember it; don't you?
A My--I guess I didn't pay a great deal of attention to cigarette advertisements as a child. I remember from the '60s that the
Marlboro Man was an advertisement figure and based upon my childhood recollection that would be as far as I could go.
Q So do you know what kind of impact seeing the image of a rugged cowboy having a good time smoking would have on
children?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I want to know what he knows.
MR. KOETHE: Well, what impact with respect to what?
MR. HOAG: Is this the witness asking me this question?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: It is not. It is his lawyer. It is unclear and a vague question. I think you should clarify it.
MR. HOAG: That is not for you to tell him not to answer. He understood the question and it is a pretty dam clear question
and he knows what I mean.
Read the question back.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: In the area that I have expertise in, which is the level of public awareness of health hazards associated with
smoking, I can say that those advertisements did nothing to diminish high level public awareness and public awareness of health
hazards increased as a result of the advertisement shown. Beyond that area, I have not undertaken research to comment.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I move to strike as an unresponsive answer. My question is: Do you know what, if any, impact hundreds of television
advertisements showing a rugged cowboy having a good time smoking would have on children?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Again, I feel like I have answered that question. This was a very high level awareness of health hazards of
smoking on children from the 1960's and that level increased, even as the Marlboro Man ads were being shown. Beyond that area
of public awareness and health hazards of smoking, I have no expertise in evaluating what people thought about advertisement.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know whether or not images can persuade?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form. Vague.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Can you answer?
A Again, my opinion with regards to that question is not any better than anybody else's. Certainly I think images at the time
can be effective and make a point to people, but that is not an expert opinion. That is simply a personal opinion.
MR. KOETHE: Would it be possible for me to take a short break?
MR. HOAG: Sure. Absolutely. Five minutes.
MR. KOETHE: Let's say five minutes and we'll be back as soon as we can.
(Thereupon, a recess was held.)
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Now, do you agree that cigarette companies target children in this marketing effort; correct?
A No, I have not--I do not agree with that statement.
Q Do you have an opinion as to whether or not cigarette companies target children?
MR. KOETHE: I want to interject or clarify if it's a personal opinion or his expert opinion in this matter.
MR. HOAG: Well, we'll separate out the two.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q First, do you have an expert opinion as to whether or not cigarette companies target children?
A No. I am not an advertising expert in terms of strategy and design of advertisement. I have no inside knowledge of tobacco
companies' advertising strategy.
Q Do you have a personal opinion as to whether cigarette companies target children?
A My personal view is that most teen-agers make the decision to smoke based upon peer pressure and parental example, and I
really am not an expert, but as a person I see no evidence that advertising is an important factor in attracting teen-agers to smoke.
Q Were you finished with your answer?
A Yes. That was the answer.
MR. KOETHE: Did anyone else come on the line that hasn't been on the line?
MR. FALKENSTEIN: This is Eric Falkenstein. I had to get off for a moment and came back on.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you have any opinions whether or not, expert opinions or personal opinions, whether advertising is an important factor
in anyone's decision to decide to smoke cigarettes?
A Again, really it is beyond my expertise to comment on factors that cause people to start smoking.
Q You will agree as a practical matter that the tobacco industry must replace quitting and dying smokers with young smokers;
correct?
A Again, I am not--I don't have any knowledge of companies' motives, or corporate goals, or that kind of thing.
Q Well, if they are going to remain in business as a company selling tobacco products, they are going to have to replace dying
and quitting smokers with new smokers; correct?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Your proposition is a logical one, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do the Joe Camel ads appeal to children?
A I am not an expert on the appeal of advertising campaigns, nor do I have any knowledge that would allow me to answer
that question.
Q Have you ever seen a Joe Camel advertisement?
A Yes, I have.
Q What is depicted?
A Well, I can only describe, and no better than anybody else, that there is a Joe Camel, a camel with advertisement as part of
a billboard and other advertisement for cigarettes.
Q You don't know whether or not the Joe Camel advertisement would appeal to children; correct?
A It is correct that I don't have the expertise in that area. I did, of course, in my research, see articles dealing with the controversy
over the Joe Camel. I am familiar that there is one, but I have no expertise to make a judgment about the appeal on the Joe
Camel ad.
Q Do you know whether or not the amount of children smoking increased after the beginning of the Joe Camel ad campaign?
A No. I can't answer that question specifically. The research, from my recollection of the research and having not reviewed this
particular data in the last few days, but my recollection is that the percentage of teen-agers who smoke declined until recently
and that decline has leveled off. I don't recall that there has been any solid statistical evidence of a statistical significant increase,
but merely the decline has stopped.
Q What is your understanding of when the decline in the number of teens smoking stopped?
A Again, off the top of my recollection, that is about the last four to five years.
Q Do you know anything about the Council for Tobacco Research?
A Yes. It is an entity that is in existence and I read about it in the course of my research.
Q What is your understanding of that entity?
A My understanding of that entity is that it is entirely based upon information in the public domain about it. I believe that it is
and its predecessor, an organization created as a consortium of tobacco companies who fund and sponsor research into tobacco
and including health related matters.
Q Do you know whether or not the Council for Tobacco Research funded research that was done for the purpose of assisting
the tobacco companies in preparing for litigation?
A I do not. To the best of my recollection.
Q Have you ever heard of a frank statement to cigarette smokers?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Yes. I am familiar with that statement.
Q What do you know about that statement?
A It was a statement which appeared in major newspapers around the United States in 1954 and it was paid for by the tobacco
companies with the exception of Liggett and Meyers. It was stating their position on the scientific and public health records that
were appearing in a great fan fair in that period of time suggesting a linkage between smoking and lung cancer and other diseases.
Q Do you know how many publications that frank statement of cigarette smokers was published in?
A I do not know the number of publications that it appeared in. It was certainly--it certainly appeared widely and in major
newspapers, except that it was broadly distributed, certainly.
Q Now, one of the things that were broadly distributed statement was a statement that there is no proof that cigarette smoking
is one of the causes of lung cancer. Are you aware of that?
MR. KOETHE: I am going to object. It is a mischaracterization of the documents of the witness the witness doesn't have the
benefit of in front of him due to this telephonic deposition.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q It is not a mischaracterization of the documents.
MR. KOETHE: You know it is, John.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you have the document in front of you?
MR. KOETHE: No, I don't.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q It says here the medical research of recent years indicated many possible causes of lung cancer. Then Number 3 it says that
there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. Do you understand that in the frank statement, that the cigarette
industry stated that there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer?
A I don't have the document in front of me, but to the best of my recollection that is an incomplete and inaccurate characterization
of what the frank statement says. It is inaccurate in some respect and incomplete in others. Again, reminding that the records
that I don't have the documents in front of me. I am familiar with that statement, the frank statement.
My recollection is that the position taken there was that the evidence, which to that point was overwhelmingly the matter of
statistical association, statistically at that point it did not prove any scientific causation.
They were drawing a distinction between statistical association and scientific causation and the statement talks about what
respect the company had of people conducting the research and the need to conduct further research as well as pointing out that
there was very substantial disagreement in the medical and scientific community over some studies appearing. That there were,
in fact, stories appearing attributing lung cancer other than to cigarette smoking and all of the statements there were--all of the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
things that you mentioned from the frank statement certainly were things that were being said by other people in 1954. Other
people, and by other people, other than the tobacco industry.
Q Are you aware that these are things that the tobacco industry is still saying; correct?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the vagueness of the question. What things are you referring to? I think you need to be clear.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Again, you are not the person I am questioning. Clearly I am talking about the things that he just referred to that are in the
frank statement, based upon his recollection.
MR. KOETHE: Your question was objectionable. I am going to object to it.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So can you answer the question?
A Restate the question, please.
MR. HOAG: Read the question back.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
THE WITNESS: Clarify what you mean by “things.”
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Those things that you just characterized as your recollection of what was included in the frank statement to cigarette smokers
in 1954.
A I said several different things. I have no specific knowledge of what tobacco companies positions are today.
Q You mean you haven't done research into what the tobacco companies are publicly stating today?
A I am certainly aware of their public statements. Certainly I just simply-- there are so many things that are talked about in the
frank statement, without knowing what, or just more precisely what you are referring to, I hesitate to give you a misleading
answer.
Q Does the cigarette industry still today say that medical research indicates many possible causes of lung cancer?
A I am not sure.
MR. KOETHE: I object to the form of the question. Without being specific as to who you are referring to, I think it is improper
to ask the witness a question regarding the cigarette industry as to what this means.
MR. HOAG: I have never seen an attorney make so many speaking objections. You are amazing.
MR. KOETHE: Any less than you, John. Don't make the statements like that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. HOAG: If we go back and look at the records on the last deposition that we took, it is kind of laughable.
MR. KOETHE: I have never seen an attorney ask so many objectionable questions.
MR. HOAG: Can you read back my question, and when you object this tune just make it a one word objection, or preserve
your last objection.
(Thereupon, the requested portion was read back by the reporter.)
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is that correct?
A The statement that I am familiar with that represents the tobacco companies have made in recent years are that smoking
cannot account for every case of lung cancer. Lung cancer does appear among non-smokers, and that not all people who smoke
get lung cancer. I can state that I am familiar with those two statements.
Q Does the cigarette industry today still state that there is no agreement among the authorities regarding what the cause of
lung cancer is?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. In reference to the industry, but you can answer.
THE WITNESS: Again, I don't recollect seeing that specific statement. The statement that I recollect seeing is that not all cases.
There certainly are non-smokers who come down with lung cancer, or the diagnosis of lung cancer and not all cigarette smokers
become victims of lung cancer.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Does the cigarette industry admit today that the products that they make are, in fact, injurious to health?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Again, it is my understanding of their position that they do not admit that, but you stated that and really that
is my understanding of their position.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q That they didn't admit that back in 1954 either; did they?
A 1954 did not include any statement of that kind no.
Q The cigarette industry the validity of the statistics regarding health effects of smoking; correct?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
THE WITNESS: I believe that actually that is not correct. The health representatives of the tobacco companies whose statements
I am familiar with do continue to say that statistics cannot prove a scientific causation. I am not aware that on--in that all
statistics that have been developed are criticized as being invalid statistics, but rather that the statistics, or the industry's position
at least, are again, and I don't know if the industry's position is put in the position of the representatives of the companies whose
statements I am familiar with, that statistics are not proven, or have not proven a scientific causation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So in the frank statement to cigarette smokers, the tobacco industry, with the exception of Liggett, that didn't sign this, said
that we believe that the products that we make are not injurious to health. It is your understanding that to this day the tobacco
industry, with the exception of Liggett, ?? changed that position; correct?
A Again, I can't accept your characterization entirely. It is my understanding from the public statement, of which I am familiar,
that companies and their representatives do claim that further research is needed. That there is not, in at least some areas that we
are talking about, there is not hard scientific evidence as they perceived it to sustain their claim. I am aware that the company
takes that position without necessarily agreeing to the precise phrasing that you gave in your question.
Q You are aware of that position, that they never share with the American public whenever they have the opportunity to; correct?
A No. Again, I would not accept that as an accurate characterization. I know that there has been public comments to that effect
by company representatives, but there are all kinds of ways that the company communicates with the public, and not all of those
can contain that message. I couldn't say that they take every opportunity.
Q When there are public messages that depict healthy young people having a good time smoking, what message is being
conveyed to the American public in all of the advertisements--
A In all of those advertisements, which I presume you are referring to, they contain and have for over 20 years now, a warning
that cigarette smoking is dangerous to health. So I think that that is not an opportunity and in fact, the advertisement carries
the precise message that it may well be injurious to your health.
Q So when on a huge billboard the cigarette company, or a cigarette company shows healthy, attractive, young people having
a good time smoking and then in print so small that a driver or a passenger in a car can't even read it, gives a warning, you are
saying that image depicts healthfulness is totally negated by the warning; correct?
MR. KOETHE: Objection to the form and mischaracterization of the testimony.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is that correct?
A Again, I don't agree with your characterization of your testimony. I can read the warning and I am 45 years old. I can certainly
read the warning on billboards as I drive by.
Q So you can actually read the warning on the billboards that you have seen for cigarettes as you drive by them; is that correct?
A Yes. I think I believe that I can.
Q What do those warnings say?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A There are several different warnings. They warn that cigarette smoking is harmful to pregnant women, and might product
pregnancy problems, low birth rate and lung cancer or coronary disease and they warn about cigarette smoking carries carbon
monoxide and there are several different things that they warn about.
Q One of the warnings says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema; is that correct?
A Yes. That is my recollection.
Q Have you been able to read that warning as you drive by billboards depicting healthy, youthful people having a good time
smoking; correct?
A Yes. I have been able to.
Q Has there ever been a billboard that you have been by where you couldn't read that warning when it was on the billboard?
A In fact I am sure that there have been entire billboards that I couldn't read as I passed. I am sure that there have been occasions
where I couldn't read warnings just like possibly I am unable to read other things on the billboards due to its position with traffic.
Q Well, the depiction of healthy, young people is many, many times larger than the print with the warning on it; correct?
A The print with the warning on it is a part of the billboard advertisement and it is prominently displayed on the billboard, or
in every billboard site for cigarette it contains a health warning.
Q How does the size of the warning, and the print on the warning, compare to the size of the images depicted of the healthful,
youthful, attractive people having a good time smoking?
A It is a portion of the billboard.
Q How big a portion of the billboard is the printed warning as compared to the visual depiction on the billboard?
A You know, I don't know that I could give you a precise estimate. I do, in fact, notice that there is a warning on every billboard.
Q Well, is that warning larger or smaller than the visual depiction on the billboard?
A It is only a portion of the billboard. The overall billboard is larger than the warning, but the overall billboard may contain
maybe words, or maybe a picture, or a package, or maybe a variety of other things and yet the warning only takes up a portion
of the billboard.
Q It is a very small portion of the billboard; isn't it?
A That is your characterization of it.
Q What would be your characterization of it as far as how it compares to the rest of the billboard warning?
A It is smaller than the rest of the billboards, but it is well displayed on every billboard.
Q It is a lot smaller than the visual depiction?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Again, I think that I already stated as accurately as I can. If the warning takes up a portion of the billboard and it is on every
billboard, not the entire billboard, but it is only a portion of it.
Q Those billboards depicting healthy, youthful people having a good time smoking, who pays for those billboard ads?
A Well, first of all, your characterization doesn't describe every billboard, but certainly the cigarette manufacturer pays to
advertise their product on the billboard.
Q So the goal of the cigarette advertiser is to tell people that they shouldn't be smoking?
A Repeat the question.
Q I will rephrase it. So the goal of the cigarette advertiser is to convince people that smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease
and emphysema?
A Cigarette companies include in every advertisement a warning to people that if they choose to smoke, these are the risks that
they are encountering. The companies, of course, are engaged in competition, and the companies are advertising their product
so that people can smoke or try their product as opposed to the competing product, at least my understanding.
Q Well, is it your understanding of whether or not they put those ads up on billboards in order to encourage a certain percentage
of people to start smoking?
A Again, understanding that I am not an expert in why people start smoking, it is my understanding from the documents that
there are other factors that have been much more important to people's positions as far as smoking.
I think that also it is my understanding that it is the position taken by tobacco companies that smoking is an adult decision that
an adult ought to be free to make based on all the information at their disposal.
My position is that there is an abundance of information at their disposal and has been for a very long time that cigarette smoking
can be harmful to your health in a variety of ways.
Q I move to strike as unresponsive to my question.
Now that the Surgeon General's report or the Surgeon General's statement says that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart
disease an emphysema, does the cigarette industry agree with that particular warning?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it is my understanding, based upon public statements of representatives of the tobacco companies, that
they do not necessarily agree with the position taken by the Surgeon General.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know that they don't agree with the position that cigarette smoking causes any disease?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q You were aware of that; right?
A Again, the position that I am familiar with is that I can't accept that, your characterization of the position.
Q With the exception of Liggett, do cigarette companies admit that cigarette smoking causes any disease?
A To the best of my recollection I can't recall a company taking--any company taking the official position that their product
causes lung cancer or coronary disease.
Q Or any disease; correct?
A Any disease is a broad statement. I don't know that I can make that authoritative statement. I don't know of any case. I will
answer by saying that I don't recollect them making any statement to that effect.
Q You heard the expression in advertisement, “Come to where the pleasure is,” correct?
A I don't recall that particular statement. I may have seen it and heard it, but I don't recall it.
Q Assuming that a billboard advertisement has the words, “Come to where the pleasure is,” are those words in any way
inconsistent with the warning that says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema?
A In my view they are not inconsistent as many people take pleasure from doing risky and potentially dangerous things. So I
don't--I do not see any inconsistencies in that statement.
Q Is lung cancer a pleasurable dung?
A I am sure it is not.
Q How about heart disease, is that pleasurable?
A I am sure it is not.
Q Now, is the cigarette company who uses the expression, “Come to where the pleasure is,” trying to convince people to smoke
cigarettes because the cigarette smoking is a pleasurable experience?
A Again, I am not an expert on advertising strategy and designs. I do not know what or have any information that allows me
to judge what the companies are hoping to accomplish with that advertisement. I am aware that advertising is most effective in
areas of brand competition and I think that it would be very plausible to believe that companies are hoping to convince smokers
that their brand is more enjoyable smoking than other brands.
Q What about convincing smokers not to quit because it is pleasurable?
A I don't have any information that that would be suggestive advertising has any impact, but I am not an expert in all aspects
of advertising by any stretch of the imagination.
Q Now, the words that are depicted on billboards, for example, words like “come to where the pleasure is.” Are those words
larger print than the warning?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Again, I--I may have not seen the particular billboard that you had in mind. I don't know that I can give a blanket answer
to your question. If I may not have seen that billboard.
Q You have seen a billboard that has the words, “Come to Marlboro Country”?
A Yes, I believe so.
Q Now, are those words larger than the warning?
A Yes. I believe they are.
Q Are those words much larger than the warning?
A They are larger than the warning.
Q You are not sure whether the words are much larger than the warning?
A Much larger is a subjective judgment. I am sure or many people would consider them much larger and others might be
satisfied with just larger.
Q Are they more readable?
A They are larger. I think that as I stated earlier, I can usually read, other factors permitting, I can usually read everything
that is on the billboard.
Q Have you done any studies, or read any research to ascertain the percentage of people who actually read the Marlboro Country
versus those who actually read the warning as they pass the Marlboro billboard?
A Research that I have done indicates that the resulting attitude and level of awareness of people has certainly--that the research
says, or that I can say, that they are very aware of the health hazards of smoking which the warnings reinforce, although I think
they are aware, or very much aware apart from warnings. I have not done any research specifically about billboards and who
reads which part of which billboard.
Q I move to strike all the answer except for the part where he says he is not aware of billboards of who reads what billboards,
because the rest of the answer was totally unresponsive to my question.
MR. KOETHE: Well, it was very responsive. You just didn't like the answer.
MR. HOAG: Well, we'll let the judge decide whether it is very responsive or not.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know what percentage of children smoke cigarettes?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: The data which I am familiar with deals with--I would characterize teen-agers rather than children, and beyond
that I couldn't answer your question since there are a variety of people who are teen-agers that smoke one cigarette and teen-
agers who admit to being regular smokers and so forth. You would have to further clarify it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know what percentage of children admit to being regular smokers?
A It is my recollection that that figure is in the low teens, but I confess that that is a pure recollection. I have not reviewed
this in the past few days.
Q How many hundreds of thousands of children does that represent?
A I don't know.
Q You don't know?
A No. I don't know. It would be easy to calculate if you have the figures in front of you.
Q Those children who are regular smokers, do you know what percentage smoke Marlboros?
A No.
Q Do you know whether it is more than 50-percent of all children that smoke Marlboros?
A I am not familiar with any breakdown of brand preference among teen-age smokers.
Q Do you know that Marlboro spends more money for advertising than any other brand?
A No, I don't know that.
Q Do you know that Marlboro has the highest percentage of children smoking its cigarettes?
A I think I just stated a few minutes ago that I had no--had not seen any information about brand preference among teen-age
smokers.
Marlboro is, I believe, is the Number One selling brand among all smokers.
Q Even more popular among children and did you know that, among children who smoke, and did you know that?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. It has been answered.
THE WITNESS: As I already stated, I have no information about brand preference among teen-agers, under age smokers.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q That wasn't a consideration of yours when you did your research for this case; correct?
A Just me. That wasn't a consideration.
Q The brand preference of children who smoke?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A No. I did not do any research on brand preference among teen-age smokers.
Q When did you first become involved in the Engles case?
A I believe I was contacted in early February of 1997.
Q Who contacted you?
A Again, I believe it was Mr. Koethe as a representative of the Jones, Day law firm.
Q What is your understanding of what the Engles case is about?
A Well, again, it is--I am not a physician. I am not a lawyer. My understanding is that it is a class action lawsuit in Florida
trying to recover damages on behalf of a class from an illness that the plaintiffs allege to be as a result of cigarette smoking.
Q Do you know whether or not the people actually smoked cigarettes or not, the people that are the plaintiffs in this case?
A My understanding is that the class is a class of smokers, yes.
Q Do you know how old they were when they started to smoke?
A I probably can't provide you that information off the top of my head. I have read the interrogatories and the depos of the six
main plaintiffs and I have taken notes on each of them, and the beginning to smoke, that was a factor in shaping my research
design in this case.
Q In what ways was it a factor in your research design for this case, the age at which the plaintiffs started to smoke?
A Well, in trying to find out what the information--trying to discover what the information in the environment was about the
health risks of smoking were in the case of the six main plaintiffs, their age and the time that they began smoking and both
factors that helped--they are both factors that help you decide what sources and time periods you need to research.
Q What years were cigarettes advertised in medical journals; if you know?
A I have not reviewed the medical journals in a systematic fashion as part of my research.
Q Do you know if cigarettes were ever advertised in any medical journals?
A Off the top of my head, I don't know--I don't recollect. I did not research the medical journals.
Q Do you know if any medical doctors ever endorsed specific brands of cigarettes at any time?
A Yes. I believe that there were doctors, or groups of doctors who either endorsed cigarettes and advertising as a brand preference
of the doctors.
Q What year or years did that occur?
A Again, off the top of my head I believe that there was some advertisement similar to the ones that seemed to be describing
in the late 1940's and perhaps early 1950's.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Now, are the ads depicting medical doctors endorsing cigarette brands, what publications were those in, what types of
publications were those in?
A In various magazines, newspapers ads and printed media at various times.
Q National publications?
A Yes.
Q To a general reading audience?
A Some to general reading audience and some more specialized reading audience.
Q So were any of the ads broadcast on television or radio?
A I have seen only a few televisions ads from the early 1950's and I don't recall seeing one, although I am saying I simply
don't know.
Q Is cigarette smoking addictive?
A Again, I am certainly not an expert on addiction, from a medical or psychological standpoint, but there certainly is an
abundance of evidence throughout the entire 20th century in a public domain suggesting cigarette smoking is, and nicotine in
it, is habit forming, addictive is very difficult to quit once you start doing it, and at least to some or many people.
Q So do you have an opinion, a personal opinion, whether or not smoking is addictive?
A My personal opinion suggests, with the understanding that I am not an expert in the area and I know that it is a loaded sort of
medical term which people debate definitions all the time, but my personal belief is that cigarette smoking is a habit which is
very difficult for many people to quit. As a lay person I would probably defer to it as addictive, but that is not an expert opinion,
or is it based on any sort of scientific or medical definition of addiction.
Q That is just a common sense belief; is that correct?
A Well, it is simply my personal opinion and personal preference as far as casual characterization of it.
Q Based upon what you heard and read; correct?
A Well, again, here I have--I want to distinguish between what I have maybe as far as my personal opinion and my expert
opinion on the level of awareness. If the habit is forming or possibly addictive in nature of cigarette smoking, it is through
my opinion that I just stated a personal opinion and basically from my personal observations and through the research that I
have done and address the issues of public awareness of the habit forming nature of cigarette smoking. The fact that it is often
referred to as addictive comes from research that I have done in this and in other cases which we mentioned earlier.
Q With the exception of Liggett, do you know that the cigarette industry consistently denies that cigarette smoking is addictive;
correct?
A From my reading of the public statement I am familiar with that position.
Q They take that position publicly; correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Yes.
Q Now, you said from your observation that cigarettes are addictive. What are your observations?
A Again, my observations are no expertise that I carry with it, no special expertise. I know that some people smoke and can
stop smoking and seem to be able to quit smoking quite easily, whereas others have a hard time doing so. There seems to be
a certain sort of habitual nature of smoking which becomes a habit and it simply is--I am not a scientist, but I would use the
term almost interchangeable, habitual.
Q Have you ever known anyone that had withdrawal problems when they tried to quit smoking?
A No, I have not.
Q Have you ever known anyone who tried to quit smoking?
A Yes.
Q What do you characterize as withdrawal problems?
A I suppose in terms of withdrawal problems I was thinking about the kind of withdrawal problems that I am familiar with
in a secondhand fashion. People who have alcohol problems, or perhaps other drug problems, and that would not accurately
characterize anybody I have known personally who has had to quit smoking or attempted to quit smoking.
Q Have you known people personally that have had other drugs problems other than nicotine and tobacco?
A I have known people who drink too much, yes.
Q Other than alcohol have you known anyone who has a problem with drugs with the exception of the problem of cigarette
smoking?
A Yes. I have one second cousin that had a problem with very hard drugs. He is a relative. I don't know him particularly well,
but I know through my family that he went for treatment at several treatment facility centers before finally being able to be
drug free for several years now.
Q That person was eventually able to quit the drug or drugs?
A To the best of my knowledge, after a number of unsuccessful attempts, one treatment facility has been successful. I should
perhaps clarify that I have not seen this individual in ten, 20 years, so that is from the records from other members of my family.
Q Do you know how many people who quit smoking go back and smoke again?
A No. I do not know the percentage on that. I know that there are people who quit and fail to quit, or quit and take up smoking
again.
Q Did you know that there are people who continue to smoke even after they are diagnosed with lung cancer?
A Yes. I do know that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Have you ever known anyone diagnosed with lung cancer who still continues to smoke?
A Yes, I have.
Q That is evidence of a pretty powerful addiction; isn't it?
A In the case of the specific individual that I knew, he certainly did not attribute it to that.
Q Do you consider it as evidence of a powerful addiction for a person who is diagnosed with lung cancer to continue to smoke
cigarettes?
MR. KOETHE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, with the understanding that I have no expertise as a physician, I do not consider that to the case. One--
the one person that I have known personally continued to smoke after being diagnosed with lung cancer who was a former
chairman of the department who indicated to me that he did it and wanted to.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q He indicated that he did it because he wanted to?
A That was his statement to me.
Q Well, did his doctors advise him that it would cause him to die sooner if he continued to smoke?
A I do not know.
Q Did he tell you whether or not his doctor advised him to stop smoking after he was diagnosed with lung cancer?
A He did not discuss that with me, no.
Q Are you aware of any internal research that the cigarette company did concerning addictive effects of nicotine?
A I have not, in my research, received any internal company documents, or reviewed any internal company documents. I have
seen press reports that nicotine research was conducted.
Q How old does someone have to be before they are old enough to make a responsible decision on whether or not to smoke?
A I don't have expertise in answering that question. I have always encourage people to obey the law and states have different
ages in which smoking is unlawful for minors in that state, and they have different ages.
Q Are children more susceptive to persuasive power of advertising compared to adults?
A I have no expertise in that area.
Q Does it have anything at all to do with your assessment today, your expert opinions?
MR. KOETHE: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
THE WITNESS: I am not trying to indicate in my answer that I made every effort to research each of the impacts of
advertisement and what they had on the population on their awareness with the various health hazards including addiction that
have been associated with the cigarette smoking. Again, it is my conclusion, based on very substantial amounts of evidence
that the public awareness of the risks of the health hazards that cigarette smoking may pose are widely known are public and
increasing and that for a variety of reasons, advertising has not diminished or slowed that awareness.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Are there any children who began smoking as a result of cigarette advertisement?
A Once again, I am not an expert. I am not a psychologist or an expert on why any particular individual makes a decision to
start smoking. I have seen, and in the research I have done accounts in the public press which tend to suggest that parental
influence and peer pressure overwhelmingly historically are overwhelmingly the most important factors in the decision of
people to smoke, but again, I emphasize that I am not an expert in that area. My reporting of the information that I have seen
in the public media.
Q So have you seen any records in the public media indicating that children, at least a certain percentage of children are
persuaded to smoke because of the influence of cigarette advertising?
A I have certainly stories coming from the advocacy groups saying that they believe that the cigarette advertisements has an
impact on children. I have seen this and I have no expertise in evaluating that story.
Q Stories that say that, or the stories that you read that indicate that there is not an effect on children, are those financed, or
do they come from the advocacy groups?
A To the best of my knowledge they are simply--they were not financed by companies or by advocacy groups.
Q All of the things that you read indicating that children are influenced to begin smoking by advertising, those all came from
whatever you characterized as advocacy groups; is that correct?
A The ones that I remember the best did come from the advocacy groups. I would not state that those are the only sources. I
think that there are probably other stories reflecting a broader concern over that possibility.
Q Aside from the deposition of the plaintiffs, the named plaintiffs in the Engle case, the six that you read and looked at, are
there any other documents or depositions in the Engle case?
A Let me clarify for the second time that I don't believe I read six depositions.
Q All right.
A But to the best of my recollection those are the only documents that I read, legal documents related to the Engles case.
MR. KOETHE: I would like to clarify for the witness to testify earlier that he also received the interrogatory responses of the
named plaintiffs.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I meant to include that as well.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Other than the interrogatory responses and the depositions reviewed of the named plaintiffs, you haven't reviewed any other
documents in the Engles case?
A I also reviewed my expert part of the preparation in reviewing the draft, the final draft of my expert disclosure if that was
considered a document.
MR. KOETHE: I want to make sure we are clear. Your question is referring to documents in the nature of the report documents
as opposed to various other materials researched in connection with his research, not “Engle court documents”?
MR. HOAG: Well, when I say documents I mean that in the broadest sense. Any documents that you reviewed in preparation
for the Engle case.
THE WITNESS: No. Then I thought you were referring to legal documents referenced in the case.
MR. KOETHE: John, I need to take a short break here. It is noon here. Do you want to take a lunch break?
MR. HOAG: I would rather not. I don't think I am going to be more than somewhere between 30 an 60 more minutes. We
could end by 1:00, or if you want to keep going.
MR. KOETHE: Let's take a five-minute break and then we'll come back.
(Thereupon, a recess was held.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q We are back on the record. Is everyone ready to go?
A Yes.
Q The last thing I think we ended with was the explanation that we were talking about when I asked you about documents that
you reviewed. I meant it in the broadest sense. Whatever documents you reviewed to prepare for the Engle case. So aside from
the depositions that you have reviewed and the interrogatories that you reviewed, what else have you looked at?
A I reviewed a large variety of materials including newspapers, magazines, toll polling data, television material, federal and
state documents and publications, secondary sources and some other materials as well relating to popular cultures, songs, films,
et cetera, and I don't mean that to be an exclusive list, but that is substantially a larger list or substantial material that I reviewed
in connection with or in addition to the legal documents that I mentioned earlier.
Q Those things that you looked at, with the exception of the depositions and the interrogatories, were those provided to you
by counsel?
A With the exception of the legal documents, I don't believe that any of them were provided to me by counsel. All of them were
things that I searched that an assistant discovered in the process.
Q What were you asked to do for the Engle case?
A I was asked to examine the issues of the public awareness and common knowledge of health hazards, alleged health hazards,
including addiction associated with the cigarette smoking and what the levels of public knowledge of those hazards were
historically.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Prior to he time that you did that for the Engle's case had you ever done that before?
A Yes, I had.
Q When did you do it before?
A I had in connection with--I had done similar work and related work in the case of Connors versus Reynolds, and I had also
done a similar related work in the case of Clark versus Liggett.
Q Other than those two tobacco cases, had you ever, prior to that, or prior to those two other cases, done any work to look at
the history of tobacco, the tobacco industry in communication regarding cigarettes and tobacco?
A Yes. I had. Just as a southern historian who is interested in economic history in particular I have a good bit of reading on the
history of tobacco as a product crop, history of tobacco industry and the emergence of cigarette industry. I was teaching history
and I am familiar with smoking and health issues and the public response to that issue and teaching the courses with the larger
subjects I attempted to communicate my knowledge on the subject in the classroom.
Q Is any of that reflected on your curriculum vitae?
A The CV you have, I don't have one in front of me now, has my teaching expertise on there in terms of the area of teaching
interest. It should be reflected through the subjects that are listed there, not that tobacco is going to be listed, but the subjects
that would include that. I have not conducted an intense public awareness research that I have done in this case before my
involvement in this case.
Q Did you write any books or chapters in books about this topic?
A Which topic?
Q The topic that we are talking about, tobacco and the history of tobacco industry.
A I am trying to give an accurate answer as I can. I have written the economics and spoken on economics and the history of
the south, which includes tobacco in an important way, but I have not published or written about public awareness on smoking
and health.
Q When you said that you have not written or published about the issues of smoking and health and public awareness; correct?
A Public awareness of smoking and health I have not published on the subject.
Q The first time you researched that in depth was after you were approached by the attorney representing the tobacco company
to be an expert witness; correct?
A In terms of a focused research project, that is correct, was a subject that I had a preceding interest in, preceding interest and
conducted research projects using the same standards that I had done in any other projects.
Q Have you prepared any written reports concerning the results of your research, the research that you did related to tobacco
company litigation?
A I have not prepared any written reports regarding that case, no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: The expert disclosure that you have.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you intend to prepare any written reports?
A At this point I have no plans to do that.
Q You have no plans to do that?
A At this point in time that is correct.
Q Do you have any intention to submit any of the information that you obtained as a result of the work you have done as an
expert to any journals for publication?
A As I said, at this point I have not submitted anything for publication.
Q Have you said something that you didn't finish?
A I have not written anything, or published--I have not written anything to submit for publication, and I am not in the process
of doing so now. I am not in the process of doing so now.
Q The article that you had written, or the articles and essays that you have written, have any of the articles and essays been
about the tobacco industry?
A No. I believe one article mentions the importance--well, let me try to clarify that. Nothing I have written focuses on the
tobacco industry, no.
Q Let me just give you a couple that I have checked to see if that refreshes your recollection as to whether it has anything to do
with the tobacco industry, which could include agriculture. On Page 6 of your CV there is what is called “Review of Rachel N.
Klein, Unification of Slave State, the Rise of the Planter Class in the South Carolina Back County.”
A Yes.
Q 1760 to 1808.
A Yes. I recall that.
Q Does that article or that review have anything to do with tobacco?
A It certainly--the book under review discussed the cultivation of the tobacco, South Carolina tobacco country and that is about
ten years that I probably did mention tobacco in the review. I couldn't tell you exactly, but the book certainly covers tobacco
planters and in fact, my book should be on there that has the discussion, I believe, in Chapter 1, a brief discussion of the attempts
by South Carolina planters to grow tobacco in the late 1700's and how those efforts were abandoned when cotton emerged as
a possible cash crop. I can't recall, but there are a couple of paragraphs, or maybe one, or something along those lines.
Q That paragraph or paragraphs, were they relating to the agricultural aspect of tobacco production in the 1700 or 1800's?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A In the late 1700 or early 1800's.
Q In South Carolina?
A Yes.
Q Is that a crop, tobacco a crop now in South Carolina?
A It is, as a matter of fact.
Q Is it a significant agricultural crop in South Carolina?
A Yes. It is certainly along with soy beans, or I believe one of the two major cash crops in South Carolina today.
Q Is it the major cash crop in South Carolina ahead of soy beans?
A My recollection is it has been in recent years bypassed by soy beans.
Q You did a review of the Laurence Shore Southern Capitalist Business History Review?
A Yes.
Q Does that have anything to do with the tobacco industry?
A To the best of my recollection that book did not. The capitalistic question there was not the tobacco entrepreneur but it
is my recollection there is another book review in there about--I can't remember the title, but the author was Robert Kensor
and I reviewed that book. It is a local history of Orange County, North Carolina, and that book had a substantial amount of
information in it about the early tobacco entrepreneurs, particularly the Duke family. I did write a review on that book.
Q You teach at the University of South Carolina?
A Yes, I do.
Q You have been there for how many years?
A This is my 13th year on the faculty, excuse me, I finished 13 years. I am-- in the fall I begin my 14th.
Q There is another article called “Farmers in the South Carolina Up Country Changing Production Patterns,” and does that
have anything to do with tobacco?
A No, it does not.
Q On the bottom of Page 8 of your CV there is another article “Redneck and Merchants Economic and Development and Social
Tension in the South Carolina Up Country 1865 to 1900” and does that have anything to do with the tobacco industry.
A No, it doesn't. The up country region of South Carolina was not a tobacco producing region in the late 1900's or the 19th
century, and it did not become one.
Q When did tobacco start being a major cash crop in South Carolina?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Well, there was a brief period of time that we already discussed in 1780 and '90 when the back country attempted to grow
tobacco with very little success and it was reintroduced in the PeeDee section of South Carolina in around 1890 and cultured by
South Carolina that found that the popular strain of crop could be grown in selected areas of South Carolina and it re-emerged
as a cash crop of some importance in the history of South Carolina.
Q That would have been sometime around 1890?
A Yes. I believe that is approximately the time that the efforts were made to introduce the particular tobacco plant in question
in South Carolina and grow it. Certainly by the 1920's or so that had been a reasonably successful endeavor.
Q That continued as we speak; correct?
A Yes. In a very much diminished fashion. There are far fewer tobacco farmers than there used to be in the PeeDee region. It
doesn't account for--it doesn't rank as highly as it once did in terms of contribution involved in the state.
Q So it used to be Number I and now it might be Number 2 behind soy beans; is that right?
A That is my recollection. To explain that or put that statement larger, in the 1950's almost 45-percent of all South Carolina
were living from agriculture, primarily cotton. Now it is about 1.2-percent and tobacco I believe is second amongst the 1.2-
percent who farm. Only does loom nearly as large or as important economically to the state as it once did, although it is still
important today? It is a number of people primarily earn their living in agriculture.
Q You wrote an article by a public lecture on Page 9, “Political Corruption in South Carolina.” What was that political corruption
in South Carolina that you were talking about?
A There was a specific instance of--there was a federal sting operation, where the FBI came in and used the lobbyists that they
had arrested for cocaine distribution to bribe state legislators to support for pari-mutuel betting in South Carolina. They were,
in fact, able to produce indictments an indict, I think, 15, 16, of them, of state legislators, and this occurred in the 1980's and
early 1990's, and most of those convictions had been overturned in the prosecurial.
Q The political corruption in that summary, there wasn't anything else involved other than that?
A That was essentially it.
Q How many hours have you spent so far working on this Engles case?
A I believe at this point 55, 60 hours.
Q Does that include the deposition today?
A Yes, it would.
Q Is there anything that you haven't already done that you plan to do to prepare for your testimony at trial if in fact you testify
at trial?
A It is certainly possible that I might review additional material if something comes to my attention. I wouldn't want to preclude
that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q Do you have any friends or relatives who work for any of the law firms representing the tobacco companies?
A No, I do not.
Q Have you ever received any grants of any kind, including research grants that were funded, at least in part, by any tobacco
company or any affiliate of a tobacco company such as Council for Tobacco Research?
A No, I have not.
Q Now, the money that you received as an expert, does it go to you or to the university?
A It goes to me personally.
Q So that the work you do as an expert consultant totally is separate from your work as a professor or an associate professor
at the University of South Carolina; is that correct?
A Well, it is work that I do over and above the work that I do for my faculty position for the University of South Carolina, yes.
Q Now, you first started working as an expert witness on tobacco related cases and you told me, if this is right, it was 1996.
A I believe that I first began my research in 1995 in August or September of that year.
Q That was the Clark versus Liggett case?
A No. The Connors versus Reynolds was the first case that I became involved with at some point in my research on that case.
It was part of my research--as a matter of fact, that case was delayed from the point of view that definitely that may not be
the accurate legal term, and then I began working on the Clark case and at--I think at the time I believe I indicated to you
earlier in the deposition.
Q Did you prepare any written reports for the Connors case?
A No. The answer I gave earlier on that involved all research.
MR. KOETHE: There was expert disclosure, John, for clarification for that on the Connors case.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Other than the expert disclosure--
A I did not prepare any other records.
Q On any of the tobacco related cases; correct?
A Correct.
Q Now, the Clark versus Liggett case that you were deposed in, how many hours have you spent on that case?
A My recollection on that was between 40 and 50 hours. I am not precise on that. Approximately that amount.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q I think you already answered, but just to make sure, those three cases which would be Clark, Connors and Engles, are the
only three cases where you have been an expert in a tobacco related case; correct?
A Yes. That is correct.
Q The only other time that you have ever been an expert on any other case that is not tobacco was for the seven hours back
in the '80s sometime; correct?
A Yes. It might have been 1990. It was '89 or '90, yes.
Q Have you been approached at all about working or serving as an expert in any other tobacco cases, even if you are not working
on them yet, any other tobacco cases?
A I have not.
Q The next question I am going to ask you is one where I am going to ask you for your personal belief. Does cigarette smoking
cause any disease?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: I do believe that I answered that question earlier, but I will state it again. For the record, my personal opinion
is not given as anyone who is a medical or scientific expert, is that the evidence that I am familiar with convinces me that the
risks associated with cigarette smoking and a number of diseases are significant and meaningful and I certainly don't want to
take those risks.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Aside from the risks that you are convinced about, are you convinced that any diseases are caused by cigarette smoking?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. I think it has been asked and answered. Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: Again, I attempted to answer that question. I am not a medical expert, but I believe that if you smoke you will
probably shorten your life by doing so and encounter more health problems if you do than if you don't. That is my personal view.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you believe that it has been proven that cigarette smoking causes diseases?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Again, I personally am convinced that the possibilities are significantly greater that you will be afflicted with
certain disease if you smoke than if you don't.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Are you convinced at least for some people it is more than a possibility that cigarettes definitely cause disease for some people?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
THE WITNESS: I don't understand that question. Restate it.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, take your friend who had lung cancer. Was he a smoker, the chairman of your department?
A Yes, he was.
Q How many packs a day did he smoke?
A That I don't know.
Q Did you see him smoking?
A Yes.
Q Did he smoke frequently?
A I guess that would be a fair characterization of it. He also drank heavily to excess, and I would personally label him probably
as an alcoholic.
Q Did cigarette smoking cause his lung cancer?
A I don't know what caused his lung cancer. I am certainly convinced that his drinking and smoking put him at a risk for disease.
Q So you cannot state that the cigarette smoking caused that particular individual's lung cancer; is that correct?
A No. I simply don't have the expertise in doing that.
Q Do you know if cigarette smoking has actually caused the death of even one person?
A Again, if you simply want my personal lay persons opinion on the subject, without any claims that it carries any expertise
with it, I do believe that people shorten their lives through their decision to smoke.
Q Does that mean that you do believe that some individual's deaths have been caused by cigarette smoking?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. Asked and answered many times.
THE WITNESS: I believe exactly what I said. I believe that some individuals, by their decision to smoke, have shortened their
lives, and to put themselves at a higher, substantially higher risk for certain diseases than if they decided not to smoke.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know any individuals under the age of 18 who smoke cigarettes?
A Currently I do not know anyone under that age that smokes cigarettes.
Q Have you ever known anyone under the age of 18 who was a regular smoker of cigarettes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Yes.
Q Have you ever known anyone under the age of 18 who was addicted to cigarettes?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I don't really believe that I have sufficient expertise to answer that, but people I have known who are under
the age of 18 and smoke certainly are people I personally believe could quit if they wanted to, or if they chose to try.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know what percentage of regular smokers become regular smokers before Age 18?
A No, I do not.
Q Was any part of your research that you did in preparation for your testimony as an expert witness today?
A I think that in doing the research that I have done, part of my preparation I did run across an estimate or statistics on sources
on that, but I simply don't recall them off the top of my head.
Q You said that amongst the things that you looked at to prepare for your expert testimony today were newspapers. What
newspapers did you look at?
A I looked at the New York Times, and I looked at a variety of Florida newspapers, the Miami Herald, the Florida Times Union,
the Tampa Tribune, the Palm Beach Post, and the Tallahassee Democrat.
Q When you looked at the newspapers what were you looking for?
A I was looking for terms relevant to the project that I was researching and that is as a historian, what level of public awareness
of common knowledge regarding health hazards and associated with smoking among ordinary people in any given community
at different points in time, and the information was out there of what knowledge did people have.
Q How did the newspapers ascertain that?
A Well, that is a variety of ways. The research that the newspapers did was to tell you what sources were covered and what
information about scientific studies and government agencies reported to the public, and what sort of advice people were getting
from newspaper columns, and medical columns about smoking, and human interest stories about smokers and non-smokers,
and information about efforts to get people to quit smoking.
There were a variety of ways in which newspaper editorials and polls that were published in newspapers and the newspapers
provided me an abundance of information with a variety of subjects and most importantly about the information in the
environment and certain periods of time in the community where the newspaper circulated.
Q What period of time did you look at for the newspapers?
A For all of the Florida papers a period of time from 1950 down to the present. It was not done on every single one of the
newspapers to the present, but the time period that I studied the New York Times it was pretty much throughout the 20th century.
Q You said that you looked at articles and newspaper articles and news articles and did you look at anything else?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Certain advertisements, I am sorry to ?? that, but advertisements, or anything that would appear in a newspaper related to
cigarette smoking that came to my attention.
Q Were there cigarette advertisements in newspapers during those periods of time?
A Yes, there were.
Q Were any of them full page advertisements?
A Yes. Some of them, or the majority of them, as I recall, were not.
Q What section of the newspaper were the cigarette advertisements placed?
A Usually they would appear as other advertisements did, in various news and sports sections of the paper and occasionally if
there was in various newspapers a Sunday magazine of a different title and cigarettes tended to be advertised in the magazine.
Q How many cigarette advertisements were there compared to the number of article related to the health effects of smoking?
A I don't know that I can quantify that for you. There were not a great many of the level of advertisement in different newspapers
that varied from time to time. I would say in the 1950's and '60s it was certainly not a saturation of advertising, but two and
three advertisements per week in newspapers. That would come through the 1950's and many dozens and hundreds of stories
in the same decade. That is the best comparison that I can give you.
Q Two and three advertisements per week in--
A Probably an average throughout the decade of the 1950's.
Q So you looked, for example, the New York Times, there was an average of two or three cigarette advertisements per week
in the 1950's and '60s?
A I would have reviewed more recently I would be more comfortable saying about the various Florida newspapers I listed.
Q The Florida newspapers, it is your recollection that they had two or three advertisements, cigarette advertisements per week,
an average, in the '50s and '60s; correct?
A In the '50s that is accurate.
Q When you say two or three per week, you mean two or three for each brand?
A Two or three for any cigarette brand--some--there were some more weeks there were more and some less. I would say three
would be a good average based upon my recollection of the materials that I surveyed.
Q During that same period of time in the '50s and '60s, how many television advertisements were there in a given week regarding
cigarettes?
A I do not know. I have no way of quantifying television advertisements.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q How many televisions, or how much information was on television regarding health effects of cigarettes during that period
of time?
A Again, I can't quantify that. There was a substantial amount of information available. There were entire shows that were
devoted in the '50s and '60s to stories about smoking and health. There were ones that was news coverage on a substantial degree
from the Times News Archives that I am familiar with that began collecting materials in the late 1960's and very frequent in
numerous news stories, which were available, which I have reviewed.
Q Now, are you familiar with which sections of the newspaper is the most read section?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I am not able to answer that.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q For example, do you know what percentage of the newspaper subscribers read the editorial page?
A I may have seen that information, but I do not know.
Q Do you know what percentage read the sports page?
A No.
Q Do you know what percentage look at a full page ad that shows attractive, young people in bathing suits?
A No.
Q Do you know what age group reads what section of the newspaper most frequently?
A No. What I was able to do was--
Q That is not what I am asking you. Do you know what age groups read each section of the paper most frequently?
MR. KOETHE: Go ahead and answer the best you can.
MR. HOAG: If the answer is you don't have an answer that is okay. I want to know.
THE WITNESS: I may have seen that information in the research regarding that, but I don't know it.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you know how many people watch the Beverly Hillbillies each week as compared to any of the people who watch the
daily newscast on TV?
A No. In no precise term I do not know that.
Q Do you know whether or not the number of people viewing cigarette advertising on television was far greater than the number
of people who viewed the newscast on television?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
A Again, I don't have an answer on that with any degree of specificity. I am aware and did see stories newscast have a larger
size audience than prime time shows, but I paid no attention to the advertising, et cetera.
Q You said that you reviewed the New York Times and the Florida newspapers during the specific periods that you already
mentioned. You said that you looked at TV. What did you look at as far as TV was concerned?
A I looked at some television materials. I looked at the television news clips regarding smoking and health that were available
and the Vanderbilt Television Archives from 1967 to the present.
I looked at various television specials mentioned in the newspapers and I was able to obtain copies of, the Edward R. Murrow
Show. He had a show that was a forerunner of the 60 Minutes on one of the other news-type things, See It Now and it showed
who was making health issues and the CBS report showed it in the 1960's.
I viewed some television commercials and I viewed some American Cancer Society anti-smoking spots.
Off the top of my head those are the television materials that I can recollect.
Q How many American Cancer Society smoking spots were there that were broadcast compared to the number of cigarette
advertisements?
A I don't know that I can answer that specifically with regard to the American Cancer Society. I believe that the government
policy was that there had to be one anti-smoking between 1966 and the ban on advertisement television, there had to be an anti-
smoking spot run for every three or four cigarette commercials as far as the equal time provision.
Q That was back in 1966?
A Or '67, I believe.
Q Prior to that there wasn't any such rule; correct?
A That is correct.
Q The Edward R. Murrow, you said that there was one See It Now program that was about cigarette smoking and health hazards?
A I am forgetting now whether it might have been a two-part show that he devoted in 1955, I believe, that chose that issue.
Q Do you remember the program that Edward R. Murrow did on Joe McCarthy?
A Yes. I do, or I probably more accurately I read stories in the accounts, the McCarthy era and Murrow's coverage.
Q His coverage was prior to 1955; wasn't it?
A Of the McCarthy?
Q Yes.
A Yes, I believe it was.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q On the See It Now broadcast related to the McCarthy, Edward R. Murrow was smoking heavily on the broadcast himself;
wasn't he?
A Yes, he was smoking heavily on the broadcast about cigarette smoking and health.
Q He was already addicted to cigarettes prior to that program; correct?
A He was smoking heavily on the show.
Q You don't know whether or not he was addicted to cigarettes or not?
A I don't know why Edward R. Murrow smokes.
Q You know that he died of lung cancer; correct?
A Yes.
MR. HOAG: I don't have any other questions.
MR. KOETHE: Before we finish up here I would like to take a couple of minute break and we will be back on in a few minutes.
(Thereupon, a recess was held.)
MR. KOETHE: We are done, but I want to make one clarification to his earlier testimony. I am going to ask him to do that.
Are you through?
MR. HOAG: Yes.
THE WITNESS: I think I misunderstood exactly what you asked at one point where I wanted to give you all the information.
In addition to the cases that were mentioned, which I have disclosed, I have also been consulted with on one additional case
where I have not been declared as an expert. I have done approximately 15 hours or research consultant work in this case which
is very similar to the type of research that I have done in other cases.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q What case is that?
A I am going to ask him to not disclose the case. He is doing the work for the Jones, Day tobacco litigation. I wanted to make
sure that the record was accurate, but I believe we are not required to identify the specific case until we decide to or not decide
to disclose him in that case.
Q That is a tobacco related case?
A Yes.
Q How long ago did you begin to work on that case?
A You know, I haven't reviewed my records on that. I believe that that was perhaps March of this year.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
Q You have not yet been disclosed as an expert witness in this case, or that particular case; right?
A That is correct.
Q The decision at this point hasn't been made whether or not you are actually used as an expert in that case.
A That is my understanding, yes.
Q Are you continuing to work on that case?
A Yes, I am.
Q How much work do you expect to do?
A I honestly don't know how much to complete the research I need to do.
Q What is your assignment in that case?
A Just to do exactly the same as in the other cases that I worked on in terms of public awareness of health hazards of smoking.
Q Is that a Florida case?
MR. KOETHE: I object to the question.
I ask him not to answer.
MR. HOAG: Certify that. I would like to have that question certified whether it is a Florida case or not.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q What tobacco company or tobacco companies were involved in that case?
MR. KOETHE: Objection. I think he stated that he was working for Jones, Day and has been asked to consult with Jones, Day
on the matter. I don't believe we are required to disclose the case and what it involves. I think the questions of that nature that
you are asking in an effort to essentially determine that information. So I don't think that that is proper.
MR. HOAG: I will certify that question too.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Now, aside from this one other case that you are discussing now, are there any other cases where you have been consulted,
even if you have not been specifically specified as an expert witness?
A No, there are not.
Q Of course, I mean not just with Jones, Day, but any other law firm.
A The same answer. There are no other cases with any other law firms.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs, v. RJ..., 1997 WL 34673167...
MR. KOETHE: That is all we wanted.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I have one other question about the case that you are working on now. Is it a private case, an individual action, or is it a
class action?
MR. KOETHE: It is not a class action, John.
MR. HOAG: Does it involve more than one plaintiff?
MR. KOETHE: Again, I am going to object and ask him not to answer.
MR. HOAG: Certify the question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Has that case been brought by any state?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
MR. HOAG: Certify the question. I am finished.
MR. KOETHE: Does anybody else have anything?
MR. MCCONNELL: No.
(Thereupon, the deposition was concluded at 1:00 p.m., reading and signing having been waived.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56
