Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Original Image of 2010 WL 3000717 (PDF)
2010 WL 3000717 (D.Conn.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, D. Connecticut.
Barbara A. IZZARELLI,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY.
No. 99CV02338.
April 1, 2010.
(Deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: D.Conn.
Name of Expert: Louis M. Kyriakoudes
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
[Note: Pages 2-4 missing in original document]
witness.
MR. QUINN:
Michael Quinn here representing plaintiffs Hibner and Humpal.
MS. CASE:
Ashlie Case, from Jones Day, for R.J. Reynolds.
MR. HENK:
Pete Henk for ?? USA.
MS. KAPETANOVIC:
Kathleen Kapetanovic for Liggett Group. Inc.
LOUIS KYRIAKOUDES. Ph.D. having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Good morning, professor.
A. Good morning.
Q. We've ?? several times before; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you've been deposed many times?
A. That's correct.
Q. And so you understand that you must give verbal answers to my questions.
A. Yes. I understand that.
Q. Okay. And you understand we can't interrupt each other while we're conducting this deposition. You understand that?
A. I understand that.
Q. And do you also understand that you must answer the questions that I ask?
A. Well, I'll do my best.
Q. That's fair enough. And you understand that this videotaped deposition may be used at trial?
A. That's right. That's why you are filming it.
Q. Good. You are an expert. I know you know.
Now, we've got a lot to cover today, so if I ask you a question that may be fairly answered yes or no, will you give me a yes
or no answer?
A. Yes.
Q. And, similarly, if I ask you a question that requires a more detailed answer, you will give me a more detailed answer?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, you understand you've just been sworn to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Do you understand
that?
A. That's right.
Q. And do you have any questions about what that means?
A. No.
Q. So if I ask you a question that you've answered untruthfully in a prior deposition, you will give me a truthful answer today?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. I have not answered questions untruthfully in prior depositions, but I will continue to, as I've always done, answer truthfully
in this deposition, of course.
MS. CASE:
Q. And you will tell me the whole truth?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. I will answer truthfully, yes.
MS. CASE:
Q. Answer truthfully including giving the whole entire truth?
A. Yes. That's what the -- what I said I would do just a moment ago.
Q. And you understand that every time you are under oath in a deposition or at a trial, you are sworn to give the truth, the whole
truth and nothing but the truth, correct?
A. That's correct. I take that very seriously.
Q. Are you taking any medications today that might interfere with your ability to give truthful testimony?
A. No.
Q. How about any medications that might interfere with your memory?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever been diagnosed with a memory problem?
A. No.
Q. Have you had any unusual memory problems this summer?
A. No.
Q. Has anyone mentioned to you, a family member, colleague that you seem to be having trouble with your memory?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. You are not represented by plaintiffs counsel today; is that correct?
A. That's right. I'm here by myself.
Q. Mr. Quinn is not your lawyer?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you retained or consulted with counsel privately in your -- on your own behalf with regard to any matters you think
we might get into today?
A. To represent me?
Q. Correct.
A. No. I don't have an attorney.
Q. You understand that you are here today to give testimony about the Hibner and Humpal cases?
A. That's right.
Q. And are you prepared to do so at this time?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have to do any additional work before you are prepared to testify about those two cases?
A. No.
MS. CASE:
I'm going to mark these 1 and 2, please.
(Exhibits 1 and 2 were marked.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Professor. I've just handed you what I've marked Exhibits 1 and 2 to your deposition.
A. I see them.
Q. And ?? is your notice -- Amended Notice of taking Deposition in the Hibner case; is that right?
A. Yes, uh-huh.
Q. And Exhibit 2 is the same for the Humpal case, correct?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. I'm going to ask you to turn to Page ?? of Exhibit 1, Schedule A. Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And it's also page 4 of Exhibit ??
A. I've got them both here.
Q. Have you seen these before?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you bring anything with you today in response to the schedule ??, Exhibits 1 and ??
A. I did.
Q. Can you hand those things to me at this time?
What you've just handed me is the most recent copy of your CV?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is that right?
A. Uh-huh.
MS. CASE:
I'll mark that Exhibit 3.
(Exhibit 3 was marked.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Has this changed in any meaningful way in the last month?
A. No. No.
Q. What else did you bring with you today?
A. I had acquired, through my research, some more television advertisements and other documents, so I just burned them to
a dish. And I can give you that or maybe the court reporter can return it to me after you've copied it and I can send it onto
you, however you want to do that.
Q. You've just handed me a CD. It has your name at the top, and at the bottom. It says, sup, reliance, Humpal/Hibner?
A. That's right.
Q. Can you tell me basically what's on the disk?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. What's on the disk is a folder called Commercials that has video commercials for cigarette products. There is a sheet of paper
within that file that also has links to video commercials, and an on-line database through the Legacy database, rather than use
up a lot of memory space. Then, in one of the items here, it was asked for me to send -- I forget the language, but anything that
I had sent Mr. Quinn, and so I included those materials in there, as well.
Q. Can you tell me what those are?
A. Yes. I sent him a copy of my standard generic expert report, and there is a copy of a newspaper article from The New York
Times in 2002 or 2003 called History For Hire.
Q. Okay. Can you tell me why you sent those to Mr. Quinn?
A. We had not had much of a conversation. He was interested in my opinions related to tobacco, generally, and I said, the best
way is to read this generic expert report that I've composed. It is an introduction to what I do and ?? I do it and my opinions.
It's something that I've produced to the defense many times. So it's not -- it's unchanged from prior versions of it that I've
produced in the past.
Q. When did you send you, as you called it, generic expert report to Mr. Quinn?
A. Probably about two weeks ago. Yeah, two weeks ago.
Q. Was that your first contact with Mr. Quinn?
A. Yes.
Q. Was that the first you had heard of the Hibner or Humpal cases?
A. No. Prior to that, I had dealt with a secretary in his lawyer's office.
Q. When was that?
A. Earlier. I think I got materials related to this case back when I was deposed for the Koballa case and I actually had some
confusion at the Koballa deposition as to what was the course of things to be discussed at that particular deposition. So they
sent me materials at that time.
Q. At the time of your Koballa deposition on August 24th or at the same time you were sent Koballa materials prior to that
deposition?
A. Prior to that deposition.
Q. Can you give me your best recollection of when that was?
A. It was just before that.
Q. So it wasn't months before that; it was a matter of days?
A. Days. Yeah, days.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. So days before the Koballa deposition was the first time you had seen materials for Koballa. Louis, Hibner or Humpal?
A. Yes. And this paralegal, Tammy Todd, had sent materials after that, as well, in this month, as well. And basically, since
you are going to ask, those materials are the depositions of essentially the family members involved in both of those cases
and the interrogatories.
Q. And those are not on this disk that you produced?
A. No. You have those already, so I didn't see a need to burn copies.
Q. Okay. Is there anything -- and we'll go through and list what exactly you have reviewed for this case. Is there anything
else that you have in your possession that's responsive to any of the requests in schedule A of Exhibits 1 or 2 that you haven't
produced at this time?
A. Well, I've got a couple of other documents that I want to add to my reliance list. So I brought this book which I've had in my
possession. This is my only copy and I don't have a photocopy of it, so I do want this back. Is that possible?
This is an advertising publication, I guess you would call it. So this --
Q. Let me take a look at that.
A. And I brought another artifact. I have two artifacts. I have this artifact, which is a historical artifact. And this, also, I would
need back. Is that possible?
q. Could you just describe for me the red box that you have?
A. This box is a package of Blosser's cigarettes.
Q. What are Blosser's cigarettes?
A. They're a medical cigarette that was sold in the first half of the 20th Century.
Q. And why did you bring that with you today?
A. It ?? be something I would ?? to use at the trial, so I just wanted to identify it to you.
Q. Why might you want to use it at the trial?
A. Well, depending upon how much of the history that we get into on the direct examination, we may want to talk about the
tradition of medical cigarettes, which are a part of the rise of smoking, generally. And Blosser's is an example of a popular
medical cigarette.
Q. And I just said “the trial.” You know, we're here today to talk about two cases, so if I don't specify one or the other, will
you assume I'm talking about both Humpal and Hibner?
A. Yes. And I'll follow the same practice. So just now, what I said applied to both.
Q. And could you just describe for me the other item that you brought?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes. This is a book entitled, “Breakthrough! MERIT Presents History-Changing Achievements, 1851 to 1978, as reported
by the New York Times.” And it's published -- it's published by Philip Morris, Incorporated, for Merit Kings and 100s. And I
know in came out at the time that the Merit brand was introduced in the late '70s, but it doesn't have an actual date inside of ??.
Q. Why did you bring that with you today?
A. It's an example of materials related to the Merit cigarette and, in this case. Merit is one of the brands smoked. So I have this
in my personal collection and I brought it with me as an artifact.
(Off the record.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Professor, we were talking about the Schedule A to Exhibits 1 and 2. Is it your practice to review Schedule A attached to
your Notice of Deposition prior to appearing for the deposition?
A. Yes.
Q. And you do that regularly in all the cases in which you are deposed?
A. Yes.
Q. Just to finish up with Exhibits 1 and 2, other than the two items you mentioned that are on the CD that you provided in
terms of your communications with Mr. Quinn, have you had any other communications by e-mail or in any written form with
anyone from -- anyone representing the plaintiff?
A. Including, like, the secretary about scheduling?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. I have scheduling memos from -- know know, telling me what time to be here and when am I available with Tammy
Todd, the secretary. I did not bring those.
And I have one communication with Mr. Quinn which I did not bring.
Q. What is the content of that communication that you did not bring?
A. Well, that's a privileged communication so I did not bring that.
Q. You understand that Mr. Quinn is not your lawyer, correct?
A. Right. But in discussing the communication with him, he identified it as a privileged item, where we discussed trial strategy
and not to bring that.
Q. You were discussing trial strategy with Mr. Quinn?
A. In an e-mail, yes.
Q. And the e-mail, what is the date on it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. The exact date, it's been within the last ten days. Probably about ten days ago.
Q. And who initiated the communication?
A. I did.
Q. What did you write in your e-mail to Mr. Quinn?
MR. QUINN:
Object.
A. Well, I discussed aspects of the trial, from a strategic perspective, related to my testimony.
MS. CASE:
Q. Please tell me the content of that communication.
MR. QUINN:
Object. He said it was privileged.
A. Said it was privileged. I'm not going to answer that.
MS. CASE:
Q. Are you an attorney, sir?
A. No. But we -- we discussed this e-mail. If there's a problem with it, if the judge wants me to turn it over. I'll happily, of
course, do so.
q. When you initiated this particular e-mail communication, did you believe you were engaging in attorney strategy sessions
with Mr. Quinn?
A. Well, I didn't say attorney strategy. They were trial strategy discussion ?? to my testimony. ??, I did.
Q. So you were intending to advise Mr. Quinn on how he should ?? trial with regard to your testimony?
A. Yes. That would be fair. Or how to proceed with my testimony, yes.
Q. And how to proceed with your testimony so as to best maximize the chance that the plaintiff will prevail at trial?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No. To -- so that he understands my opinions. He's coming from a position of, my perception, of not having ever done a
tobacco case before, and not as knowledgeable as some of the other attorneys of some factual materials, so I offered him just
some basic discussion related to that.
MS. CASE:
Q. So you weren't advising him on trial strategy on how to lose a trial, were you?
A. No, I wasn't advising him how to lose or how to win, simply related to my testimony, me, personally.
Q. And you understand that Mr. Quinn wants to use your testimony to prevail at trial?
A. Well. I know that that's what he wants to do. That's right.
Q. And you were telling him how to best use your testimony to do ??
MR. QUINN:
Objection.
A. No. That's not exactly how it was phrased.
MS. CASE:
Q. It doesn't matter to you one way or the other?
A. Well, I've been asked this question. I was asked this question in the Barbanell testimony and you can refer back to that
previous answer. In fact, it might have been you that asked me the question. No, it wasn't. It was the other attorney, Jenny
Brown, and you can refer to it. I went into great detail and you can refer to that previous answer.
Q. Please provide the answer. I don't believe we had the videotape of that deposition, and Barbanell is in Broward County.
These cases are in Volusia County. Please provide an answer.
A. OH, sure. I can summarize it for you.
MS. CASE:
Could you read the question back for him?
COURT REPORTER:
“It doesn't matter to you one way or the other?”
A. That's right. I'm not an advocate in this litigation. I'm simply here to bear witness to the truth, as I understand it, using the
methods and materials normally used in my profession as a historian.
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you are choosing to withhold an e-mail because you were providing what you are deeming attorney privileged
communication with Mr. Quinn, plaintiffs' counsel?
A. That's correct.
Q. Has Mr. Quinn responded to that e-mail?
A. He did.
Q. When did he respond?
A. Shortly thereafter, and within a day or two.
Q. What was the content of his response?
A. A response to my first e-mail. I mean, I hate to be vague about that, but if I was going to give you the e-mail, you know,
you would have all that in front of you, but to answer these questions would essentially require me to tell you everything that
was in this e-mail strategy.
Q. You are currently refusing to produce your communications with plaintiffs counsel as they relate to both of these cases; is
that what you are telling me?
A. Yes. One set of communications. That's right.
Q. One set of communications. So we've already talked about the e-mail from you to Mr. Quinn discussing trial strategy, correct?
A. Yes, broadly, yes.
Q. And then there was his response. Was that also discussing trial strategy?
A. It was in response to some issues that I had raised, yes.
Q. So it was discussing trial strategy?
A. Yes, testimony strategy related to me, related to my testimony.
Q. How to present your testimony in the best way for him at trial?
A. No. I wouldn't describe it that way.
Q. How would you describe it?
A. I'm not going to, if it was privileged. ?? would be no point.
Q. Are you personally, refusing to produce these or are you refusing to produce them at the direction of plaintiff's counsel?
A. Well, I'm not sure on this one.
MR. QUINN:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Well, let me speak to that. Yes. He is --
MS. CASE:
Please let the witness answer the question, and then if you want to add something, go ahead.
MR. QUINN:
Go ahead. Answer the question.
A. I'm not sure.
MS. CASE:
Q. You are not sure if you are refusing to produce them or if you are refusing to produce them at Mr. Quinn's direction?
A. Well, I'll say this, in my discussions with Mr. Quinn about the communications, we agreed that this set of communications
reflected what he described as privileged material related to the trial, and so therefore -- bascially, the answer would be that
I'm not producting it because he's mounted objections on that.
MR. QUINN:
And, now, let me speak to that objection. The Florida rule on experts says that if you believe something is privileged that you
have the right not to produce it, if we believe -- I believe it is privileged.
I believe that those two communications are privileged. They deal with trial. And I told him that it was a privilege.
Under the rule, once we do that, what we are required to tell you, is to identify it for you, which he has done. You may now
seek, through the court, the opportunity to test me as to whether it's privileged or not. But there's no need going into it anymore
because he's not going to tell you what it was.
MS. CASE:
I understand. I'm still going to go into it a little beyond that.
Q. With that statement, after you sent an e-mail to Mr. Quinn and Mr. Quinn responded to you, were there any further e-mail
communications?
A. No.
Q. You were questioned in the Gray deposition about a document that had been sent to you that you had believed was attorney
work product. Do you recall that?
A. Gray deposition? Which one was that?
Q. Gray would have been on September 1st. Plaintiff's counsel is Matt Schultz. Do you remember that?
A. Okay. I remember that deposition.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. You had been sent, I believe by a paralegal in Mr. Schultz' office, a document discussing trial strategy that you deemed
attorney work product. Do you remember that?
A. Are you getting that confused with the Koballa case?
Q. Perhaps.
A. Because in the Koballa case, just to help you out here, I was sent, what I believe was in error, a document which when I
opened it, it was clearly like a game plan, if you will. And I though, I don't want to see this, and I closed it. And I sent an e-
mail to the secretary that had sent this saying that I believe you sent this to me in error. Even I, with my limited knowledge,
understand that this is what falls within the boundaries of privileged communications and was not something I needed to see.
It was not relevant in any way to my expertise or my testimony, et cetera. So I think that might be what you are talking about.
Q. I think you might be right. So when you received that document from the paralegal that you identified and recognized as
work product, you responded somewhat harshly to the paralegal, saying that you didn't want to receive this and you didn't need
it, you weren't supposed to be seeing privileged communications. Do you recall that?
A. Yes. That had no business or no relevance to my testimony or my role in the trial.
Q. And so, certainly, you wouldn't initiate a communication with plaintiff's counsel that you intended to be work product
privileged; is that right?
A. Well, no, that's not right. Those two things have nothing to do with each other. I mean, if you are trying to link this Koballa
incident in where I was sent clearly, in error, materials that are only relevant to, say, for example, the attorney who is trying
the case and his assistants, to something that directly relates to my testimony, which I discussed with Mr. Quinn, those are two
completely separate and unrelated types of communication.
Q. Well, you've been involved in litigation for quite some time, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you believe you can recognize attorney work product when you see it, correct?
A. Yes. When it so clearly screams that, as in the case of the one that we just described.
Q. So do you, personally, consider the e-mail that you wrote to Mr. Quinn to be attorney work product?
A. Me, personally?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, I'm not qualified. You know, I'm not an attorney. You know, he's making the objection.
Q. I'm not asking you. He made his position quite clear.
A. Yeah.
Q. I'm asking you what you believe with regard to that e-mail.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
Well, I'm going to object. And my objection is based on the fact that he's already told you it's my objection. It's not his. Therefore,
he doesn't have to explain my reasons. If you want to know my reasons, you can ask me for my reasons.
MS. CASE:
I want to know his understanding of the communication.
MR. QUINN:
Well, he was instructed not to present it. That's the end of the discussion.
MS. CASE:
That's not the end of the discussion, as far as I'm concerned. In order to move forward with seeking these communications,
we'll need as specific information about them as we can get.
MR. QUINN:
You have that.
MS. CASE:
So that's what I'm getting.
MR. QUINN:
No. You already have that. You are going beyond that. You already have the fact that there are two e-mails within the last ten
days, one from him, one from me. I know exactly where they are. I know exactly how to produce them to you.
Once you are able to show me that they're not work product, I'll give them to you. Now, let's move on.
MS. CASE:
Q. When you drafted that e-mail to Mr. Quinn, did you believe you were creating a work product document?
MR. QUINN:
Ojbect. Asked and answered. You don't have to answer the same question over and over again in this deposition.
THE WITNESS:
Okay.
MS. CASE:
Q. Are you refusing to answer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No. I'll refer you to my prior answer.
Q. I've asked the question, but you haven't answered it. I can ask the question as may times as necessary for you to provide
me with an answer to the question.
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form. That's misleading.
A. I agree. I mean, I -- as I was writing the letter, did I think this was privileged? That word did not come into my mind when
I wrote it. Did I think it related to how the trial might be conducted, in terms of my testimony? Yes. I did believe that it was
a sensitive piece of communication.
So, yes, I mean, it was a substantive communication about matters related to my testimony that I intended for only the attorney.
Mr. Quinn, to see. That was in my mind when I wrote it. Whether that's privileged or not, you know, I'm not an attorney, so
I didn't hold it up against a standard, a legal standard in my mind.
Q. Do you intend to testify at trial in the Hibner case?
A. I intend to. Yes. I intend to testify. Give, you mean?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. I do intend, in both cases, to be there in person.
Q. In Hompal, as well?
A. Yes.
Q. And when you drafted the e-mail to Mr. Quinn, was it your intention to testify live, as a witness, at the Hompal and Hibner
trials?
A. Yes. My intention has been to appear in person, yes.
Q. So at the time you drafted that e-mail, you weren't under some understanding that you were only a consulting expert that
would not be called to testify at trial?
A. That's correct. Yes.
Q. Going back to Exhibits 1 and 2, aside from the documents you've already handed me and the documents that Mr. Quinn has
instructed you not to produce, is there anything else that you have in your possession that is responsive to any of the requests
in schedule A?
A. Well, I was sent a formal objection that was filed with the court to some of these items by Mr. Quinn or maybe his secretary.
I forget. And I haven't brought things that they've objected to.
Q. What haven't you brought that's responsive to these requests?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, Item 16 and 17, I haven't brought anything relevant to that.
Q. Do you have anything in your possession relevant to 16 or 17?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Tell me what you have that's relevant to Request Number 16.
A. Well, the way number 16 is worded, it asks for any communications that I've had with Robert Proctor of any -- I interpret that
to mean of any type, even stuff not related to litigation, even personal matters. And I do have things related to other research
projects that I've done. I have materials related to that in my file.
But as the objection says, it bears no relevance to this case, so I did not bring them.
Q. Describe for me what you have in your possession that you haven't brought with you in response to 16.
A. E-mails related to organizing a session at the History of Science Society, e-mails related to a personal nature, you know,
with Mr. Proctor.
Q. And you have a personal relationship with Dr. Proctor?
A. A friendly relationship, yes. We're colleagues. Yes.
Q. And what sort of personal matters would you be discussing with Dr. Proctor?
A. You know, just friendship matters. I mean, nothing like, you know, bearing one's soul. It's nothing like that. Just friendship
e-mails, just like anyone would send an e-mail to a friend, where you have a common research and professional identification,
as he and I do, as we're both historians of the cigarette industry and smoking and health, generally, in American life, and indeed,
globally.
Q. Do you remember what my question was?
A. Yes. You asked for a description of things of a personal nature and I gave you the answer.
Q. And what you described as being personal in nature largely related to your commonality of being historians of the cigarette
industry. You consider those communications to be personal?
A. Well, there's personal information in those communications. I mean, we're colleagues and friends.
Q. And there's information regarding your roles as cigarette historians; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. And so you have in your possession e-mails with Robert Proctor that relate to your role as cigarette historians that also
contain personal information and you haven't brought those with you today?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Can you describe for me or can you give me an idea of how many e-mails we're talking about that have sort of that hybrid
character, that have some --
A. I haven't counted them, so I can't. I mean, I haven't counted them.
Q. Over what time period have these occurred?
A. Well, in my possession, I have e-mails from probably the last year. That's about how far back my e-mails go.
Q. And you delete e-mails older than a year; is that --
A. Well, when you change computers, you often lose your e-mail. That's right.
Q. Did you change computers a year ago?
A. I changed e-mail systems.
Q. Is that when you went to the GMail?
A. I went to GMail. I also, at a point in time, after I had adopted the use of GMail, I had actually downloaded GMail. I was kind
of learning how to use the program. And downloaded the e-mails onto an older computer and don't have those in my possession.
Q. Where is the older computer?
A. Probably in the trash. I mean, it was a broken -- when I turned it into the university, it was broken. The screen came off.
It was a laptop. The hinges broke. I think they junked it.
Q. And do you recall when it was that you got the new computer?
A. I got the new computer, I believe, in 2008.
Q. Can you be more specific? Was it at the beginning of the school year? Was it at the end of the school year?
A. Oh, yes. I would have gotten it -- when did I upgrade? It would have either been in the fall of 2007 or the spring of 2008,
sometime in the school year, the '07/'08 school year.
Q. So do you have in your possession all of your e-mails that you've sent or received since the time you upgraded computers
during the '07/'08 school year?
A. No, No. I delete e-mails. I answered this question, again. I believe it was Mr. Henk asked me this question in the Koballa
deposition.
And I periodically go through and delete e-mails. I don't have an automatic deletion, but I do -- it gets to be too many, and so
I'll go through and just kind of delete whole qualities -- or whole areas of e-mails that I don't need anymore for my work.
Q. Have you deleted e-mails from Robert Proctor?
A. I'm sure I have, yes. I periodically go through, I do mass deletes. I'm sure I have, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Have you deleted e-mails that you've sent to Robert Proctor?
A. Well, with GMail, you can delete the whole conversation. You get rid of the whole thing. So that includes send and recevie.
Q. So that's a yes?
A. Yes.
Q. I don't think you gave me an idea of even roughly how many e-mails we're talking about between you and Robert Proctor
that you don't feel that you need to produce. Is it five? Is it ten? Is it a hundred? What is your best estimate of how many e-
mails you decided not to bring today?
A. Well, the way I interpret Number 16, it's every e-mail between me and Robert Proctor.
Q. That's a good way to interpret it.
A. And, you know, I've probably communicated with Robert a couple of times, maybe three times a month, on average,
sometimes more, sometimes less, over the time that I've known him, certainly at the times that I've been on this e-mail system.
So you do the math on that. Maybe 26 or 40 e-mails a year, maybe more or less. I haven't gone through and counted them. I
mean, would have to go back and do inventory, which I've not done that.
Q. So it would be fair to say that there are dozens of e-mails that you have with Robert Proctor that you haven't brought with
you today in response to Exhibit 16?
A. Dozens. Yes.
Q. Do you have any e-mails between you and Robert Proctor that you haven't produced to the defendants previously that relate
specifically to the situation with Betty Smocovitis at the University of Florida?
A. No. I've given you everything on that.
Q. You are sure?
A. Yep.
Q. Positive?
A. Positive, everything I have.
Q. And there's nothing else?
A. Nothing else.
Q. Other than the dozens of e-mails that you are not producing at this time?
A. Well, that's a different category. Now we're talking about the ones related to --
Q. Cigarette litigation, generally?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Oh, well, now you are talking -- that's different than -- cigarette litigation is a different category than being a historian of
the tobacco industry and smoking and American life.
Q. You separate those two?
A. I do, absolutely.
Q. But you have e-mails related to your work as a -- your research as a historian of the cigarette industry with Dr. Proctor that
you are not producing at this time?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Anything else in response to 16 that you have that you are not producing?
A. No. What you just described. But just to clarify, when you asked about materials related to this business with the university
of Florida. I did produce the forwarded e-mails to you and the forwarding e-mail which I sent a deposition to Mr. Proctor,
which is referred to in prior, testimony.
Q. How about Number 17?
A. Well, this is broad. I mean, very broad.
Q. I thought you weren't a lawyer, sir.
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form, argumentative.
A. No. I'm not a lawyer, but I can read English. I am literate. And so in that capacity, as a person who has the ability to read and
understand English. I make a reasonable judgment that this is a very broad response and I'm not bringing anything responsive
to this.
MS. CASE:
Q. You are personally deciding not to bring anything responsive to 17?
A. Yes. That would be me, as well.
Q. Mr. Quinn hasn't directed you not to bring anything responsive? That is your personal decision?
A. That's right. I personally object, in the capacity of myself, if that's possible. I don't know if it is. But this requires a fishing
expedition into matters that are completely unrelated to this particular set of Cases.
Q. I'll just read 17. It say. “All correspondence or communications, including e-mails, text messages and faxes between you or
your assistants and any person or entity relating in any way to smoking and health litigation.”
You understand that we're here today in a smoking and health case. Two, actually.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes. I also understand I'm here in my capacity as an expert witness, and the purpose of this deposition is for you to inquire
of me what I know and what I'm likely to testify and the materials that Im going to rely upon to give my expert testimony in
this case. That, of course, I'll happily provide to you.
But this attempt at fishing -- in fact. I wouldn't even call it fishing. I would call it case netting. I'm not going to bring anything
responsive to that.
Q. So you have documents in your possession related to smoking and health litigation that you are refusing to produce in
response to number 17?
A. Yes, many documents that deal with issues not even related to your client or any client represented in this room.
Q. How about specifically communications with any counsel representing plaintiffs in the Hibner and Humpal cases?
MR. QUINN:
Objection, asked and answered.
MS. CASE:
Q. Other than the two we've discussed, are there additional e-mails, text messages, anything with counsel for the Hibner and
Humpal plaintiffs?
A. No.
Q. Are there specific documents that you are thinking of that you don't want to produce in response to Number 17?
A. No. I'm not thinking of any particular documents. I mean, this -- I mean, this is just so broad. The way I interpret this, to
satisfy it, would have to -- I'd just give you my computer, and you can come through my office and poke around and, you know,
spend a few days taking whatever you want. I mean, that's how I interpret that.
To me, it's very broad. And it deals with matters, again, that would require you to have access to matters that have nothing to
do with your client or Mr. Henk's client; for that matter, anything even happening in the united States. It would give you access
to things that would involve international issues, which have no bearing on anything related to any issue that would come up
in Volusia County litigation, Engle progeny litigation or any litigation that I anticipate coming out of this deposition.
Q. All right. Let's limit it to Engle progeny litigation. With that caveat, do you have any documents in your possession responsive
to Number 17, Engle progeny cases in Florida, specifically?
MR. QUINN:
That you haven't already produced.
A. Well, you can go back to all my prior depositions in the cases and follow up on a discussion of that. I have delivered many
e-mails. Like in the koballa deposition, I think I handed over a whole bunch of e-mails.
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Let's eliminate documents that you've already produced at some point to defense counsel in Engle progenv litigation, Do
you have other documents. Communications, e-mails, text messages, things that you haven't yet identified that you can do at
this time?
A. Well, I have materials relating to cases that are happening in the future for which there has been no Notice of Deposition,
and to which I have consulted with attorneys and have not, as of yet, made a decision as to whether I would or would not appear
in person. So that category of materials.
And when those cases come to a position where there is a deposition notice and you have the opportunity to request that
correspondence, I'll respond to those requests at that time.
Q. Aside from cases where you've been asked to consult and you haven't yet been named or noticed for deposition, how about
anything beyond that?
A. No, nothing beyond that.
Q. How about anything in relation to Engle progeny litigation generally? You've discussed an e-mail that you sent to Mr. Quinn,
that work product privilege has been alleged on that- Have you sent other e-mails to plaintiffs' counsel representing perspective
Engle plaintiffs regarding strategy, anything along those lines?
A. Well, again, I refer back to ray previous answer. There are -- up to this point in time, everything in which there has been
a deposition notice, and I've produced or discussed those documents. There are, in my files, correspondence relating to future
cases, which I don't know their status in the courts, but from my perspective, I've not been asked to schedule a deposition. You
know, I've explained my opinions and things like that. So I do have some documents related to that. And when those come
up, I'll produce those.
Q. Fair enough. We were talking a little bit before about Dr. Proctor. You described him as your friend; is that correct?
A. Yes. We're colleagues and friends.
Q. And you've worked with him both inside and outside the judicial process in matters relating to your testimony in tobacco
litigation?
A. Well, that's not quite accurate. I've never worked with him as an expert witness. I mean, we've never collaborated as experts.
You know, he does his testimony. My testimony is different than his, covers different areas.
But, professionally, as historians, we have worked together, that's true.
Q. And you've also collaborated on articles; is that right?
A. Well, again, that's not quite right. We have not coauthored any articles. We worked together to compile one table. He wrote
an article. I wrote an article as part of a larger research project. When you say “collaborate on an article,” in academia, that
usually means co-authorship, so that's just maybe a little bit more precise than you probably meant it in your mind.
Q. It sounds like you are parsing word; with me.
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. The two of you collaborated on a table, you worked together on a table that was published in an article that I believe he
authored and you authored. Is that the same table?
A. Yes. Right. But the two articles were separate. We did work together on a larger research project, though.
Q. So you worked together on a larger research project that resulted in each of you writing articles about historians who testified
for defendants in cigarette litigation?
A. That's right.
Q. So you both worked together on that project?
A. Yes. We each had different assignments, yes.
Q. And you worked together to compile the table listing defense historians; is that true?
A. That's right.
Q. And did you consider that to be related to the testimony that you gave in cigarette litigation?
A. Related to the testimony? I mean, to the extent that it covers the subject of litigation, it's related, yes.
Q. And in that table that you collaborated with Dr. Proctor on, you identified not only testifying experts for defendants in
cigarette litigation, but also Consulting experts, correct?
A. Yes. That's right.
Q. And you understand The difference between testifying and consulting experts, correct?
A. Well, to the extent that consultants consult and don't intend to testify, advise, you know, yes, that's the difference. I understand.
Q. And do you understand that work with consulting experts is privileged attorney work product?
A. That sounds reasonable, sure.
Q. And you, nevertheless, identified consulting experts in this article that you wrote?
A. That's right. I drew upon historical documents that were -- well, they were subpoenaed by the united states Congress. I'm not
an expert in all of the legal maneuverings that happened, but my understanding is that some of these claims of privilege went
all the way up to the Supreme Court and were lost. And these documents, therefore, are available to scholars.
Q. And you understand those were documents generated in relation to litigation?
A. That's right. But I didn't use them in a litigation environment. I used them in a peer-reviewed scholarly environment.
Q. You used them. That was all that I asked you, correct?
A. Right. In a peer-reviewed scholarly study.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And do you have any reason to believe that any defendant intentionally waived their work product privilege with regard
to those documents?
A. It makes no matter to me whatsoever. I researched the documents that were in the archive and reported on my findings in
this peer-reviewed study.
Q. You learned the names of these consulting experts from what you understood to be privileged industry documents?
A. Oh, well, at the time. When I was researching that, I didn't chink of them as privileged or not. I just thought of them as
archival sources.
The privilege is an issue that, as far as I'm concerned, applies only to legal matters. This is historical matters. And if a document
or set of documents or an archive is there, we're entitled to use that as part of our research, and especially access it through an
on-line archive, such as that maintained by the University of California.
Q. I'm not asking you whether you were entitled to use the documents or not. I'm asking you whether you understood that you
were looking at documents that had been generated by defendants' Counsel and intended to be cloaked under the privilege of
attorney/client.
A. Well, I did that research in 2004 and 2005.
Q. I didn't ask you when you did the research.
A. Well, but I'm trying to answer your question. Add, you know, at that time, I didn't think either way, whether they were
privileged or not. That was not something I was thinking about.
So I guess to give you an answer is, I didn't think about it. I didn't address that issue over the course of my research. It did not
enter into my consideration as using these historical documents for my study.
So the answer would be, no, I didn't understand them to be privileged at that time.
Q. Do you agree that privilege is a legitimate aspect of litigation and necessary for both sides within this process?
A. Oh, yes. For litigation, yes. Yes. Now we're talking about litigation, yes.
Q. And you've invoked that privilege today, correct, to avoid producing e-mails that you have with plaintiffs' counsel?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. You and Dr. Proctor have been Communicating for years with regard to your research on the cigarette industry, correct?
A. For the record, I don't appreciate you using your fingers to make quotes when you use the term “research” in terms of my
professional work. I find that demeaning.
Q. I apologize. I didn't --
A. Well, I appreciate the apology. Thank you.
Q. I didn't know specifically how to word it. So let me try --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. It's research. Research would be an adequate word for it.
Q. Okay. I'm asking specifically about your article research. Maybe I didn't make my question clear. You had parsed the words
about whether you were collaborating or not Collaborating, so that was still the vein that I was talking about.
A. Okay.
Q. Okay. Do you understand?
A. Well, ask your question.
Q. Let me just start that over. You have been communicating with Dr. Proctor for many years about smoking and health
litigation; is that right?
A. About research on smoking and health.
Q. So about research on smoking and health, you and Dr. Proctor have been communicating for years?
A. That's correct.
Q. Would you say that it's been roughly three times a month for a period of years?
A. Sometimes more, sometimes less. I mean, long periods of time will go by where we have no reason to talk because we're
not doing any particular work, any particular work that's in common. Then when we do have some project, we'll talk a lot or
e-mail a lot.
Q. And your relationship with Dr. Proctor began when?
A. We talked on the telephone beginning in 2003. I was still in Chapel Hill then, we didn't meet in person until we both attended
a conference in 2004.
Q. So since 2004, on average, three times per month, you've Communicated with Dr. Proctor?
A. I'll refer to my previous answer. Sometimes more, sometimes less.
Q. On average, that's your best estimate?
A. Yes. A couple, maybe three.
Q. And have you communicated with Dr. Proctor about -- obviously, you've communicated with Dr. Proctor about defense
historians testifying in cigarette litigation.
A. Yes.
Q. And you consider questions about the public awareness of the risks of cigarette smoking to be central to the tobacco industry's
defense of product liability suits?
A. That was what I discovered in the course of my research from the data project, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you believe that to be true?
A. Yes. I think that's true. If it's central -- I don't know if it's Central, but certainly it's an important feature of the litigation
defense, as I understand it, from reading the materials that I used for that study.
Q. Do you recall describing it as central in your article?
A. Maybe I used that word.
Q. In your tobacco control article?
A. Is that the word I used?
Q. Yes.
A. Then I'll stick to that.
Q. You are nor going to make me get it out, are you?
A. NO.
Q. Do you believe that your and Dr. Proctor's articles could have the tendency to dissuade professional historians from working
with counsel for tobacco companies?
A. Well, I don't think it has yet. I mean, I think it -- there seems to be no shortage of historians that you can draw upon for
consultation and for testimony, I mean, there seem to be a fairly large number of people that have worked with the industry, so
I don't think my article -- if you use that as a test, it certainly hasn't affected things for you.
Q. I asked you if you thought it could dissuade professional historians from working for counsel with the tobacco industry.
A. No. No. I don't think so.
Q. You think it has no effect on academic historians in any capacity?
A. Well, that's a different question. No. I think it --
Q. It is a different question.
A. I think it does have an effect in the sense that it discusses a part of the profession that's not well-known to a lot of historians,
and that is historians acting as expert witnesses, generally, which is not something that's well-known to lots of people in the
profession. And it's -- and, in particular, it's especially, within that subset, people that have advised or consulted far the tobacco
industry or have testified as experts at the request of the industry, that also is not well-known.
But keep in mind, that article was published in a journal called Tobacco Control. And I don't know how many historians have
actually read that article. It's probably quite a small number because that's a public health article, and that's really for people
who are involved in issues related to tobacco.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
You can go back and look at that, article and the people that have appeared in that, and I think you would toe hard pressed to
find more than two or three or four historians who have ever published in it.
Q. DO you remember what my question was?
A. Yes, I did. I gave you a good answer.
MS. CASE:
Could you read back my question, please.
COURT REPORTER:
“You think it has no effect on academic historians in any capacity?”
MS. CASE:
Q. Could you answer my question, please?
A. Well, I think it has -- I gave you -- it has some effect in the ways that I described previously, I just did a moment ago.
Q. Which would simply be notifying the few historians that may read Tobacco Control about the use of expert witnesses in
litigation? Does that fairly summarize what you believe the effect to be?
A. You did it better than I did. That's very good.
Q. Maybe one day we could switch chairs. We'll get out of here a little quicker.
Dr. Proctor has communicated with you by e-mail about his contacts with Professor Smocovitis at the university of Florida,
correct?
A. He forwarded those two e-mails, and I've discussed those, and you have those, yes.
Q. And his contacts with -- “his” meaning Dr. Proctor's contacts with Professor Smocovitis related to research assistants that
several graduate students at the University of Florida were providing to Dr. Gregg Michel, a defense historian; is that true?
A. That's right, Yes.
Q. And you received the two e-mails from Proctor forwarding his communications with Professor Smocovitis May 3rd and
June 8th of this year; is that true?
A. Those are the dates, as I recall them.
Q. And each of those two e-mails forwards to you three e-mails between Dr. Proctor and Professor Smocovitis discussing the
fact that there were graduate students assisting defense counsel; is that right?
A. That sounds right, yes. It's an extensive correspondence. I didn't count it up, but that sounds about right.
Q. But Dr. Proctor is forwarding you a chain of e-mails when he sends you each of those two e-mails, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Right. That's what was in there.
Q. And the e-mails that you received from Dr. Proctor had a different title on them when he forwarded them to you than when
he was communicating with Professor Smocovitis. Do you recall that?
A. No. I haven't studied them that carefully.
Q. Now, in May of this year, you sent Dr. Proctor, by e-mail, a transcript of Dr. Michel's deposition testimony in Martin; is
that true?
A. That's true, yes.
Q. And you did that because, I believe you testified, that you like to keep track of who is testifying on behalf of the defense
in smoking and health cases; is that right?
A. Yes. I mean, I wrote that article and I kind of keep up on that, yes.
Q. So you believe that to be related to your article, the forwarding of the transcript to Dr. Proctor?
A. Yes.
Q. And that relates to the articles you've both written criticizing defense historians?
A. That's correct.
Q. Plaintiff's attorney in Martin had forwarded you the transcript; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I believe you told me in the Barbanell deposition that you hadn't read the transcript of Dr. Michel's deposition before
Sending it to Dr. Proctor. Is that still true?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Have you read it since?
A. No, I haven't, actually.
Q. And you forwarded it to Dr. Proctor because you believed he would be interested in Dr. Michel's testimony?
A. Well, I forwarded it to him because it was an easy way to say, as I said in the forwarding e-mail -- and I'm paraphrasing
-- here's another historian working for R.J. Reynolds.
Q. But no one asked you to forward the deposition testimony to Dr. Proctor, correct?
A. No. No. I did that on my own.
Q. So you could have chosen not to send the deposition testimony to Dr. Proctor; is that true?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. That's true, yes.
Q. Now, you've come to learn that after you forwarded that transcript. Dr. Proctor began communicating with Professor
Smocovitis at the university of Florida; is that right?
A. I've come to learn that. That's right.
Q. And you understand that there were certain graduate students identified by Dr. Michel during the deposition in Martin?
A. Right. I guess the -- his research assistants.
Q. And some of them were at the University of Florida?
A. That's what I understand, yes.
Q. And so the topic of the communications between Dr. Proctor and Smocovitis were the graduate students at the University
of Florida where she works. Dr. Smocovitis, and those graduate students assisting defense expert Gregg Michel?
A. That's correct.
Q. And the same day that Dr. Proctor began communicating with Professor Smocovitis, he forwarded you the e-mail string of
their conversation that they had had; is that right?
A. Oh, I would have to look at the notes. You know, I haven't reviewed those e-mails very carefully. I mean, that would be an
objective fact that could be established by the e-mail, which you are hading me.
(Exhibit 9 was marked.)
MS. CASE:
I'm handing you what's been marked Exhibit 9, for the sake of associates drafting motions in limine in the future.
A. Okay. It's the same day. Yeah. I just didn't have that in my memory.
Q. And what I handed you, Exhibit 9, was an e-mail from Dr. Proctor, to you, on Saturday, May 23rd, at 4:24 p.m., and it's
titled “Spreading the Word.” Do you see that at the top?
A. Up-huh. Yes.
Q. And beneath, what he's forwarding you is communication with Professor Smocovitis that had occurred also on May 23rd --
A. At least at the top, yes.
Q. If you want to take a look at both of the e-mails. This on includes two e-mails.
VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by. We're going off the record. This concludes Tape 1 of the deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes. The time is 10:17.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
(Off the record.)
(Exhibit 10 was marked.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
This is Tape 2 in the deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes. The time is 10:18.
MS. CASE:
Q. Still on Exhibit 9, professor, which you received on May 23rd, can you confirm for me that both of the e-mails or actually
all three of the e-mails back and forth between Dr. Proctor and Smocovitis were also on May 23rd?
A. Yes. They're all from the same day.
Q. So you agree that the same day that he forwarded the communication to you, this first one, was the same day that he initiated
his communication with Professor Smocovitis?
A. Yes.
Q. And I believe you've testified that you opened and read that e-mail on May 23rd; is that right?
A. I skimmed it very briefly and it didn't seem to require any action on my part. I certainly didn't read the entire thing. It's a
very lengthy e-mail.
Q. So on May 23rd -- I'm sorry. Were you finished?
A. Yes.
Q. On May 23rd, you opened the e-mail that Robert Proctor had sent you on May 23rd?
A. Oh. I don't know if I opened it that day. I couldn't tell you if I read it that day or the next day or -- I don't remember when
I encountered that e-mail. I had forgotten about it. That was an e-mail that made no impression upon me; otherwise, I would
have mentioned -- I didn't have a memory of that particular e-mail.
Q. Had you received similar e-mails from Dr. Proctor in the past?
A. Similar? We have, in the past, discussed historians testifying for the industry, particularly when we were working on the
data project. So, yeah, I guess I have.
Q. Hand he ever forwarded you an e-mail string between himself and another third party?
A. I don't think so.
Q. So this is the first time it occurred, to your knowledge?
A. Yes. This is probably the first time it occurred. I'm busy. This is not my main job. And so, you know, if there's nothing that
requires me to respond to an e-mail, I move on.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Is it true that this year, more than half your income is derived from cigarette litigation?
A. Yes, but not half my time.
Q. Two days after you received this e-mail from Dr. Proctor, you were deposed in the Campbell case. Do you recall that?
A. Yes.
Q. And you didn't bring the e-mail from Dr. Proctor to anyone's attention during the Campbell deposition; is that true?
A. No. I didn't bring that e-mail. I probably hadn't read it.
Q. And you did not produce a copy of the May 23rd e-mail from Dr. Proctor at your May 25th Cambell deposition, did you?
A. No.
Q. On June 8th, you received a second e-mail from Dr. Proctor frowarding more communications with Dr. Smocovitis at the
University of Florida about Dr. Michel's graduate students. Do you recall that?
A. Well, I know that -- I mean, I recall it when I found it in my e-mail files, when I was searching for another e-mail in response
to a request by one of the defense attorneys.
Q. So you did receive an e-mail dated June 8th from Dr. Proctor; is that true?
A. That's true, yes.
Q. But you maintain that you didn't read that e-mail at the time that it was sent?
A. No. I didn't even know that I had that in there.
Q. When do you believe that you read that e-mail?
MR. QUINN:
I'm going to object at this point in time. And I want to put this on the record.
MS. CASE:
Can you let him finish the question?
MR. QUINN:
No. I'm going to object, then he can Finish the question.
All of this information, all of this questioning has already been done once. And I've read it, and I don't think it has a thing in
the world to do with him testifying as an expert in the Hibner and the Humpal case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
And so because it is my understanding that this deposition is of an expert who is going to testify in Humpal and Hibner, that's
how he was identified, and that is my understanding of what the notice was for, you know the rule and I know the rule as to
what you are supposed to be asking, for purposes of an expert's deposition.
This is way beyond that, and the proof that it is way beyond that is you asking him early in this deposition whether he had
a layer. And, to me, that means that there ma be some other reason other than just deposing this gentleman because he is an
expert in Hibner and Humpal.
Had I known that, and had I known, I would have filed a protective order and let the court know these things that you are
attempting to go into that have nothing to do with what he's going to testify about.
I'm putting that objection on the record because this witness needs to know that you may be deposing him for something other
than his testimony in Hibner and Humpal. I don't know what it is, but I'm smart enough to know that it's beyond finding out
what he's going to testify to in Humpal and Hibner. And so I'm putting that objection on the record, that I think it is beyond
the scope of the rule regarding experts and I want him to know that.
Now, go on.
MS. CASE:
You are through with your --
MR. QUINN:
I am through for the time being.
MS. CASE:
I understand that questions as to bias and truthfulness are always relevant to an expert's testimony, and that certainly relates to
his testimony in Hibner and Humpal, So I'm going to continue.
MR. QUINN:
But that is not what you are asking him, about this bias. You are asking him about his relationship with Proctor, which is a
totally different issue here. I know the road you are going down in Proctor. This man is not on that road.
And if your attempt is to put him on that road, then that's a different deposition than the deposition that you've noticed today,
and your asking him whether he has a lawyer should trigger him to that.
And if that's what you want to do, if your attempt is to destroy this man's character, then maybe we ought to postpone this, let
you guys determine that that's what you want to do, and then let this man go hire himself a lawyer and see what kind of causes
of action may arise from your attempting to do that.
Or, we can take this deposition for what it is, and that is, a discovery deposition, Now, that's all I've got to say about it.
MR. HENK:
I want to say, for the record, for Philip Morris that I disagree with everything that Mr. Quinn just said.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
Am I supposed to be surprised at that?
MR. HENK:
I'm just making a statement, sir. I didn't respond to what you said, I am just saying, for the record, I disagree 100 percent with
what you said.
And, Mr. Quinn, neither you, nor any other lawyers in the room get to decide the scope of cross-examination at trial of Dr.
Kyriakoudes. That's the judge's role.
And that's all I'm going to say for the record right now.
MR. QUINN:
And I've already stated to you that I'm not --
MR. HENK:
Then why are you going to restate it?
MR. QUINN:
That I'm not going to interfere with questions that deal with his testimony. And all I'm saying is, is that if it is for some other
purpose, you should have let him know that it was for some other purpose.
MS. CASE:
Questions relating to Professor Kyriakoudes's bias and willingness to comply with the oath are relevant in any deposition that
he takes. If we have reason to ask questions with regard to those, we are fully entitled to do so. That relates to trial testimony
in any case in which he would testify.
MR. QUINN:
Well, I've put my objection on the record. We'll take it up later.
MS. CASE:
Q. Now, on June 25th, you were deposed in the Barbanell case. Do you recall that?
A. Yes.
Q. And during the Barbanell deposition, I asked you about your communications with Dr. Proctor and the Florida graduate
students. Do you recall that?
A. Is that how you asked it? You asked me if I was aware of that situation.
Q. I asked you about your communications with Dr. Proctor. Do you recall that? I asked you if you hand sent him the transcript.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Oh, that question. Yeah, and I answered that. I told you that I had, yes.
Q. And you told me, at that time, that -- you admitted that you had forwarded the transcript to Dr. Proctor.
A. Yes. Of course, I have.
Q. And you testified that was the only communication between you and Dr. Proctor on the matter.
A. That's right. And I was answering truthfully because that's all I -- I understood to be the only communication.
Q. And June 25th was after you had received the two e-mails on May 3rd -- 23rd and June 8, correct?
A. I've explained that in the Koballa deposition. You can refer to my answer on that.
Q. And in Barbanell, you did not produce the two e-mails that we've marked Exhibits 9 and 10?
A. That's correct.
Q. And so you had these e-mails in your possession, but you didn't produce them?
MR. QUINN:
Ojbect.
A. Well, I didn't know that I had them in my possession.
MS. CASE:
Q. I didn't ask you if you knew you had them in your possession. I asked them if you had them in your possession and didn't
produce them.
MR. QUINN:
Object, argumentative.
A. Yes. They were in my possession.
That's true.
MS. CASE:
Q. And you were later deposed in the Grossman case on July 9th. Do you recall that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. It was just after your family vacation, correct?
A. That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And during that deposition, you were again asked about your communications with Dr. Proctor and the Florida grad students.
You recall that?
A. That's right.
Q. And on July 9th, you did not disclose the two e-mails marked Exhibits 9 and 10?
A. No. But what I did say was that I had --
Q. Professor --
A. I have to explain. That I had the forwarded e-mail that we've referred to, where I sent Mr. Proctor the deposition. And they
asked for me to produce that. And I said, sure, and when I went and searched for that, that's when I discovered these other
two e-mails.
Q. So after you were deposed in the Grossman case on July 9th, you went back to your e-mail and you searched for
communications with Proctor; is that true?
A. Yes. Later in that month, yes, and then came up -- sometime after that period, yes.
Q. And it's you testimony that you did so because defense counsel's questions made you think to do that?
A. Well, they made us -- they asked me for -- I identified a piece of e-mail correspondence that I did know about and had in my
files. I mean, I get 150 e-mails a day, sometimes more. And very little of it is spam. But I did identify to them this forwarded
e-mail. And they said, well, can we have a copy of that? And I said, sure, I'll go back and look for it. And in the process of
pulling that out of my file, I discovered these other two e-mails.
Q. With the understanding that the impetus to go back and search your e-mail occurred at the July 9th deposition in the Grossman
case, I want you to give me your best recollection of when you went and searched for communications with Proctor in your
GMail.
A. It would have been, you know, later in that month, probably towards the -- towards the end of July, when I started thinking
about the -- started thinking about this tobacco stuff again. When I have to think about it and do stuff to it, I work on it and
then do my main job.
Q. What computer did you search for those communications with Proctor? Was it a home computer, office computer?
A. My office computer that I access through the -- you know, GMail is a web-based service.
Q. And so you were in your office at University of Southern Mississippi on that computer and --
A. Well, I bring that computer home. I was probably at home because I worked at home for two weeks, basically the second
half of July.
Q. So you have a laptop that's provided by your university?
A. That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you take that between home and work?
A. That's right.
Q. Is that the only computer that you access your GMail account on?
A. No. I mean, I can access it through any public terminal.
Q. Do you have a home computer?
A. Not one that I use. My -- we have just laptops in our home. Sometimes I might use my wife's computer, but generally,
that's not my practice.
Q. Do you have a recollection of using your university-issued laptop computer when you performed the search for Proctor in
your GMail in box?
A. Yes. I would have used my laptop.
Q. You know that an analysis of your computer hard drive would tell us precisely when you searched for Proctor in your GMail
in box.
A. I'm not a computer expert, but I wouldn't be surprised by that.
Q. Would you be willing to have your computer examined by a forensic expert for the limited purpose of ascertaining when
exactly you searched for communications with Proctor in your Gmail?
A. Okay. This has reached the point, having taken into consideration what Mr. Quinn has said, I'm not going to answer any
more of these questions. They don't seem relevant to the case. If you want to re-notice this deposition and I can hire an attorney,
I'll be happy to do that.
Q. So I will take that as a no, you would not be willing to have your hard drive examined to determine when, precisely, you
searched for communications with Proctor?
MR. QUINN:
Object. That was not his answer. I didn't hear a “no” anywhere.
A. That's my answer. I'm not going to elaborate or add to that.
MS. CASE:
Q. So you won't tell me whether or not you are -- you certainly aren't willing to agree to allow us to have your hard drive
examined to answer this question; is that fair?
MR. QUINN:
Object.
A. I will refer to my previous answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MS. CASE:
Q. Which did not answer the question, in my opinion.
A. Okay.
Q. Are you willing to let us look at your computer?
MR. QUINN:
Object, asked and answered.
MS. CASE:
Q. Do you have something to hide?
A. No. I have nothing to hide, but this is -- again, taking into account what Mr. Quinn said, I came to this deposition thinking
that this would be a deposition about my professional opinions related to this case. Hibner and Humpal, and this is a different
matter altogether.
Q. But you are not willing to answer my question?
All right. So I will take that as a no on the computer hard drive search.
MR. QUINN:
Object.
MS. CASE:
Q. Shortly after --
MR. QUINN:
That's a statement, not a question.
MS. CASE:
Q. Going with late July being the time you roughly discovered these communications with Proctor that you had in your e-mail,
it was more than a month before you produced those; is that right?
A. That's true.
Q. And the very first time you produced them was at your August 24th deposition in the Koballa case?
A. That's true.
Q. Now, you testified at the Barbanell trial in Fort Lauderdale on July 27th and 28th. Do you recall that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. That's correct.
Q. And had you found the two e-mails from Proctor before you testified in the Barbanell trial?
A. I think so. I think I had found them before then.
Q. But you didn't bring that discovery to anyone's attention?
A. It didn't seem to matter to me. I was focused on other matters.
Q. So you knew that you had testified that you had simply one e-mail that you had sent to Proctor forwarding Dr. Michel's
transcript and you testified to that in the Barbanell deposition. Do you recall that?
A. I'm going to refresh my memory. I don't think you asked me about e-mails in that testimony.
Q. Would you consider a question about communications to be a question about e-mails?
A. Yes, I would. You asked me about -- I'm looking here at the testimony. You asked me about a bunch of hypotheticals,
about outing people, about writing articles, and a bunch of, I would describe it as value questions, about whether the wisdom
of pursuing this particular line of activity on the part of an expert, and I gave you my answers on that.
MS. CASE:
Move to strike as not responsive to any question.
A. Proceed.
MS. CASE:
Q. Could you answer the question?
A. I did.
Q. Do you recall indicating that the entire universe of your communications with Dr. Proctor relating in any way to Dr. Michel's
research assistants was simply forwarding the first e-mail of Dr. Michael's transcript?
A. That was my recollection. When I gave -- whatever I said in the deposition, my recollection and my knowledge, when I gave
that deposition in Barbanell, was that was the only matter that I had relevant to that.
Q. But by the time of the Barbanell trial at the end of July, you know that wasn't the case; is that true?
A. Right. That's -- I had searched for those e-mails and I didn't think anything of it because it certainly wasn't anything I was
involved in.
Q. And so when you testified at the Barbanell trial, you knew that your testimony had been inaccurate at the Barbanell
deposition?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, I don't feel like it was that inaccurate. All I know is that when I searched for those e-mails, I found those two forwarded
e-mails in my files that I had not been aware of. But if I had been asked at the Barbanell trial about them, I certainly would
have answered about them, but I wasn't asked that.
Q. At the time of the Barbanell trial, you and Dr. Proctor were the only two people who knew about those e-mails; is that right?
A. Well, I knew what I had. I guess he would be the other -- I mean, I can't speak to what he knows. He sent them to me,
obviously, but I'm only going to speak for myself.
Q. You would assume that he knew that he forwarded you those e-mails, correct?
A. Yes. I would assume that, yes.
Q. So as far as you knew, you were the only two who had any knowledge of those communications between you and Dr. Proctor?
A. Well, they're forwarded e-mails between another person, Betty Smocovitis. She probably knew about them.
Q. I'm talking about his forwarding them to you. Do you have any reason to believe she knew he had forwarded them to you?
A. I wouldn't know either way.
Q. So as far as you know, the only people that you know for sure had any idea about these e-mails marked Exhibits 9 and 10
were you and Dr. Proctor?
A. I guess so. That would seem reasonable.
Q. So is there any reason to expect that at the Barbanell trial you would have been asked questions about e-mails that defense
counsel didn't know existed?
MR. QUINN:
Obejct to the form.
A. It's reasonable.
MS. CASE:
Q. So would you consider the testimony you gave in the Barbanell trial to be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
A. Yes.
Q. Even though you hadn't corrected your misstatement from the deposition, however inadvertent?
A. Yes.
Q. You were under oath again on August 5th, when you testified in the Martin trial. Do you recall that?
A. Yes. No. I think that was a different trial.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Is it the Campbell trial?
A. That's right.
Q. My mistake. So the Campbell trial was August 5th, is when you testified there.
A. That sounds right.
Q. And, again, obviously, you had already found the e-mails from Dr. Proctor by that time?
A. That's right.
Q. But you didn't bring those to anyone's attention in relation to your testimony in Campbell?
A. No. I didn't seen them to be relevant.
Q. Then again you were deposed on August 19th in the Willis and Evers cases, and you didn't bring those e-mails to anyone's
attention at that time?
A. No. It didn't come up in those depositions.
Q. You received a Schedule A attached to your Notice of Deposition in both Willis and Evers, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And as you testified earlier today, it is your practice to review Schedule A prior to attending a deposition, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. So you believe you reviewed Schedule A prior to your Willis deposition on August 19th?
A. Yes. And I brought the materials relevant to the Willis case.
Q. You don't find your e-mails with Dr. Proctor to be relevant to the Willis case?
A. Say that again.
Q. Do you believe your e-mails with Dr. Proctor, these two e-mails, Exhibits 9 and 10, you believe those were not responsive
to the document request you received in the Willis case?
A. I didn't think they were.
Q. Now, on Friday, August 21st you called Dr. Proctor and spoke to him on the telephone; is that true?
A. That's right.
Q. And you called him or he called you?
A. I answered questions related to this back in the Koballa case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. It was unclear to me, so I want to confirm whether you called him or he called you.
A. I'm not exactly sure who called whom. But I did talk to him on the phone.
Q. Regardless of who called who, you learned, during that conversation with Dr. Proctor on August 21st, that him e-mails had
been subpoenaed from Stanford; is that true?
A. Well, I thought -- I thought his e-mails to the University of Florida had been subpoenaed. That's what I understood.
Q. So you learned during that phone call that there was a subpoena asking for Proctor's e-mails to the University of Florida?
A. That's right.
Q. So is it your testimony that you were unaware that e-mails had been subpoenaed from Stanford, as well?
A. You know, I didn't read -- I didn't see a subpoena. It seemed like you were doing the full court press on him, so you probably
were getting, you know -- using a shotgun approach, so I wouldn't be surprised if you were going for everything.
Q. You wouldn't be surprised if the defense counsel had requested the e-mails from Stanford, as well?
A. That's true.
Q. So August 21st was when you first learned about any subpoena related To Dr. Proctor's e-mails?
A. That's correct.
Q. Did watt Schultz's name come up during the phone conversation with Dr. Proctor?
A. I don't think so. I don't -- yes. I don't know that he has a relationship with Matt Schultz. I don't think he -- he may or may
not even know him.
Q. What did Dr. Proctor say about The Subpoena or subpoenas?
MR. QUINN:
Have you testified to this previously?
THE WITNESS:
I testified to this previously.
MR. QUINN:
would you like to refresh your memory by looking at what you testified to previously?
A. I brought it with me and I'm going to take my time. This has really gone to a new level. I mean, I've been forthcoming
with you on these matters, and, you know, you are wanting to use it for another reason and my patience with this is just about
over. So, you know --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MS. CASE:
Q. Would you refresh your recollection, sir?
A. Yeah. I'm going to take my time.
MS. CASE:
why don't we take a short break while the doctor refreshes his recollection. VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by, we are going off the record. The time is 10:43.
(off the record.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
we are back on the record. The time is 11:01.
MS. CASE:
Q. Professor, have you had a chance to refresh your recollection?
A. I have, yes.
MS. CASE:
Monica, could you please read back my last question?
COURT REPORTER:
“What did Dr. Proctor say about the subpoena or subpoenas?”
A. Well, he told me that there was a hearing on these issues that have come up in all the depositions, so that's what he talked about.
MS. CASE:
Q. What did he say about the hearing? And let me just ask if what you are looking at is your testimony in the Koballa deposition.
Is that what you used to refresh your recollection?
A. That's correct.
Q. And that's what you are looking at right now?
A. That's right. And just so you know, I'm going to read the answers verbatim that are relevant to the question from Koballa.
Q. Do you not have a recollection of what you discussed with Dr. Proctor about the hearing? If you have an independent
recollection. I would ask that you testify --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. You've already asked me about this.
MR. QUINN:
And I'm going to object. This has been asked and answered more than once and this witness knows that.
MS. CASE:
Q. Would you answer, please?
A. Yes. Since I've been asked questions on this already, I'll just refer to my prior answer, and we can go through this way or,
you know, if you want to expedite it. You are in control of that process.
Q. My question was, what did Dr. Proctor say about the bearing?
A. I talked to him on Friday afternoon.
Q. What was the question that you are reading the response to?
A. We're on Page 227.
Q. For the record, if you wouldn't mind, since you are going from the deposition transcript, if you could read the question that
you are reading the answer for, please.
A. “But even though you spoke with Dr. Proctor on Friday, the same day as the hearing, you didn't speak with Dr. Proctor
about the issue, correct?
“I don't think he -- he didn't bring it up. I talked to him on Friday afternoon. The hearing may not have been over. I don't know
what time this hearing was held on Friday. He may not have even known, but we didn't talk about it,”
And my recollection, my independent recollection is that he told me that there was a hearing, but the outcome was not known
to him at that time. That's my recollection now. That nay -- yon know, I'm not a party -- I don't know what actually went down
in your courtroom down in Volusia county, so I don't have any independent knowledge of that, outside of this situation.
Q. Did Dr. Proctor give you any indication of what he expected the outcome of that hearing would be?
A. No.
Q. Did he believe that the e-mails would be produced?
MR. QUINN:
abject, asked and answered.
A. It didn't come up.
MS. CASE:
Q. On August 22nd, the following day after you spoke with Proctor, you sent Matc Schultz a text message; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes. We had a deposition scheduled for that week.
Q. And did you send this text message from your personal cell phone?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And who is your wireless carrier?
A. I have an iPhone.
Q. A wireless carrier would be, like, AT&T or --
A. AT&T. Only AT&T does iPhone.
Q. Is your account a personal account or is it through the university?
A. It's my own account.
Q. Are you the primary name on the account or is it in someone else's name?
MR. QUINN:
I'm going to object to this line of questioning. This is beyond the scope of him as an expert witness. If you read the rule, it is
clear that it's beyond the scope of him being produced as an expert witness.
We are here and we are ready to talk about Hibner and koballa and his testimony in those cases. We are not here to rehash what
has already been testified to about Proctor and his involvement with Proctor. That's not why we're here. Okay?
MS. CASE:
I'm currently asking --
MR. QUINN:
And I don't represent him regarding that. I represent him regarding why we are here. And I'm going to ask you to move away
from this line of questioning and to ask him the questions that you need to ask him so that you will know what he's going to
testify to in Humpal and Hibner. Because I don't know how much longer he's going to answer your questions about Proctor.
A. I'm not going to answer them without an attorney representing me. So you can ask your questions and I will sit here and
I will give the same answer.
MR. QUINN:
Now, doctor, are you doing that because you have already answered questions about this before in detail?
MS. CASE:
Object to that question. This is my deposition --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
Let me tell you something. You are absolutely right. This is so --
MS. CASE:
You are directing him not to answer?
MR. QUINN:
This is so unusual, and this is so out of context and out of character for a lawyer to be speaking up like this. I understand that.
But I also understand that you are way out of bounds, as far as I am concerned.
And since I don't represent this gentleman, I, as a lawyer, have a duty and an obligation to tell him what's going on. And to tell
him that he came here under my direction because I have hired him as an expert, and he's an expert on Hibner and Humpal,
which are the cases that I'm going to Try. And he is here to answer your questions about that.
And any questions that deal with his bias or his prejudice that you think may have bearing, he's already answered in prior
depositions, and he doesn't have to answer it all over again.
We will answer questions about the Hibner and the Humpal testimony that he intends to give, but anything else beyond that,
it's his call, not mine.
MS. CASE:
So you are not directing him not to answer?
MR. QUINN:
I'm not telling him anything. I don't represent him. You've already made it perfectly clear that I don't represent him and that he
doesn't have a lawyer here to advise him, and you, as a lawyer, know that.
Now, what is your obligation under that, ma'am?
MS. CASE:
I don't answer questions at deposition and I have no --
MR. QUINN:
Well, you know, normally, I don't ask questions of a lawyer in a deposition, but this is very strange and unusual, and so I am.
THE WITNESS:
I'm going to take a break, and make a contact, and retain an attorney and we can reconvene this when I feel more comfortable
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Sir. I haven't met with you before. I'm addressing Mr. Quinn. I haven't met you before. I don't know what your practice is with
regard to advising witnesses through speaking objections. I feel that's what you've done here.
Certainly, and question relevant to professor Kyriakoudes's bias and oath, ability to take an oath and understand the oath and
comply with it, those are relevant to his testimony, no matter what case it's being taken in, My questions are entirely appropriate
and I'm entitled to answers to them. If the witness would like to take a break and call an attorney, he's more than welcome
to do so.
MR. QUINN:
Your questions are repetitions. Your questions have already been asked and they're already been answered in prior depositions.
Your attempt here and your only attempt here is intimidation, and intimidation is not a purpose of the deposition. Okay?
MS. CASE:
Sir. I'm simply asking very specific direct questions.
MR. QUINN:
And we are more than happy --
THE WITNESS:
I'm stepping out of the room, if it's on the record.
MR. QUINN:
-- to answer your questions, him as an expert, in those two cases.
MS. CASE:
We're going to go off the record. Mr. Quinn can continue his ?? off the record, if he'd like.
VIDEO REPORTER:
We're going off the record. The time is 11:09.
(Off the record.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Now, professor, you took a break to make a phone call. Is there anything you would like to say at this point?
A. No. I didn't -- I wasn't successful in my phone call. Continue with your questions.
Q. You are willing to answer my questions at this time?
A. I'm willing to proceed.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. You are willing to proceed?
A. No. I meant, to ahead and proceed with your questions.
Q. Had you ever sent Mr. ?? a tent message before August 21st?
A. Yes.
Q. How many times?
A. I wouldn't -- I don't keep track of that.
Q. Is it your regular practice to communicate with Mr. Schultz via text message?
A. Regular practice? I'm not sure what that means. I have text messages -- text message with him on things like, for example,
he's asked me questions, where do you want to eat the night before a deposition.
Q. And have you ever produced those communications in response to a Schedule ?? to a deposition notice?
A. I wouldn't know how to produce them. How do you print out a text message?
Q. So Ill take that as a no?
A. No.
Q. You haven't produced the content of text messages with plaintiff's counsel at any point; is that true?
A. That's right. I don't know how to produce them.
Q. Any other counsel for plaintiffs in Engle progeny litigation with whom you've had text message communications?
A. I don't think anybody else. Matt Schultz uses text, so he sent me text and I reply to them.
Q. So the first -- I think you said the first text was not August 21st.
A. No.
Q. That wasn't the very first time?
A. No. But they've all been issues related to the matters I just described to you, which is, where do you want to get dinner. I'm
running behind, scheduling and those kinds of things.
Q. Anything that you'd describe as substantive?
A. No.
Q. Do you believe that the content of text messages is confidential?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No, no.
A. You understand that those are discoverable communications?
A. How do I -- how do I print -- how do I deliver them to you? I don't know how to do that. I've always thought of text messages
being kind of throwaway messages. But there may be some way to get them from the phone company, but I don't know how
do that and I don't have access to that.
Q. Do you consider text messages to be more confidential than e-mails?
A. No. I would think they'd be less.
Q. Why?
A. Because they're -- you know, they're throwaway conversations. I mean, I don't think of either of then being confidential, so --
Q. Okay. I'm not sure if you specifically answered. Other than Matt Schultz, can you name for me any other counsel representing
plaintiffs in Engle progeny litigation with whom you've exchanged text messages?
A. You know, I send text messages to indicate things like I'm running behind, and so people text all the time. I don't keep track.
I don't keep those in my possession. I don't know how to keep those in my possession, so therefore, I wouldn't know how to
produce them to you. I don't keep track of text messages.
Q. To your recollection, are there any other counsel representing plaintiffs in Engle progeny litigation with whom you've
communicated via text message, their names, please?
A. Oh, sure. Okay. I have, on occasion, exchanged text messages with, I believe, Gary page, who I've worked with. He uses
text message. Not everyone uses it.
Q. Anyone else besides Matt Schultz and Gary Page with whom you've exchanged text messages?
A. Not that I can recall.
Q. So those would be the only two?
A. That I can recall, that's right.
Q. Have you deleted text messages either from Mr. Page or Mr. Schultz?
A. Yes, as soon as I get them. Your phone fills up very quickly, so you have to delete them.
Q. So you deleted the text message that you sent to Mr. Schultz August 21st, 22nd?
A. August 21st or 22nd? I don't know. I mean, how do you retrieve text messages?
Q. You really don't know?
A. I mean, they pop up on your phone, and then you read them, and then aren't they deleted right after that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you have an phone, correct?
A. Right. I mean, I would have to go and look, you know.
Q. You don't know how to search for text messages that you've received on your phone?
A. No.
Q. Is that the case?
A. Right. I mean, there may be a may. I've only had this phone since June.
Q. Have you -- to your knowledge, have you changed some setting so that all text messages are deleted once they're read? Have
you taken steps to affirmatively make that how your phone operates?
A. No. You know, you might be imparting to me a higher level of technical sophistication. Text messaging is just something
that I started doing with -- when I got the Phone, which I got in June.
Q. As best you can recall, what was the extent of your text messages that you sent to Matt Schultz?
A. Oh, yeah. Give me a call.
Q. That was it?
A. Yes.
Q. Did he respond via text message?
A. Yes.
Q. What was his response via text message?
A. I believe what be said was, at the beach with the kids, call you later.
Q. And did you respond by a text message to his response?
A. No.
Q. You waited for him to call you?
A. Yes.
Q. And then he did call you?
A. Yes.
Q. That same day?
A. I think it was that day, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And the purpose of that call, J think you said you had a deposition coming up that week?
A. Uh-huh. That's correct.
Q. And you talked about arrangements for that deposition?
A. That's right.
Q. And you also talked briefly about the situation with the subpoena with Dr. Proctor, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. Why did you think to ask Mr. Schultz about the situation with the subpoena for Proctor's e-mails?
A. It just came up in the conversation.
Q. Who brought it up?
A. I don't know exactly. I can't recall exactly who brought it up, to be honest with you. It was a short conversation, just a
couple of Three minutes.
Q. Why did you think Mr. Schultz would know about the hearing on the subpoenas?
A. He keeps up with -- I mean, it's his job to keep up with that kind of thing. At least I presume, my understanding is, as an
attorney, he keeps up with issues related to tobacco litigation.
Q. And was that August 22nd phone call the very first time that you had spoken with Mr. Schultz about Dr. Proctor?
A. You mean generally? No. He's -- he made mention that he was using Robert Proctor on some of his cases, although, to be
honest with you, I can't recall if there were any cases in which I participated in.
Q. Prior to that August 22nd phone call, had you spoken with Matt Schultz at all about the situation with Dr. Proctor and the
graduate students at the University of Florida?
A. After it came up in the depositions, I did make mention of it, yes.
Q. I'm asking if August 22nd, that phone call was the first time that you spoke with Mr. Schultz about it.
A. Oh, I see. I had mentioned. We had discussed it previously.
Q. When was that?
A. I wouldn't know exactly when. J just know that we had some discussion about it.
Q. Do you recall if that was before or after your trial testimony in Barbanell?
A. I don't.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Do you recall if it was before or after your trial testimony in Campbell?
A. The trial testimony in Campbell, can't recall. I'm not sure about that, I mean, you know, I'm busy. I have lots of calls. I
don't keep track of these things.
Q. So when you spoke with Mr. Schultz on August 22nd about the situation with Dr. Proctor and the Florida graduate students,
had it been more than a month since you had first spoken with Mr. Schultz about the issue?
A. I'm not sure. I mean, I just don't really know. And I'm not sure if I had a better recollection if I was asked about this previously,
so I'm going to take a minute and refresh.
Q. Feel free. And, again, that's your Koballa deposition transcript that you are referring to?
A. That's correct. Okay. Yes. And in the Koballa., I answered that I had asked Schultz about the issue, so that's a more accurate
reflection, since this was closer to the events. You had asked me that previously in the discussion, who brought it up, and I
said that I --
Q. That wasn't exactly my question. The question and answer in the Koballa deposition was what you discussed during that
August 22nd phone call. What I'm asking is times that you --
A. Well. I don't want to cut you off, but I'm referring to you asked me a couple questions ago. I'm just going back --
Q. 50 you are not answering my current question, correct?
A. That's correct, yeah.
Q. Could you answer my current question or do you still need to review your testimony from the Koballa deposition?
A. Well, ask your current question.
MS. CASE:
Could you repeat my last question prior to the witness refreshing his recollection?
COURT REPORTER:
“So when you spoke with Mr. Schultz on August 22nd about the situation with Or. Proctor and the Florida graduate students,
had it been more than a month since you had first spoken with Mr. Schultz about the issue?”
A. I don't recall when I spoke to him about it, but there was no secret about these issues, particularly after it came up in my
depositions. So I know I did speak to him about it briefly prior to that, but I don't remember exactly when.
MS. CASE:
Q. When you say “prior to that,” you mean prior to the August 22nd phone call?
A. That's correct.
Q. Old you speak with him about it after the Barbanell deposition, within that time frame?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I'm not sure. I couldn't answer that. I can't recall.
Q. How about in relation to the Grossman deposition on July 9th? Was it after you had came back from vacation with your
family?
A. You know, I don't keep track of these things, so I'm not sure, I couldn't say affirmative either way.
Q. So you had certainly spoken before August 22nd with Mr. Schultz about Proctor and the Florida graduate students, correct?
A. Yes. And to be more precise, he had mentioned that the defense was objecting to a variety of activities alleged to have been
done by Dr. Proctor.
Q. Had you spoken with Mr. Schultz prior to August 22nd about the situation with Proctor and the Florida graduate students
once or more than once, to your recollection?
A. Probably once. It was not a big thing, it was just kind of -- you know, a short, you know, kind of -- this is what came up
in my depositions, you know.
Q. So you are saying then it would have been after when it first came up?
A. After the Barbanell.
Q. After the Barbanell?
A. Yes. It was after the Barbanell deposition.
Q. So it was sometime between June 25th and August 22nd?
A. Yes. That -- it would be in that time period, that's true.
Q. And beyond that, you can't give me any more specific recollection about when you had this conversation with Mr. Schultz?
A. I mean, I'm busy, and I don't keep track of these things.
Q. So you can't give me any more specific --
A. No.
Q. Now, was August 22nd the first time you spoke with Mr. Schultz about the e-mails that Proctor had forwarded you regarding
the Florida graduate students?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. So even though you had spoken with Mr. Schultz prior to August 22nd about the situation with Proctor and the graduate
students, you didn't mention the e-mails that you had in your possession when you spoke with Mr. Schultz at that earlier time?
A. NO. I never brought it Up.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. But you knew about it at the time? You knew that you had those e-mails in your possession when you first spoke with him
about the Proctor situation?
A. I'm not sure. I mean. I searched -- I found those e-mails sometime towards the middle or end of July, you know, when I
was getting ready to go, you know, just to look for that third e-mail that we've talked about. And I'm not sure. I couldn't give
you the answer to that. I just don't recall.
Q. Prior to you mentioning to Mr. Schultz on August 22nd that you had the e-mails marked as Exhibits 9 and 10, had you
spoken with anybody else about the fact that you had Exhibits 9 and 10 in your possession?
A. No.
Q. He was the very first person that you told?
A. Yes. That would be true. Yes. I believe that was the case, yes.
Q. And why did you tell him?
A. Well, it came up in the conversation. I told him that I had discovered these e-mails, and that I was going to, you know,
produce them, just to let him know. And he said, sure, go ahead.
Q. It's your testimony that you informed Mr. Schultz during that August 22nd phone call that it was your intention to produce
these e-mails, Exhibits 9 and 10, at which deposition?
A. I'm not sure which -- the one I produced them at, I guess, the Koballa, the one where I was asked about them, Those are
the ones I produced them at.
Q. Now, you had found the e-mails in July, correct?
A. Late July.
Q. Late July. And you were deposed on August 19th, correct?
A. In Koballa?
Q. No. In Evers and Willis.
A. Uh-huh. That's true.
Q. And on August 19th, you didn't produce the e-mails, correct?
A. No. No. It didn't come up.
Q. So the reason that you decided to produce the e-mails at the August 24th Koballa deposition was because you learned that
Proctor's e-mails had been subpoenaed; is that true?
A. No. Mr. Henk asked me about it and that's why -- I told film. You can read the testimony. He asked me about it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. I thought you just testified that during your August 22nd phone call with Mr. Schultz, you indicated to him your intent to
produce these e-mails at your next deposition.
A. And then my next deposition was -- when was my next deposition? I would have to check.
Q. Two days later.
A. And which case was that?
Q. Koballa, August 24th. From the conversation that you had with Mr. Schultz on August 22nd -- that's a Saturday, correct?
A, Right.
Q. And you told me that during your phone conversation with him, you indicated to Mr. Schultz that you intended to produce
the e-mails from Dr. Proctor at your next deposition. Is that true?
A. Well, yes. I mean, I said I had these e-mails and that, you know, that I -- you know. I didn't want to -- you know, I wanted
to send them on, to produce them. That's right. And I think the next opportunity I had was when Mr. Henk asked me about it.
And I think we took a break and I went and printed them out on my computer.
Q. What I'm trying to get at is what led you to tell Mr. Schultz that you were going to produce the e-mails at your next deposition?
A. Oh, I had these. They seemed to be -- you know, they seeded to be -- they seem to have become an issue in the tobacco
litigation, and I certainly didn't, you know, want to sir on anything, so I was going to send them forward.
Q. So mid to late July, you find the e-mail.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. The e-mails, the two e-mails.
A. That's right.
Q. And then you go to the Barbanell trial in late July, yes?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you testify in Pensacola the first week of August, right?
A. That's right.
Q. And then you were deposed in Willis and Evers on August 19th?
A. That's right.
Q. And at none of those times did you take the opportunity to produce those e-mails. Correct?
A. I was never asked about these issues.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. What I want to know is, what changed your wind? Why did you tell Mr. Schultz that you were going to and intended to
produce them on August 22nd?
A. Well, I -- what I said was, I had these e-mails, and I said that, you know, I didn't know I had these e-mails when I was
asked initially, and that if I'm asked again about these e-mails, I'm going to have to -- or if I'm asked again about this Proctor
business, to use that as a shorthand to describe all that's going on, that I have these. Now that I know that I have these, I'm
going to have to produce them.
Q. And the reason that you were suddenly inclined to produce them after you learned that -- because you had learned they had
been subpoenaed From Dr. Proctor and from the universities, correct?
A. No. Because I had discovered them in late July. If I had been asked prior about this issue, I would have identified it then. It
only became an item of conversation in this talk on Saturday because it was topical. I said, well, you know, by the way, I should
let you know that I've -- you know, in the Course of searching my e-mails responsive to another request, I found a couple of
others that I didn't know I had and didn't recall having, and that, you know, the next time they ask me about this, I'm going to
have to produce those, just to kind of let him -- you know, let him know.
Q. But you hadn't produced them at the first opportunity you had to produce them after you discovered them, correct?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. Well, I hadn't been asked about them. I mean, I -- you know, you guys are deposing me, on average, you know, once a week,
maybe once every other week On this. And, you know, lots of things come up in these depositions. I answer The questions to
the best of my ability, and, you know, honor the oath to the best of my -- humanly possible.
And, you know, when it comes up, and I'm asked about it, and I have new information and I'm asked about these issues, I
answer it forthrightly.
Q. So it was not your intention to produce the e-mails unless you were specifically asked again whether you had communications
with Proctor beyond forwarding the transcript of Michel's deposition?
A. Well, you know, I understand depositions to be opportunities for you to ask me about my opinions related to the case and
those such issues, so when you ask me a question. I give you the answer.
Q. So it was your intention to wait until you were specifically asked again about communications with Dr. Proctor before you
produced the e-mails?
A. That seemed to be the way to do it, because when that issue came up, I had new information, I would then provide that
new information, yes.
Q. So even though you already had been previously asked about communications with or. Proctor, you didn't see the need to
correct that former testimony once you discovered that you did, in fact, have those in your possession?
A. No. I didn't see it that way. You know, it's -- you have lots of opportunities to ask me all kinds of questions. I mean, it's not
like you are only deposing me occasionally. This is the third time I've sat down with you in six weeks, so you guys have lots of
-- I mean, you are talking to me a lot, so -- and it's becoming burdensome to me, particularly given that my opinions are pretty
consistent, in fact, highly consistent and practically generic.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
So I just thought I would wait for the next opportunity, since this train seems to be regularly scheduled coming into the Station
pretty regularly.
Q. And by “next opportunity,” you mean the next deposition after your conversation with Mr. Schultz?
A. Well, I had a deposition scheduled that week, and I was asked directly, and I gave a direct answer.
Q. So you decided To wait until you were asked directly to produce the e-mails that you knew you had been asked about in
the past?
A. Well, yes. I mean, I didn't -- I'm not in the habit of going back and reading my prior testimony. That would be even more
burdensome. You know, when I am deposed, I give the best answer I can and the truthful answer. I discovered new information,
and when asked about that, supplied it to you.
Q. Well, you actually do go back and read your testimony when you read and sign your deposition; isn't that right?
A. Well, I have read this.
Q. And it's your practice To do so, correct?
A. Well, no. I think you would be hard pressed to find a deposition to which my signature has been attached at the end. I think
it's been quite a while that I've actually sat down and read the deposition after the deposition.
Q. Well, now, you were sent your Barbanell deposition on -- the deposition occurred on June 15th. You were sent the original
and an errata sheet on June 30th. Did you receive that?
A. I did.
Q. And have you -- and I believe that it instructed you that you had 30 days, under the rules, to read and sign the deposition.
Do you recall that?
A. Or it would be accepted as a default truth. Right. And I opted for the default.
Q. And so if you received it on June 30th, or it was sent on June 30th, when do you believe you received it?
A. Oh. I believe I -- I believe the unopened Fed-Ex is sitting in my off-fee right now.
Q. So you didn't even open it?
A. No.
Q. But by mid to late July, it came to your attention that you had the e-mails marked Exhibits 9 and 10; is that, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. And, yet, you still decided to allow the 30 days to lapse and to not make any corrections to your Barbanell deposition
testimony?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, yes. I mean, I just -- I discovered -- Barbanell was in the past. I discovered the e-mails and I just thought I'd bring
them up the next time they were relevant.
Q. What do you mean by the next time they were relevant?
A. As I explained a moment ago, the next time I was asked about it.
Q. Asked specifically and directly about it?
A. Asked about the pRoctor issue.
Q. Is it your testimony that you weren't asked about the Proctor issue at your August 19th deposition in the Evers case?
A. I'd have to review that before I looked at it.
Q. You don't recall me asking you questions about the Proctor situation during your August 19th deposition in Evers?
A. You know, they run together. I mean, again, I just want to point out that I've -- it's not like I only have these once in a while,
and therefore, they remain distinct in my mind. There's a bunch of them. So I would have to review that testimony.
Q. You don't remember that?
A. Not as being distinct from other depositions. I mean, there were -- I think they happened within a week of each other. I mean,
they were compressed and there were two depositions for Evers.
Q. Did you think that I would refuse to accept the e-mails marked Exhibits 9 and 10 during your August 19 deposition in Evers?
A. No. My recollection is it didn't seem to come up. Maybe I'm mistaken on that, but that's my recollection.
Q. Now, August 19th was the first time that we've met, correct?
A. In person?
Q. Yes, face to face.
A. I believe so, yes.
VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by. This concludes Tape Number 2 in the deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes. The time is 11:42.
(Off the record.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
We are back on the record. This is Tape 3 of the deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes, Ph.D. The time is 11:44.
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. We were talking about your August 19th deposition in the Evers case. As of August 19th, you had already discovered that
you had the two e-mails from Proctor in your possession, correct?
A. That's correct. I had found them earlier.
Q. And there was a Schedule A attached to your Notice of Deposition in the Evers case. You recall that?
A. Yes.
Q. And you testified earlier that it was your practice to read that prior to coming -- to appearing for the deposition?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I asked you if you brought any materials with you that were responsive to Schedule A on August 19th. And do you
recall what you told me?
A. I don't. Do you have it written down?
Q. Well, you actually offered me an additional copy of your CV. We had just done the willis deposition prior to that and so you
tole me you could give me another copy. Do you remember that exchange?
A. Okay. I don't. But it's been -- it was a busy week. That was also the first week of classes. And, in fact. I seem to recall I had
to take a break from that deposition to go teach the first class of the semester, so you hit me at a particularly busy time.
Q. True. It was very busy. I believe that was the willis deposition, we took the break. But do you recall offering me a copy
of your CV?
A. Yeah. I'm sure I did that. Yeah. That sounds reasonable.
Q. And you said you didn't have anything else to produce; is that what you recall?
A. Yes. I don't think I produce much at that.
Q. Now, again, I think I started talking about this before we changed the tapes. August 19th was the first time that you and
I had met face to face?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I think it's maybe before or after, during the deposition at some point on August 19th, you learned that I had been asking
you the questions in the Barbanell deposition on the phone. Do you remember that?
A. That's correct.
Q. And during your August 19th deposition in Evers. I specifically mentioned the Barbanell deposition and we talked about
the situation with graduate assistants.
A. That's right. And I still hole to that position. I've played no role in any of this business at the University of Florida and
that is clear.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. But you didn't provide me with the two e-mails at that time?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. So you weren't completely honest with me?
A. I don't know about that. Where -- no. I think I was on the up and up with you.
Q. So you knew you had the e-mails from Proctor, correct?
A. Forwarded e-mails, that's right.
Q. Forwarded e-mails. Exhibits 9 and 10. We'll be specific.
A. That's right.
Q. You knew you had the e-mails at that time, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I asked you questions about Proctor and the graduate students on that day, August 19th, yes?
A. I think so. I would have to review the testimony to know exactly what I said.
Q. And you still didn't give me the e-mails at that time. That's true?
A. That's right. I don't think you ask me about those issues, about the e-mails or my knowledge of things, but I would have
to refresh my testimony before I -- my recollection of my testimony before I could answer these questions effectively. I didn't
bring that one with me.
Q. Well, my question was simply, did you give them to me on August 19th?
A. No. I didn't give them to you on August 19th.
Q. And you didn't make the decision to tell me that your Barbanell testimony hadn't been entirely accurate at that first Evers
deposition?
A. Well, my Barbanell testimony was accurate because you asked me if I knew about the issues in the Barbanell trial, and that
was true. I mean, I didn't know about these things. I had not -- these were not e-mails that I had, you know, read and incorporated
into my knowledge base. So they were just kind of sitting in there. They were forwarded e-mails, for which I played no part in.
Q. So you led defense counsel to believe in the Barbanell deposition, including me, that the only communication you had with
Dr. Proctor in any way related to the graduate students was the one e-mail that you forwarded to Dr. Proctor including Dr.
Michel's transcript?
A. That's right. And that was my recollection and that was accurate. What you asked me in Barbanell was did you know about
these events, and I did not know about those events.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And so by August 19th, you knew that your recollection, at the time of the Barbanell deposition, was not entirely accurate.
True?
A. Well, my knowledge. I mean, my knowledge was what it was during the Barbanell deposition, so I mean, there's not a
problem there. That was true and accurate.
I discovered that there were these, you know, e-mails in my files, but they were not anything that I had incorporated into my
knowledge, had -- in the case of one of them even read, responded to, had authorized. I mean, you know, people send me stuff
and he sent me something. And I basically glossed over it.
So my Barbanell testimony is accurate in that regard. But it didn't seem to be something that occurred to me in the Evers
deposition. So that's why I didn't give it to you. It didn't seem to be relevant. I didn't even think about it. When I was asked
directly by Mr. Henk, in the later deposition, then I did give it to him.
Q. Even though by August 19th, you had already discovered, as we've gone over, these e-mails?
A. Yes.
Q. And we talked about the Proctor situation on August 19th?
A. That's right.
Q. But you still didn't produce the e-mails?
A. No.
Q. Do you think you should have produced them at that time, on August 19th?
A. No. I produced them when I though I should have produced them.
Q. Did you think about giving them to defense counsel on August 19th?
A. To be honest with you, it didn't even occur to me because these are much more important to you than they are to me. They're
not anything that I acted on or, you know, interacted with. This is -- I, personally, did no action in any of these events, in
any way, whatsoever, save for the initial action, which I told you about, which was forwarding another expert's deposition
testimony. And I made my opinion on those actions very clear in prior testimony, and so I -- you know, to me, this is something
that is unrelated to me. I feel like I'm a bystander in all of this.
Q. So on August 19th, it's your testimony that you did't even think to produce Exhibits 9 and 10 to defense counsel during
your Willis or Evers depositions?
A. That's right.
Q. It didn't even occur to you?
A. It didn't even occur to me.
Q. So is it a fact that you found out that the e-mails were being subpoenaed from Dr. Proctor that led you to then produce the
e-mails at your very next deposition?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, I mean, a subpoena is a significant thing. It made me think that, well, I guess this is something, you know, important,
so, you know, I've got another deposition -- you know, this week's deposition. Here you go. I've got no secrets in that regard.
Q. So you marched in and immediately handed defense counsel the e-mails at the beginning of your Koballa deposition on
August 24th?
MR. QUINN:
Objection to the form.
A. No. When I was asked about it, when I was asked a question relevant to that, I provided the information.
MS. CASE:
Q. Did you believe that the e-mails that Dr. Proctor Forwarded to you would be e-mails that were produced in response to
the subpoena?
A. I don't know. I mean, if the University of Florida was required to -- which is a public institution, you know, if they were
required to give over their e-mails, the correspondence between Dr. Proctor and Betty Smocovitis would be part of that. Who
knows how much -- I don't know how much they talked. That's not something I have knowledge of.
So you are going to get that. I can't imagine I gave you something that you didn't have access to. That's not the question. To
me, I felt like a bystander in this process who happened to receive two e-mails I didn't even know I had, then later found. And
when it became relevant in the deposition, I gave them to you. I didn't think I was giving you anything you didn't have. I was
just simply getting rid of what I had in that regard.
Q. So you believed we already had the e-mails when you produced them on August 24th?
A. I don't know for sure what you had, but you probably had them.
Q. You believed we were going to get them even if we didn't already have them through the subpoena?
A. Not -- probably. I mean -- but that didn't really factor into --
Q. Certainly, we were going to get them?
A. You are asking me questions about the legal process for which I don't know. I mean, I wasn't -- I mean, I've seen no documents
related to this, no subpoenas. You know, it came up in conversation. And I said, well, this is -- you know, by golly, I found
these things. Next opportunity, I'll toss them by.
Q. And it was only once you learned about the subpoena that you made the decision to do that?
A. Well, I had -- yes. I mean, that would be accurate. I mean, it may be the case that the University of Florida or wherever hired
a lawyer and said, no, you can't have these e-mails. That's immaterial to me. I did not want to, as a bystander in this process,
have anything that wasn't on the up and up.
Q. Have you seen transcripts of Proctor's depositions on June 27th or September 16th?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No. I don't have his -- I don't have that.
Q. Have you spoken with Dr. Proctor about either of those depositions?
A. No. I haven't talked to him in a while.
Q. Have you talked to him since August 21st?
A. That would be when I -- the previous identified phone call?
Q. Correct.
A. No. I haven't talked to him.
Q. Is that intentional?
A. I haven't had anything to talk to him about.
Q. Do you still have in your in box the e-mails that you produced, Exhibits 9 and 10, or have you deleted those?
A. I deleted those after I printed them out.
Q. Can you recall specifically when you deleted then?
A. No, but I don't have them anymore. But I did give them to you, so I figured I didn't need them anymore.
Q. Have you received any e-mails from Dr. Proctor since that time?
A. No.
Q. Have you had any conversations with Dr. Proctor about whether he deleted any e-mails?
A. No.
Q. You are not familiar with his document retention practices?
A. No. I don't -- I don't know that.
Q. In any conversation or communication that you've had with Watt Schultz, did you ever give him any reason to believe that
the sum and substance of Proctor's activities with regard to the Florida graduate students was a five-minute phone call?
A. I'm not sure if I follow that question.
MS. CASE:
Could you read it back, please?
(wherein, the question was read back.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I can't speak to what Robert Proctor did.
Q. I'm not asking you to. I'm asking you if you ever gave Matt Schultz any reason to believe that the entirety of Proctor's
activities came down to one five-minute phone call?
A. No. I never gave him that because I don't have any knowledge of that.
Q. And you believe that the process of graduate students assisting professors is perfectly appropriate?
A. Yes. We had an extensive testimony about this. Yes. I agree.
Q. So you don't believe Dr. Michel's research assistants were doing anything wrong?
A. No. No.
Q. Now, once you learned that Dr. Proctor was reaching out to professor Smocovitis, did you think you should do anything
to try and stop it?
A. Well, when I read those e-mails in my possession, I didn't see any unethical or untoward conduct there. 1 didn't see anything
-- no. I didn't think to stop. There's nothing to stop. I mean, there's -- you know, in your initial inquiry with me, in Barbanell,
you mentioned a bunch of hypothetical activities which may or may not have happened. I have no knowledge of them either
way. But that's not reflected in those e-mails, as far as I recall.
And I gave my response to the hypothetical activities in the Barbanell and told you what I thought about the appropriateness
and lack of appropriateness of those, and so you can refer back to those earlier answers. I didn't see anything to stop.
Q. Did you believe that he was attempting to obstruct Or. Michel's ability to conduct research in the state of Florida?
A. No. I had no -- that never was anything J Thought. I mean, that is not anything 1 thought he was trying to do or certainly
not anything I was trying to do, would ever even think to do,
Q. Certainly hampering Dr. Michel's access to research assistants could have an effect on his ability to conduct expeditious
and cost-effective research?
A. Well, I don't know that that's what happened. I mean --
Q. I'm asking you --
A. Hypothetically?
Q. -- if hampering someone's ability to access research assistants could have a negative effect on their ability to conduct research.
A. As a hypothetical? Of course, yes. If you don't have research assistants, you don't have as many hands to get the work done,
or eyes, as the case may be.
Q. Do you consider the e-mails from Dr. Proctor, Exhibits 9 and 10, to be related to your testimony in any Engle progeny case?
A. No, not -- none whatsoever.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Do you consider that correspondence from Dr. Proctor to be part of your work as an expert testifying for plaintiffs in Cigarette
litigation?
A. It has no bearing whatsoever on that.
Q. Do you Consider corresponding with Dr. Proctor generally, aside from these two particular e-mails, to be related to your
work as an expert testifying for plaintiffs?
A. No. With -- and I'll give an exception to that, unless I offer him some -- discuss with him some issues specifically related to
litigation, then that would be relevant, but not on the general historical issues of smoking and health.
Q. Can you give me an example of what you are talking about?
A. Sure. You know, if I -- if Robert said, look, you know -- advised me on some case or something like that or, you know, if
he asked for advice on something related to litigation.
Q. I'm asking, has that happened?
A. No.
Q. So the caveat you gave applies to nothing that's happened in actuality?
A. That's correct.
Q. Would you consider Proctor's communications with Professor Smocovitis to be part of the work of an expert testifying in
cigarette litigation?
A. No.
Q. So that's separate and apart from his work as an expert, in your opinion?
A Yes.
Q. Now, when you sent Dr. Proctor the transcript of Dr. Michel's deposition transcript, you were at that time a retained expert
testifying for plaintiffs in crigarette litigation, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And at that time. So was he, to your knowledge?
A. Right. And, actually. I mean, that would be a communication that was related to litigation because I forwarded him an
expert's testimony and so that -- and, of course, that's somethin I identified to you before.
Q. When you received the May 23rd e-mail, Exhibit 9, from Dr. Proctor, you were a retained expert for plaintiffs in cigarette
litigation in Florida?
a. That's true.
Q. And, to your knowledge, so was he?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes. That's right. He's been busy with this, as well.
Q. The same question for the June 8th e-mail. When you received the June 8th e-mail from Dr. Proctor, marked as Exhibit 10,
you were a retained expert for cigarette litigation in Florida?
A. That's true.
Q. And so was he?
A. That's correct.
Q. You understand that your communications with Dr. Proctor are no privileged, correct?
A. Yes. Well, ones related to licigation, that makes sense. I mean, I -- I'm not a lawyer, so -- and maybe a lawyer would be
better to answer that question, but I don't, in my common day-to-day understanding, don't think of it that way.
Q. I'm not asking for a legal opinion. I'm asking for your personal belief. You don't believe, when you correspond with Dr.
Proctor, that that somehow is cloaked in privilege, do you?
A. No. That's not my personal opinion.
Q. And it's also your understanding that when you communicate with plaintiff's counsel, that's not cloaked in any sort of
privilege, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you ever been on a conference call with Dr. Proctor and anyone else?
A. No.
Q. With whom have you discussed --
(Off the record.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Other than what we've already discussed, are you aware of any e-mails from you, to you, to someone else, from someone
else related in any way to Dr. Proctor and his activities with regard to the Florida graduate students?
A. No. No. That's the sum of it.
Q. Did you understand that the two e-mails that Proctor forwarded to you, Exhibits 9 and 10, were part of an ongoing
conversation that you had with him?
A. No.
Q. It was just totally out of the blue?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes.
Q. Did it surprise you when you received them?
A. They made no impression on me.
Q. Did it seem strange to you that he would be forwarding you those?
A. No. It didn't seem strange. They seemed to be, at least the first one that I read, e-mails for which required no action on my
part. I mean, you know, I go through my e-mails as quickly as possible. And my job, as an administrator, requires me to reply
to problems. And this was forwarded material, and I said, you know, this is not anything I need to look at.
Q. Do you have any intention of conducting research or publishing anything relating to the work of graduate students assisting
expert historians in cigarette litigation?
A. No.
Q. Do you think that that is a fascinating social phenomenon that should be researched and published on?
A. It's -- I've made my opinion clear on these issues. To summarize what I said in Barbanell, this is to the extent that graduate
students need to be apprised and have full knowledge of what they're getting into, that's important for them, and their major
professors have an obligation to -- and whomever is employing them in this has an obligetion to them to do that, just so they
act from a position of full information.
But, no, this is not a subject that I would think of having any interest in. It's not something I researched. You know, you can
look at my data article to see what I think is important about historians as experts in tobacco litigation. I focus on the methods,
the materials they use and the conclusions that they draw from those materials.
Q. Have you ever communicated with Dr. Proctor through a third party?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever asked somebody to send him a message?
A. No.
Q. How about vice versa? Have you ever received a message from Dr. Proctor through a third party?
A. No. No microfilm in pumpkins.
Q. I'm sorry?
A. No microfilm in pumpkins. Mr. Henk, that didn't make an impression on you?
MR. HENK:
No.
THE WITNESS:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
At the break, I'll explain the story.
MR. HENK:
Is it before our time?
THE WITNESS:
Yeah. I guess, unfortunately, Whittaker Chambers.
MS. CASE:
We can Calk about that later.
THE WITNESS:
It's for off the record. Sorry. I apologize for that.
MS. CASE:
Q. Just to wind up this area, professor, when we met in your office on August 19th, you testified during the Evers case that
you received some e-mails from some materials from plaintiff's counsel, depositions, interrogatories, that sort of thing. Do you
remember that?
A. That's right.
Q. And you didn't have that in hard copy. You had that electronically on your computer?
A. That's right. And then I gave it to you.
Q. And you offered to put it on my flash drive after the deposition was concluded. Do you recall that?
A. That's right.
Q. And after the deposition, you, me and Mr. Geary went back to your office, and you transferred all those files to my flash
drive from the Evers case.
A. Yes.
Q. And while we were waiting for those to get copied, we had a conversation. Do you remember that?
A. I think we did chitchat.
Q. And I thanked you for providing us with that information. You were very accommodationg. Do you recall having that
discussion?
A. Yes. We talked about a number of things.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you said you were happy to provide us with the information you had received because there shouldn't be any secrets
in litigation.
A. That's right. And I believe that.
Q. And there shouldn't be any surprises in litigation.
A. I agree. I mena --
Q. We discussed that?
A. Yes. The thing that I respect about this process is it's -- everyone plays the cards with the cards face up. That's why I've
acted the way I have.
Q. But it's true, isn't it, that you only turned your cards face up once you knew we were going to get the e-mails from the
supboena?
A. Well, I was asked about it. I mean, when I was asked about it, about prior knowledge, I said, well, I have these e-mails, and
so I answered truthfully to that. I mean, I -- I mean, there are rules to this process. I respond to your questions.
Q. And when we were in your office on August 19th, after the deposition, you were copying files from the very computer that
you found the e-mails from proctor on, correct?
A. That's right. I received these depositions and documents electronically, trying to save paper, and I presented them to you
electronically. And the issue there was there were a number of depositions. I did not have a strong memory of them all. Of
course, not all of these depositions are relevant to my opinions. So I skimmed them. But you wanted to know which ones I had
received, so that seemed to be the most expeditious way to provide them to you.
Q. Right. And while you were copying files on my flash drive, you could have easily have copied the two e-mails you received
from Dr. Proctor onto that flash drive, as well?
A. Technically, yes.
Q. Because you had already discovered them as of that time.
A. That's true. But, you know, that's not what you were asking me about. You were asking me about another issue in another case.
Q. And so do you think that that was putting all your cards on the table after that August 19th deposition?
A. For that case, yes. I was fair with you.
Q. You didn't withhold those two cards that you could have easily provided at that time?
A. No.
Q. Have you followed up with anyone on the outcome of the hearing with the subpoenas or the subpoenas, generally?
A. No. I don't know the status of any of that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MS. CASE:
Why don't we break for lunch now.
VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by. We're concluding Tape 3. The time is 12:11.
(Off the records.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
We are back on the record. This is Tape 3. The time is 1307.
MS. CASE:
Q. Welcome back from lunch, professor. You testified during your deposition in Koballa that you were paid a $3,500 retainer
to testify in four to five volusia County cases. Would this group fall into that group you referenced?
A. Yes.
Q. And when were you first contacted to work on the Hibner case?
A. I'm not exactly sure the first contact. I know that I began thinking about the Hibner case once we scheduled this deposition
a few weeks ago and began reviewing the documents and working on it.
Q. So your first time you ever heard about the Hibner case was in the same context as Humpal and lewis and koballa; is that true?
A. Thst's right, yes. I got kind of a broad scatter shot of documents and alike, and, in fact, that was part of the explanation for
my confusion in the koballa deposition. I thought I was also being deposed in these cases, as well, which is my error. But -- so
I probably got contacted at the same time as the koballa, but didn't begin working and thinking about this case until much later.
Q. And so who was the first person that you spoke with about the Hibner or Humpal cases?
A. Spoke, in terms of oral communication, I had a phone call with this gentleman here, Mr. Quinn, I'd say about maybe ten
days ago, more or less. All prior communication was through the legal secretary or secretary at their office.
Q. I think you said within a few days of August 24th is when you fist heard of these case; is that true?
A. Yes. That's accurate.
Q. When you fist had any communication with someone representing the plaintiffs in those four cases?
A. That's right. Yes.
Q. And so when were you paid the retainer?
A. About that same time. I think it would -- it arrived about that same time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Have you worked your way through that retainer yet?
A. Not yet, no.
Q. Have you submitted any invoices or bills to plaintiff's counsel for work you've conducted in Humpal or Hibner?
A. No.
Q. Do you intend to do so?
A. Yes.
Q. When?
A. Probably when I'm finished with the case. I'm not sure when the trial is scheduled. Is there a schedule for the trial? That's a
rhetorical question. If it's within a reasonable amount of time, I'll probably wait until that's over with and just bill then.
Q. And so have you already cashed the $3,500 retainer check?
A. I did cash that, yes.
Q. So any bill that you sent would be for money that you had already accepted and put in your own account?
A. Well, I mean, the bill would be for the additional work.
Q. My question is a little bit different. Will you submit a listing of the work that you've done demonstrating that you've gone
through that $3,500 retainer, like a time card?
A. Yes. Well, it won't look like a time card, but it will list the number of hours that I've worked and it will reflect what I've
previously been paid, yes, and then the next due. I guess that's what you are asking?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. And you will do that, as you say, within a reasonable amount of time after trial?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you know who the defense historian is in the Hibner case?
A. I don't.
Q. How about Humpal?
A. I don't.
Q. You said you had a call with Mr. Quinn ten days ago. And was that in relation to both cases or one or the other?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Both cases.
Q. What did you discuss on your call ten days ago?
A. We discussed logistical arrangements. He told me that he would be coming through Hattiesburg, Mississippi the day before
the deposition, and would I be able to find time to meet with him to discuss the case at that time. And we worked out those
arrangements.
(off the record.)
VIDEO REPORTED:
We are back on the record. The time is 1339.
MS. CASE:
Q. We seem to have all the technical difficulties with the phone worked out, and during our bread, while we were getting
that done, you and plaintiff's counsel and we've discussed that you would, in fact, produce the e-mails that earlier today, you
indicated you were unwilling to produce.
So we now have those at this time. They've been forwarded to Monica, the court reporter, by you professor, from your Mail
account to her AOL account and we can mark those Exhibits 3 and 4 to this deposition.
COURT REPORTER:
I think it's 4 and 5.
MS. CASE:
Whatever the next in order exhibits are.
(Exhibits 4 and 5 were marked.)
MS. CASE:
Q. The first, just to summarize, just so we know specifically what we're talking about, the first e-mail that you forwarded is
from September 23rd, and you sent an e-mail to a paralegal, I believe, or a secretary, with Mr. Quinn's firm with regard to the
Notice of Deposition that you received to be here today. Is that true?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you were objecting specifically to Number 17 on the document request; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And similarly to what you said this morning, you felt it was very broad, the request, correct?
A. That's right. I did express the content of the e-mail in my earlier questioning. That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And you indicated that you had answered extensive questions about the underlying matter and were unwilling to answer
any further questions; is that right?
A. That's what I said in the e-mail.
Q. What was the underlying matter that you are referring to?
A. Well, I interpreted Item 17 to be a fishing expedition about my work as an expert witness, and in particular, the extensive --
the subject of the extensive discussions we had this morning about professor Robert Proctor and this Florida business, et cetera.
Q. So you thought what Number 17 was asking for was, once and for all, any communications you had with Dr. Robert Proctor,
you should bring them today?
A. No. I interpreted it to mean, once and for all, any communication I have ever had relating to smoking and health, and as I
go onto explain myself in the e-mail, I say, you know, this is so broad, it would require me to produce things for other cases in
other states, in other countries, and in other types of litigation where cigarette companies are not even a party to the litigation.
Q. Can you understand how given the experience that we've had with the two e-mails that Proctor sent to you and how it took
you a month before you turned them over, how such a broad document request might be necessary in order to cast the net wide
enough for you to produce the e-mails in question?
A. No.
Q. No? Because you were so forthcoming in response to previous Schedule As that asked for communications that you had
with -- within which Exhibits 9 and 10 were falling?
A. If you want to argue with me about that, that's certainly your right to do so. I don't see a question there. I provided you what
I've had and I feel like I've been quite forthcoming and I have no problem with that.
This seems to be -- I interpreted this request to be excessively broad, and I was concerned that with the set of attorneys, I didn't
know if they were going to respond to this or not, you know, if they were going to object to it or not. So then, of course, that's
the other part of the e-mail.
Q. In fact, with regard to the notice, you asked to be removed as an expert if you were going to have to comply with Number 17?
A. Yes. That would have required -- it's, as I said, unconscionably broad. It would have required me to produce things for which
no tobacco company has anything to do with, at least no U.S. tobacco company. So it's -- you know, you are not allowed to,
as far as I understand it, to go fishing like that in this situation.
Now, of course, a judge can review this and he is the ultimate authority on these matters. And, of course. I defer to that. I'm no
lawyer. But I wanted to put the attorneys with this firm on notice that this was a significant concern to me.
Q. And aside from the breadth of the request -- mell, let me do it this was, in order so the judge can rule on whether that's a
proper request and what falls within it should be produced, et cetera, I need for you to describe for me what e-mails you have,
e-mails or communications, documents of any kind that are responsive to Number 17 that you haven't brought with you today.
If you could describe for me what those are, I would appreciate it.
A. Well, I feel like I have, but I'll describe them again. Materials relating to my role as a consulting witness or so-called arm
chair witness. Well, let me rephrase that. I meant to say arm chair expert, where I have no intention of testifying in person.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Understand. I'm not asking for those. Any other categories of materials?
A. Well, it wasn't clear to me that that was -- from Item 17 because that relates -- these are all small -- that have some bearing
on my expert as a historian of the tobacco industry.
Q. I'm just trying to narrow down the documents that you may have that could be responsive. So tell me, other than what you
just mentioned, what other types of documents, categories of communications, things like that that you have.
A. Okay. I mean, are you narrowing it down to things related to Florida, for example?
Q. Do you have documents related to Florida that would fall within Request 17?
A. As I've described this morning, the documents would be ones that pertain to cases for which there has not yet been a deposition
noticed or for which the attorneys may not yet have listed me as an expert. That is things that are in process that may move
forward and then reach the point where they will be subject to the normal standard Schedule A. That would --
Q. I understand.
A. That would be the category of documents that I have.
Q. Anything else?
A. No. That's it. And I've -- now I'm talking about Engle progeny litigation.
Q. Correct.
A. Yes. That would -- that's all I have in reference to Florida-based Engle progeny litigation, would be things that are in process
that have not yet been noticed for a deposition or for which I've not yet appeared for a deposition or for which possibly I've
not been listed as an expert on the case.
Q. Okay. Any other categories of documents that you can think of that you have in your possession that would be responsive
to 17?
A. That would be it.
Q. Do you have any communications where you sought any kind of advice or anything along those lines from anyone, lawyer,
not lawyer, about what to do about Exhibits 9 and 10, those two e-mails?
A. No.
Q. And you agree that such communications would fall within 17 if you had, in fact, had them?
A. I don't know. I don't have anything responsive to that.
Q. But if you did, and at some later time it becomes clear that you did have them or that your memory is accurate as of this day
or not, you agree that that would fall within Number 17; is that true?
A. I mea, I don't know if that's the rule.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Or is it not --
A. I don't have a problem with it -- I dropped my microphone. I don't have a problem with that idea. I mean, there's -- I'm
reaching for my microphone as I speak.
Q. Hold off until you get your mic on.
A. I don't think I have anything responsive to that, but if I did, I wouldn't have a problem giving it to you. So I would agree
with you.
Q. So you think 17 is broad enough to cover documents that I just described?
A. That's right. But my problem with it, just so you are clear, is that it was so broad, it required me to talk about things that
are in process, which may come up, things that don't pertain in any way to litigation in Florida, things that don't pertain in any
way to litigation in which the tobacco industry is a party, formal party to the litigation, but yet issues of smoking and health
are relevant, and for things that are happening outside of the United States.
Q. Did you, when you drafted that e-mail, believe that it was a privileged communication you were having with plaintiff's
counsel?
A. That particular e-mail? Oh, I don't know. I didn't think of it either way. When I drafted that e-mail, I wanted to get the
attention of whoever it was on the other side of the e-mail.
Q. Because you wanted them to object to the Schedule A?
A. Well, yes, or if -- or more specifically, I wanted some communication from them. I had had an experience of not very good
communication with this particular law firm, and the --
MR. QUINN:
Not this -- it wasn't this law firm.
MS. CASE:
Please let the witness finish.
A. And -- but a similar issue came up in the ?? case, where I was sent a document that I thought was inappropriate, and so I
was unsure who I was dealing with on the other side because I had had very limited contact, in fact, at this point, no contact
with Mr. Quinn directly.
Q. You also state in that e-mail that you had cc'd other attorneys.
A. Yes. And that's included in --
Q. Who were those attorneys?
A. Well, since -- again, since it was so broad, I thought of, off the top of my head, those attorneys who, if I was required to
disclose these documents, they are my communications with them, so I thought of, like, the five or six.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Who are those people?
A. The people that I've been working with now, which would be David Sayles, Matt Schultz, a guy named Lee, David Lee,
Verin Smith, people I had depositions scheduled with.
Q. Anybody else? You gave me three.
A. Did I say Howard Acosta? He's on that list. I mean, you could read it off the e-mail. That would be more accurate.
Q. It's listed on the e-mail? You carbon copied them? You didn't bcc them?
A. No. I cc'd them. You will have those people.
Q. So you copied them on the e-mail that you sent to Mr. Quinn's paralegal because you thought that communications you had
with them were implicated by this Number 17 on the Schedule A?
A. Right. And just so that they would be aware of it, an FYI basis.
Q. Do you feel as if you are not under an obligation to produce those with regard to -- any such documents in regard to the
cases where those particular counsel are representing plaintiff?
A. No. No. That's not the rationale. The rationale was that this was, you know, I thought a broad and overreaching fishing
expedition. You know, I -- my interpretation of the request was for -- that you wanted to know much more than you were
entitled to, just based on my Jay understanding of the process. And given that these were people who I was working with at
The time, that I've mentioned, and I think there is a couple of others on there, as well, that just on an FYI basis, they probably
should know about that.
Q. Are there any documents, in particular, that you are thinking about that you don't want to produce that you think are responsive
to 17?
A. Yes. I explained those earlier In my previous answer.
Q. You explained that it would be a lot of documents, and that you have an objection to that and that they relate to different cases.
But is there anything that you are thinking of, specific documents, that you don't want to produce in response to Number 17?
A. Well, I'll give you classes of documents. I don't think you are entitled to know about my work with other branches of
litigation. I state --- I state in the e-mail, in fact, the answer to you, that question, is in the e-mail. I answered that very question
in the text of the e-mail. I stated That, look, I do a lot more than -- I'm involved in other areas of litigation -- and I said this a few
minutes ago -- that involve other types of venues that are outside of the state of Florida that don't involve tobacco companies
as defendants or as any party of the litigation, yet still touch on issues of smoking and health where my expertise is, and, in
fact, deal with litigation in other countries.
So I interpreted that as it --- it spoke to itself, to me to be so broad as to require anything I've ever written about litigation. And
so those classes of documents that I've just described, that's not your business.
Q. Let's call that your breadth objection.
A. If you want to call it that, okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Let's hold that back. Aside from your breadth objection, is there any other reason you don't want to produce documents
responsive to Number 17?
A. No.
Q. Then the next document that you forwarded to Monica that she's going to mark as an exhibit to your deposition is an e-mail
also from September 23rd, Mr. Quinn responding to you about the e-mail that you had sent him, Yes?
A. That's correct.
Q. And he indicated that he already knew this was a problem for you. Do you remember that?
A. Yes. That's what --
Q. What did you think he was referring to? How did you understand that?
A. Well, I understood that to mean -- I identified it as a problem, in the ways that I've just described to you, and in The ways
I explicitly stated in the e-mail. And I interpreted that to wean that he acknowledged essentially an agreement with me. That
was an acknowledgment of my -- of my issue.
Q. I don't believe I understand.
A. Well, you asked me what I thought he meant by that statement.
Q. Yes.
A. And what I thought he meant by that statement, I think anybody would interpret it to mean that he said, yes, I agree with
you and we're going to file an objection on that particular issue. You are right, you know, you are right. You've got a point.
We agree with you. You know, you've raised a legitimate issue.
Q. Well, let's talk about the medical Blosser cigarettes that you've brought with you today. I think we're going to make a copy
of the front and back of this and we'll mark it as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 6 was marked.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Can you tell me where you got these Blosser's cigarettes?
A. Yes. I purchased those from an antique dealer through Ebay.
Q. How long have you had them?
A. I've had them for a few years. I got them a couple three years ago.
Q. And these are not tobacco cigarettes, right?
A. No, they're not. And they state that on the label.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Yeah, they do. In fact, they say on the back, in all caps here, that they contain no tobacco nor habit-forming drug. Do you
want to check that?
A. No. That's -- yes.
Q. Do you know when these were sold originally?
A. Yes.
Q. Tell me.
A. I've researched Glosser's. That's the only one I have an actual authentic copy of, but I've done research on them. There are
advertisements, for example, in my reliance documents from The Atlanta Constitution in the 1920s advertising this particular
product, which you guys, of course, have. They're sold from the late 19th Century into the 20th century. I'm not exactly sure
when they stopped selling them. I guess it's sometime in the ‘40s and the '50s.
Those, as far as I can tell, based on the package design, originate from the nineteen-teens or 1920s, that particular package.
Q. So you'd agree that as early as the 1920s, it was necessary to write they contain no tobacco nor habit-forming drugs on these
medical cigarettes because the public was aware that cigarettes were harmful and could be habit-forming?
A. Well, as it's written, it doesn't say that tobacco is habit-forming. It says it has no habit-forming drugs.
Q. Such as nicotine?
A. Well, I think that's covered in the tobacco. Actually, the proper way to interpret that is there were some cocaine-laced
cigarettes that were sold in the late 19th Century. Again, in one of my PowerPoints, which I've supplied to you, there's an
advertisement for a brand called cocarettes. And I think That's pretty clear, what they're distinguishing on the habit-forming.
The significance of the tobacco part, they are explicitly telling people that it does not have tobacco in it, and that is true.
Q. So you would say, in your opinion, that, by 1920, use of the word “tobacco” would have conveyed” to the American public
that there was nicotine involved or that this is ensuring there's not nicotine in the product, just by putting tobacco?
A. I don't know -- I don't see any reference to nicotine on that label.
Q. Well, I think when I asked you, it contained no tobacco nor habit-forming drug, you said nicotine would be included within
tobacco.
A. No. I misspoke. If that's what I said, that was in error. What I was trying to say was, tobacco -- I mean, since it uses the
negative “nor,” there's neither tobacco in this, nor habit-forming drugs. And my explanation That I gave a minute ago about
the cocarette issue refers to -- that's how I interpret the habit-forming drug part.
Q. It's your understanding, correct, that ft.]. Reynolds never manufactured a medicinal cigarette; is that true?
A. Absolutely. That was not manufactured by anybody that's a defendant in this litigation.
Q. And That would include Philip Morris?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes.
Q. And Liggett?
A. And Liggett.
Q. And torillard?
A. Torillard, yes.
Q. And as far as you know, R.J. Reynolds didn't sell any cigarettes laced with cocaine, did they?
A. Mo. I've never said that.
Q. You threw that out there, so let me just make sure. Reynolds. PM. Lorillard, Liggett didn't sell cigarettes laced with cocaine,
correct?
A. No. They never did.
Q. You're not going to get on the stand and testify to that, correct?
A. Well, that would be misleading the jury, if I did.
Q. So these Slosser cigarettes weren't manufactured by a tobacco company, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. And do you have any reason to believe that Mr. Humpal ever smoked medicinal cigarettes?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Do you have any reason to believe he was aware of medicinal cigarettes?
A. I have no reason to believe that he knew about them one way or the other. I have no evidence either way.
Q. Would the same be true for Mrs. Hibner, you have reason to believe she ever smoked --
A. The same answers that apply to Humpal would apply to Hibner.
Q. Do you know what these do contain, these medical cigarettes, Blosser's?
A. I forget the pronunciation. Do they say it's stramonium?
Q. Stramonium?
A. Stramonium, which is a medicinal herb.
Q. Do you know what it's used for?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, in this case, it's used for the things that they describe on the package.
Q. Which says for bronchial asthma peroxisomes, hayfever, colds, right?
A. Yes. That's right.
Q. Do you know that stramonium is an antispasmatic drug used to halt coughing?
A. Yes, yes. And the means of application is to smoke it.
Q. And so it's a medicinal herb that has those effects, so the way to ingest it would be by smoking it?
A. That's correct.
Q. Stramonium also has psychotic effects, doesn't it?
A. That, I didn't know.
Q. It's a hallucinogen, isn't it?
A. I didn't know that. That's interesting. I wasn't aware of that particular characteristic of it.
Q. So you know today that, obviously, it would be illegal to sell cocaine-lcaced cigarettes, correct?
A. Oh, yes. It has been since the early 20th Century.
Q. Can you tell me whether it would be legal today to sell the Blosser's cigarettes?
A. I don't know if they're legal to sell right now. I haven't researched that. If you want to ask me the question of why I think
that's significant, I'll answer that question.
Q. I asked you if it related to Mr. Humpal, correct?
A. No. You don't have to go through that.
Q. And I asked you if the medical cigarettes related to Mrs. Hibner, correct?
A. I don't know that they used those, that's right.
Q. You don't know that they even had any reason to be aware of them?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you read your expert disclosure in this case?
A. I think so. I think it was sent to me -- I think it's the same text as the Koballa. I think that all came to me as kind of one
piece and I did read that one.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And that would have been within a week prior to August 24th?
A. Yes. Right. Something like that.
Q. Do you know if you saw your expert disclosure in this case before it was filed with the court?
A. I don't. You know, people are using the same boiler plate language, but I don't know when it was filed with the court.
(Exhibit 7 was marked.)
MS. CASE:
Q. I'm marking as 7 the expert disclosure in Humpal and I'm handing you that. Mr. Quinn, can we agree that Hibner is the
same as Humpal?
MR. QUINN:
Yes.
MS. CASE:
Q. I believe you are on Page 13. Looking at exhibit 7, the expert disclosure here in this case, take a minute to look at that.
A. Okay.
Q. And you recognize this language?
A. Yes.
Q. This is language you worked up with Mr. Schultz?
A. That's right, some time ago.
Q. So you don't know if you had even heard of the Hibner or Humpal case before this was filed?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you don't have a problem with folks disclosing you as an expert, even if they haven't yet spoken with you?
A. No. I mean, as long as they get in touch with me and, you know, work out an arrangement with me, I'm okay with it, and
as long as they stick to my area of expertise. I don't want to be disclosed in another field. But this is language that I originally
wrote and I've testified about that in the past. This has July 7th on it.
Q. So, to your knowledge, you had not spoken to anyone about the Hibner or Humpal cases prior to July 7, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. Let's talk about the first paragraph, which appears on Page 13. Is it fair to say that this first paragraph describes opinions
you have that aren't specific to any plaintiff?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Yes. That would be accurate, yes.
Q. And then the second paragraph refers to some testimony you may give with regard to where a particular plaintiff may have
lived?
A. That's right.
Q. Would you agree that your opinions in the Hibner case are generally consistent with the testimony you gave at trial in Hess,
Sherman, Barbanell, Campbell, Martin?
A. Frlanti.
Q. FErlanti.
A. Yes.
Q. And would you agree that your opinions for the Humpal case would be generally consistent with the testimony you gave
in Hess, Sherman, Ferlanti, Martin, Campbell and Barbanell?
A. Yes. I anticipate sticking to those general areas and I don't anticipate changing my opinions. I mean, history hasn't changed.
MS. CASE:
Let's change the tape.
VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by. We're going off the record. The time is 1404.
(Off the record.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
We are back on the record. This is Tape 4 in the deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes. The time is 1406.
MS. CASE:
Q. Because Dr. Kyriakoudes would like me to ask the question, why are the medical Blosser's cigarettes of any improtance
to the Hibner and Humpal cases?
A. Well, very briefly, they relate to the idea of presentism as a historical phenomenon, which I've explained in my trials and
testimony, standard historical concepts.
There is an interesting tradition of medical cigarettes, not tobacco, not manufactured by any of the companies involved in
this deposition or, I mean, in this litigation, but I think it does illustrate a couple of things. One, first and foremost, is from --
to illustrate presentism, we might think today that inhaling smoke is just about the most dangerous thing one could do, into
the lungs, and I think that's an accurate judgment, particularly when it comes to tobacco in 2009. But in an earlier period in
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
American history, people saw smoke as something that was positive and you could inhale it. So that's the sum of it. And that's
an illustration of an earlier set of values and beliefs.
Q. Do you feel better now?
A. Yeah. Thank you.
Q. You're welcome. Tell me what work, specifically, you've done for the Hibner case.
A. What I've done is I've reviewed some of the depositions sent to me. I've been sent the depositions of the family, the family
members, and I've reviewed the husband's deposition. I've also reviewed the answers to the interrogatories, and I believe there's
an initial one and an amended one, although the amended one was not relevant to my opinions, so that's what I've done for
Hibner. And my answer would actually be the same for Humpal.
Q. So with regard to the Hibner case, you read Mr. Hibner's deposition transcript?
A. Yes.
Q. And you reviewed interrogatory responses and his supplemental interrogatory response?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you received other depositions, but you didn't read them?
A. I skimmed through them and pretty quickly realized that they would not be useful for formulating my opinions in this case.
Q. What do you mean by “useful”?
A. That I wouldn't rely on them. That they did not contain information that was necessary for me to rely upon to form any
particular plaintiff-specific opinion in this case.
Q. And why is that?
A. Well, as I've said in the past, my primary interest is locating the plaintiff in historical time and historical place, and even
with the husband in this particular case, there's nobody that I've looked at that was kind of there when she began smoking, or
for that matter, even her youth. So there's just no early information, based on -- in these documents. Everyone seems to have
known her later. The husband, it's a second marriage for them, an adult marriage.
Q. They didn't meet until the 1980s, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. So Mr. Hibner can't tell us anything about his wife before the 1980s that he saw with his own eves?
A. Exactly my point.
Q. So Mr. Hibner doesn't give you a lot of help in terms of locating Mrs. Hibner in historical time and place?
A. No. And in the other depositions, even less.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. So what about Mr. Hibner's deposition do you rely on for your opinions?
A. Well, to be honest with you, there wasn't much in there at all, so almost nothing. Nearly nothing. I mean, he mentioned some
brand history, but that's about it, you know, when she was born. Some description of a residential history and that's it.
Q. So the three things that you took from Mr. Hibner's deposition that are relevant to your opinions are when Mrs. Hibner was
born, what her brand history was and where she lived throughout her life?
A. That's right. And, actually, as a point of fact, those things were also revealed to me in the interrogatories in a much more
efficient manner.
Q. So the interrogatory responses alone contain the information on which you base your opinions in this case specifically?
A. That would be true. That's true.
Q. When was Mrs. Hibner born?
A. She was born in 1935.
Q. And what was her brand history?
A. There was a large number of brands discussed. I remember calling Camel, Lucky Strike, Pall Mall, Chesterfield. There might
have been another mention.
Q. Is there anything about her brand history that you would feel it necessary to discuss during your testimony?
A. Only to the extent in the past, I've shown advertisements, and, you know, would select from a large collection of
advertisements, ones from those brands. That would be it.
Q. And tell me those brands again.
A. As I sit here and recall what's listed on the interrogatories, Chesterfield, Lucky Strike, Camel, Pall Mall.
Q. And so beyond those four brands, you wouldn't find it necessary to discuss any other brands in regard to your testimony
in the Hibner case?
A. Yes. That's correct.
Q. Tell me what you know about Ms. Hibner's residence history.
A. Well, she lived a variety of places, was born in the north, Pennsylvania, grew up in North Carolina and virginia, and then
later, as an adult, moved to Florida.
Q. And how is that relevant to your opinions in this case?
A. Not particularly. I mean, that's not the important part of -- that's not a particularly vital piece of information in this particular
case. It's something to acknowledge, but it's not -- it doesn't change or shape my fundamental underlying opinions as they're
expressed in the disclosure and as I testified many times in the past.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. So you are not going to do any -- you are not going to do any research specific to Virginia. Maryland, any other place you
may have lived?
A. No. No. I'm not going to read the Waynesville newspaper or -- what was the name of the town outside of the airport where
she lived, Glen --
Q. Glen Burnham?
A. Glen Burnham, yes.
Q. You wouldn't find it necessary during your testimony to discuss any of those particular locales?
A. No, not in detail, no.
Q. In what kind of detail would you --
A. I mean, if I'm asked where she lived, I would report back to that, but there's nothing particularly special or opinion-changing,
if you will, about those residences.
Q. 50 beyond the fact that she lived in a particular place, there's nothing really -- the fact of that, that she lived in Virginia or
Maryland, there's nothing specific to those areas that you would find it necessary to discuss during your testimony?
A. That's fair. Ves. I agree with that.
Q. Let's do Humpal. What have you reviewed for the Humpal case?
A. The same types of materials.
Q. Specifically.
A. The depositions, the interrogatories.
Q. Whose depositions have you read for the Humpal case?
A. His wife. I focused on that. I skimmed the others, but I found the wife's deposition to be the one that I read.
Q. What's Mr. Humpal's wife's name?
A. Oh, gosh. She's got a long name. I though I read her deposition. If there's no wife deposition, then I didn't read it. I'm not
recalling.
Q. So you are not sure what deposition you read for the Humpal case?
A. Yes. I just skimmed through them because the situation was quite similar to the Hetzner and there didn't seem to be a lot
of firsthand knowledge --
Q. Did you say Hetzner?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I'm getting my Hs. I've got so many H cases, they're all running together.
Q. It must be tough.
A. Yes.
Q. So you are not sure what depositions you reviewed for the Humpal case?
A. I skimmed them quickly, yes. I'm not recollecting.
Q. Can you tell me which ones you skimmed?
A. I thought I skimmed the one by the spouse. But if there isn't one by the spouse, then I didn't do that. I'm getting confused
with another one.
Q. So you can't tell me whose deposition you reviewed?
A. Right. Yes. That's right. Again, this one, I relied on the interrogatories.
Q. It's my understanding there's no wife's deposition. Am I wrong about that? I mean, the daughter is the PR, correct?
MR. QUINN:
Adelaide. Loss of consortium is the daughter. Who is Adelaide?
A. Adelaide is the name I --
MS. CASE:
Q. You haven't read a deposition given by Adelaide Humpal, have you?
A. No. There was some mention of her.
Q. To my knowledge. She has dementia, is my understanding.
A. Okay.
Q. Did you garner that from the depositions that you reviewed?
A. I didn't. But I wouldn't dispute that. This is an older generation of an individual.
Q. So you couldn't say that you carefully reviewed any deposition given in the Humpal case?
A. Yes. That would be fair. I just skimmed through them quickly. It was clear they didn't have the kind of firsthand information
that I was looking for, so I relied upon the interrogatories.
Q. So the depositions that you were given for the Humpal case didn't give you much information that you could use to historically
place Mr. Humpal in context?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Right. That added much more than what the interrogatories offered.
Q. So the interrogatories are what you rely on for your opinions in the Humpal case?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell what you learned in the interrogatories that are relevant to your opinions?
A. Again, just basic time and place information, year of birth, 1920, upbringing, Ohio, and mention of the brand history.
Q. What would the brand history in the Humpal case be?
A. As I sit here and recall, Lucky Strike, Camel. I believe Merit. Those are the brands that come to mind.
Q. Is that why you brought the “Breakthrough!” book today?
A. Yes.
Q. And so the “Breakthrough!” book wouldn't relate to your testimony in the Hibner case, correct?
A. Unless she smoked Merit.
Q. You have no reason to believe she smoked Merit, do you?
A. No.
Q. Is there anything about where Mr. Humpal was born and raised that is relevant to your opinions?
A. He's a product of the urban Midwest. You know, that's -- you know, there's nothing unique that is opinion-changing in that
fact, no.
Q. So you haven't done any research on newspapers in Ohio, materials in Ohio?
A. No. I've not read the complete paper. Papers, I should say.
Q. Were you able to garner anything from the depositions about Mr. Humpal's newspaper reading habits?
A. The interrogatory is listed that he subscribed to the Cleveland plain Dealer and the other Cleveland paper that's now defunct,
which I'm not recalling the name of.
Q. Cleveland Press?
A. That sounds familiar.
Q. Beyond his -- the fact that he had a subscription to the various newspapers, is there anything specific about his newspaper
reading habits that you find to be relevant in this case?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Wouldn't be relevant to your opinions, I mean.
A. Yes. It's not relevant to my opinions.
Q. I misspoke. Have you spoken with any family members of either Mrs. Hibner or Mr. Humpal?
A. No.
Q. You haven't looked at any medical records?
A. No.
Q. You haven't seen anything written by either one of them, journals, diary, that kind of thing?
A. No. I haven't looked at any of that.
Q. You haven't looked at any education records for Mr. Humpal or Mrs. Hibner?
A. No.
Q. You haven't looked at any employment records for Mr. Humpal or Mrs. Hibner?
A. No.
Q. Are their occupations relevant to your opinions in any way?
A. No.
Q. So, for example, if Mrs. Hibner was an x-ray technician at a pulmonologist's office, that wouldn't be relevant to your opinion?
A. No.
Q. You agree that based on their employment history, people can gain different experiences about their knowledge and beliefs
about the risks of smoking?
A. In special situations, that's possible.
Q. So, for instance, if a Smoker worked at the office of a cancer researcher, that smoker might be exposed to more information
about the health risks of smoking?
A. It's possible, though plenty of healthcare workers smoke, or if they worked in a tobacco factory or grew up in a tobacco-
growing area, that might have some relevance. It's hard to say, you know, how that has an effect on a particular individual.
Q. But you don't know if Mrs. Hibner worked for a cancer researcher?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know if Mr. Humpal worked for a Cancer researcher?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No, or if they worked for a tobacco company in a factory.
Q. Would someone who worked for a tobacco company in a factory, would that affect their knowledge and beliefs about the
risks of smoking?
A. It might have an influence.
Q. In what way?
A. It might make them less likely to believe the science that cigarettes are harmful. I base that on personal experience. People
who have worked in those factories have told me so.
Q. Is it fair to say that you would expect your direct testimony to include references to documents from The Tobacco Institute.
From the Council For Tobacco Research. Tobacco Industry Research Committee or any of the defendants reflecting the various
points in time they were disputing claims about the dangers of cigarette smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. And the point you would be trying to make with that testimony is that statements and activities by those groups have the
effect of creating doubt about the dangers of cigarette smoking?
A. Yes, in the mind of the public.
Q. Generally, it's true that those documents show that those entities participated in the debate about the risks of smoking, correct?
A. Yes. Often, that's the case. I guess what you are asking about is the newspaper story, where the man announced, for example,
the results of the American Cancer Society's epidemiological study and then there will be a response by a tobacco industry
official or something along those lines.
Q. So a review of the information of that sort would evidence a debate back and forth about the risks of smoking before it
would have been proven?
A. Yes. You could characterize it that way.
Q. And you wouldn't characterize the smoking and health debate as one-sided, would you?
A. In the public? In the public media?
Q. Yes.
A. No. The industry made sure that they got their message out so that they presented their side.
Q. And the other side was presented, as well, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. I know you always say this, but I just want to confirm. You are not a biographer of Betty Jane Hibner?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. You can't tell me what Mrs. Hibner saw or read during her life?
A. That is correct.
Q. You won't testify that she saw a particular advertisement?
A. That's correct.
Q. You won't testify that she probably Saw a particular advertisement?
A. That's correct. I'll talk about a general history.
Q. You won't testify that she likely saw a particular advertisement?
A. I won't use that term.
Q. You won't say that she must have seen something similar to a particular advertisement?
A. I won't use that language either.
Q. And the same would be true of any particular statement from a tobacco company other than an advertisement?
A. Again, as I said many times, I can't, based an the thin documentary record, tie specific statements to particular individuals
at particular points in historical time. I can only talk about how these operate in the broad historical process of formulating
general public opinion.
Q. Because, from the materials you reviewed, you didn't see any evidence that Mrs. Hibner saw a specific statement from a
specific tobacco company, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you don't know, similarly, if she ever relied on any specific statement from any tobacco company?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you saw no evidence of such reliance?
A. That's correct.
Q. Similarly, you don't know if she ever heard any statements by any industry groups like CTR?
A. That's correct.
Q. And so from everything you reviewed with regard to the Hibner case, you have no basis to conclude that a Reynolds document
influenced Mrs. Hibner?
A. As an individual?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Correct.
A. No. I've never testified to that.
Q. And the same would be true for Philip Morris, Council For Tobacco Research, lobacco institute, Tobacco Research
Committee?
A. That's correct.
Q. You can't tell us whether Mrs. Hibner ever saw a cigarette ad containing a movie star?
A. Well, again, the way I would put it is that the ads with movie stars were ubiquitous, but I don't have positive documentation
that she saw a particular ad on a particular day.
Q. What do you mean by “ubiquitous”?
A. Everywhere.
Q. So if it was everywhere, Mrs. Hibner had to see it?
A. Well, it would be difficult for her to avoid it, it would be difficult for any individual to avoid tobacco advertising during
the period of the heyday of tobacco advertising, when it was on television, newspaper or in the magazines, on billboards, sky
writing, point of purchase sales and all the other places that I've talked about in my testimony.
So, you know, I just want to be precise, I'm not going to place Mrs. Hibner in front of a specific ad, at a specific point in time,
at a specific place, and that would be true for Mr. Humpal. But I can characterize the ubiquity of pervasiveness of tobacco
advertising in American life.
Q. So are you going to say that Mrs. Hibner had to have seen some tobacco advertising?
A. Well, if asked. I mean, the reality is it would have been very difficult for any individual, any American, let's say -- let's pick
a decade that's relevant, you know, in the 1950s, when she was a teenager and becoming an adult, it would have been difficult
for any individual in the United States to not encounter tobacco advertising on a daily basis. I mean, one would have had to
consciously sequester themselves from the kinds of activities that we consider to be normal activities, living in normal kinds of
places, watching television or listening to the radio, reading magazines or what have you.
Q. And you don't know what Mrs. Hibner's activities were, do you?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know what Mr. Humpal's activities were, do you?
A. No. But just so you know about my opinions, I can characterize the pervasiveness of tobacco advertising in the United States.
Q. But you can't tell me what Mrs. Hibner or Mr. Humpal ever saw or likely saw or had to see at any point in their lives?
A. I can't connect them to specific ads at specific times at specific locales. But to the extent that they were Americans living
in the United States and were not sequestered in, say, for example, a convent or monastery, there's a high likelihood -- there's
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
nothing secret here. It's a simple and very commonsensical judgment, given the pervasiveness of tobacco advertising in the day,
at this time, it would have been difficult, nearly impossible for the average American to avoid these messages.
Q. You haven't done any research on what ads appeared in the newspapers where Mrs. Hibner lived, have you?
A. No. I've looked at national newspapers and some regional papers, but not papers from her particular communities.
Q. You haven't looked at what advertising was prevalent in the reads where Mr. Humpal lived?
A. In the newspaper, yes. But, again, focusing there on the newspaper. Now, television, radio, national magazines, Time, Life,
Newsweek, things like that. I have done extensive research in those areas.
A. And what do you know about Mrs. Hibner's radio listening habits?
A. Again, her as an individual, I don't know much. I do know that people listen to the radio in the 1950s.
Q. But you don't know about Mrs. Hibner?
A. Yes. I'm going to tie her to a specific message in a specific place at a specific point in historical time.
Q. And you don't know about her magazine reading habits?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know about her newspaper reading habits?
A. No. My testimony has always been about the general public and the broader course of American history related to these
subjects and I'll stay consistent with that.
Q. And, again, you can't tell us whether Mrs. Hibner ever saw The Frank Statement?
A. That's right.
Q. Do you have any basis to conclude that The Frank Statement had any effect on Mrs. Hibner whatsoever?
A. As an individual. I can't tell either way.
Q. Presume that all of my questions about Mrs. Hibner or Mr. Humpal, if I identify them in the question, refer to them as an
individual.
A. Yes. And I'll go back with that, too, to those last five minutes, and so you don't have to redo what you've already asked me
because my answers to apply to both.
Q. So all the questions I asked you with regard to Mrs. Hibner would apply to Mr. Humpal, as well?
A. Yes.
Q. You can't tell me what ads the saw, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. That's correct.
Q. You can't tell me that any particular document influenced him at any particular time, correct?
A. That's right. I don't know either of the plaintiffs' state of mind in this regard; and therefore, will not offer opinions on what
I don't know.
Q. You have no basis to conclude that any action by a defendant had any effect on Mr. Humpal at any point in time?
A. That's correct. Again, I don't know his state of mind. I can only talk about this as a historical phenomenon in American life
and the broader American public.
A. And the same would be true for Mrs. Hibner?
A. Right.
Q. You can't tell us what either of them perceived or knew or believed about the risks of tobacco smoking over time?
A. Right, a individuals. Again, what I said a moment ago about not knowing their state of mind due to lack of data.
Q. Because there really just isn't data available to ascertain what Mrs. Hibner knew when she began smoking?
A. I would agree with that.
Q. And the same for Mr. Humpal?
A. Yes. I would agree with that, as well.
Q. You can't testify about what would have been reasonable for Mrs. Hibner to believe at any point in time?
A. Her as an individual? No. All I can do is, at certain points of historical time, explain what kinds of messages the American
public was exposed to, and offer at specific points in historical time, an evaluation of the general state of public knowledge
on these issues.
Q. Maybe it will make it a little easier and we won't have to go back for the other one, so we'll give that a shot.
You won't testify what would have been reasonable for someone in the American public to believe about the risks of smoking
at any given time?
A. No. All I can do is explain the broad shape of public knowledge as a kind of collective entity. You know, and here I use polls,
this portion believed this, this portion believed that based on these set of polls, and offering an interpretation based on that.
A. Did you -- I don't know if I specifically asked you. Did you receive despositions for either Hibner or Humpal that you did
not review?
A. Yes. It was -- I guess it's Humpal for which there's a much larger set of depositions. It's not really a question. But that's an
observation. And it became clear to me that none of them were going to supply the kind of firsthand information that I described
earlier in this line of questioning, and therefore. I just kind of opened them up, went through a couple of pages and said, this
is not something I will rely upon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. So none of the family members in the Hibner case can offer any insight into what Mrs. Hibner knew when she began smoking?
A. Yes. That's true.
Q. And would the same be true for Mr. Humpal?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know what injuries Mrs. Hibner has claimed to have suffered?
A. I believe that she had lung cancer, and Mr. Humpal, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. They may have had other --
Q. Mrs. Hibner was -- repeat. I'm sorry.
A. Lung cancer.
Q. Lung cancer. And Mr. Humpal, I believe, is COPD?
A. That's right.
Q. How is the alleged diagnosis of lung cancer, if at all, relevant to your opinions about Mrs. Hibner?
A. It isn't. For understanding this historical phenomenon, it's not relevant.
Q. And would the same be true for Mr. Humpal and COPD?
A. That's true. Correct.
Q. If you could summarize for me what case-specific opinions you anticipate giving about Mrs. Hibner at trial.
A. As distinct to prior testimony?
Q. Pardon me?
A. As distinct to my general opinion that I've given --
Q. As separate from your general testimony, as you've confirmed would be consistent with your testimony in the past in Sherman,
et cetera, what, if anything, would you plan to say about Mrs. Hibner at this trial?
A. I can't think of anything. You know, her condition and her situation doesn't change the history. Again, as has been my
practice, since she was born in the mid '30s. I would, you know, begin my discussion to the context of the rise of smoking in
the 1930s, and show advertisements that would be relevant to her position in chronological time, and that would be it.
Q. So other than how old she is, there's no specific fact that you would find would be relevant to your opinions?
A. That's true. And that same answer would be for Mr. Humpal.
Q. So other than Mr. Humpal's age, there's nothing specific that you would say about him in giving your opinions at trial?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. That's correct. I mean, the other -- I mean, one's a man, one's a woman, and so in -- I might talk more about the rise of
smoking among women, which is an important historical theme, so that the jury can understand the gendered aspect of that.
That would be it.
Q. So you aren't prepared to give opinions about the particular places where Mrs. Hibner lived as distinct from the rest of
American?
A. No. I mean, she lived in a variety of places, the southeastern U.S., you know, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland. You know,
those are -- she tended to live in urban places. She didn't grow up on a tobacco farm. So they're very typical for their time.
Q. And how about Mr. Humpal, is there nothing about where Mr. Humpal lived that's important to your opinions?
A. Not particularly. Again, he was in a significant urban area. You know, his -- you know, that's it, really.
Q. Do you know what local papers would have been available to Mrs. Hibner throughout her life?
A. I'm forgetting the name of the paper in Newport News or Norfolk. I forget which one she lived in. I don't know the name of the
paper in her little community in Maryland. So not really. I haven't researched those and they're not important for my opinions.
Q. And how about the local -- you've already mentioned the Cleveland Plain Dealer. Any other specific local papers that you
can tell me were available where Mr. Humpal lived?
A. Well, as you reminded me, the Cleveland Press, the now defunct Cleveland Press, But I don't intend to research in those
papers.
A. Does the fact that Mr. Humpal read the entire newspaper every day have any significance to your opinions?
A. You know, we've already established that I'm not going to put Mr. Humpal in front of a particular advertisement at a particular
point in time, as far as my expert opinions go. I'm going to be talking about the broader history. So he read the paper. Many
people read the paper. That was a common habit back at that time. That makes him very typical.
Q. So it was typical for Americans to read the entire newspaper every day during the time of Mr. Humpal's life?
A. Yes. The newspaper habit is something that is changing today, but back in the 1950s, very common for people to come
home and read the paper after work, if they had an afternoon paper, on if they had the luxury to read it in the morning before
they went to work.
Q. You've criticized defense historians in the past for overemphasizing smoking and health stories that appeared in the
newspaper. Would you agree with that?
A. Well. I mean, they have to show the full panoply of stories. I mean, the national issue of coverage doesn't really vary much
from paper to paper. But, yes, you've got to show both sides.
A. And so you think that they overemphasize and maximize defense historians? You think defense historians overemphasize
the importance of stories about the health risks of smoking that appeared in newspapers?
A. Well, that's a broad category, you know, and there may be significant variations of the kinds of testimony that your experts
give. I mean, a more accurate way to couch my objection in that particular area would be to say that they rely too much on what
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
is in the newspaper at the exclusion of other forms of communications that were available to people, say, in the '530s and '60s,
to use time periods. '30s, '40s, '50s and '602, to use time periods relevant for these two cases. I would feel more comfortable
putting it that way.
Q. So your criticism would be that they don't use both sides; is that what you are saying?
A. Yeah, both sides. But both sides as reflected, for example, in advertising, as well. I mean, what you've really got is not simply
a history of information saying smoking was bad for you in the newspaper and magazines, as is typically on the historians that
I read, particularly for my study, that was a big part of their testimony.
I think a fair and more accurate and historically valid way to do it is to say, look, in terms of public information, we've got
messages saying, go smoke, and we have messages saying don't smoke. And you have to take in the totality.
If you take just the stories on the issue of smoking and health, well, in fact, you are going to have lots of stories that talk about
how smoking might be bad for you as an emerging science. I mean, they call it news because it tells you what you don't know
because it's new. But to be fair and accurate, you have to include the broader. It has to be broader, in terms of the sources you
look at, and what counts. You have to have acknowledgment of the television advertisements and magazines advertisements
and all those kinds of things, point of purchase and billboards, and then make a professional judgment, taking all that into
account, on that specific category of evidence. Of course, I've got other criticisms, as well, but on that specific category of
evidence, that's how I would characterize it.
Q. And you show a lot of advertising, advertising during your testimony?
A. Yes. It's important.
Q. Do you think you show as much advertising as you do to make up for some perceived lack of advertising in the testimony
of defense historians?
A. No.
Q. You don't think you overemphasize advertising in any way?
A. No. Advertising is an important component of how the cigarette manufacturers communicated information about their
product to the general public. And as I've said many times, the advertising, not only does it help shape the culture of smoking
and health, but in many ways, becomes the culture of smoking and health.
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. What I mean by that is that people accept the ads as part of their popular culture. Icons like Johnny Roventini, a/k/a, otherwise
known as Johnny Philip Morris, were nationally recognized spokespeople, trademark figures who were everywhere. And jokes
are made off of them. People play off of them in their humorous monologues. There are references to them in movies and
alike. So it becomes part of American popular culture. So the advertising functions on a number of different levels. This is
standard historical method.
Q. What, if any, advertisements would you think you would show during your trial testimony in the Hibner case?
A. Oh, what ads would I show?
Q. What ads do you think would be relevant?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
94Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I think the ads -- I can answer for both cases, here. I would go through and choose from my collection, advertisements that
reflect the brands that individuals smoked. So I would choose the major campaigns from the time period in which both of the
individuals here were kind of being inculcated into the smoking addiction.
Q. Well, there's really different time periods. Wouldn't you agree?
A. Right. So I could address each one individually.
Q. Let's start with Mr. Humpal.
A. Uh-huh. He would be the earlier one.
Q. Born in 1920?
A. That's right.
Q. Do you have any understanding when he began to smoke?
A. I don't, but I can rely on -- and I'm not going to make a firm statement as to when he smoked, but we do know, from our
social science research on this matter, that most people start smoking as teenagers, 16 being the median age.
So the world in which he was born into and the context of the world he was born into and his attitudes towards smoking
were significantly shaped in regards to advertisement during the period of his lifetime, so I would expect to start with the
advertisements in the 1920s and take through the ‘30s, ‘40s and ‘50s.
Q. So you would presume Mr. Humpal started smoking around age 16, for purposes of your opinions?
A. For purposes of my opinions.
Q. So that would have put it in roughly 1936, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. What, if anything, should Reynolds have told Mr. Humpal before 1936 about the health risks of smoking?
A. That they knew in 1936? At that early period, I'm -- that's an interesting question. I've never considered that. As far as R.J.
Reynolds goes, I'm not -- I don't have an opinion on the state of their internal knowledge about the risks of smoking and health
in 1936. But I'm not sure what they could have told him.
All I can talk about “is what they did tell him through their advertisements and other public messages and alike and, you know,
that's what I can attest to.
Q. So you won't be testifying about what Reynolds should have told Mr. Humpal before he started smoking?
A. I hadn't anticipated that, no.
Q. Because, as far as you know. Reynolds didn't have any knowledge that it should have conveyed to Mr. Humpal before he
started smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
95Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I'm not aware of anything. Again, though, I'm not completely expert in the full panoply of their medical knowledge at that
time period.
Q. You've reviewed internal tobacco company documents, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And they extend back in time for a very long time, correct?
A. They do, yes.
Q. Have you seen ever, in any internal tobacco company document that you've reviewed, evidence of a belief that smoking
caused lung cancer prior to 1936?
A. No. I have not seen that. That's why I don't intend to offer an opinion on that.
Q. So you can't get on the stand and say, R.J. Reynolds should have told Mr. Humpal that smoking could cause lung cancer
before he started smoking?
A. Yes. In this case, I can't, no.
Q. How about addiction? Can you point to any internal industry document that evidences knowledge of addiction prior to 1936?
A. No, I can't.
Q. So you can't say that Reynolds or Philip Morris should have told Mr. Humpal that cigarette smoking could be addictive
before he started smoking?
A. That's correct. My position is that people didn't think it was addictive at this time period.
Q. And so you can't think of anything that Reynolds or Philip Morris should have warned Mr. Humpal about before he began
smoking?
A. Yes. No, I can't.
Q. Let's talk about -- well, before we go to that, Mr. Humpal, it's my understanding he had a collapsed lung in 1974. Were
you aware of that?
A. I'm not. I mean, I'm not his doctor and I'm not going to offer any medical testimony, so that's not something --
Q. I'm not asking whether it was true or false that he did, in fact, have one I'm asking if you have any knowledge that that's
been alleged, been discussed in this case.
A. I have no knowledge of that.
Q. Well, I'd like you to assume for a moment that Mr. Humpal had a collapsed lung in 1974. Can you do that?
A. Sure.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
96Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. My question is, would a doctor treating a patient with a collapsed lung in 1974 have advised that patient to quit smoking,
in your opinion?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. Well, all I can say in answer to that is that there is polling evidence, polling data from the 1970s that tells us that for many
smokers, indeed the majority of smokers, when they went to the doctor, they were not getting advice to quit smoking.
So it's not inconceivable that a physician wouldn't have warned him. But then I'm not a medical doctor. I'm not going to diagnose
his condition. But it's not inconceivable that he did not get advice on smoking from his physician, based on the data that I've
looked at.
MS. CASE:
Q. That sounds like it's fair to say you don't have an opinion whether he would have been warned one way or another at that time?
A. He, as an individual, no. I mean, all I can say is that, you know, we have, for example, a Harris poll, taken from 1972. Where
smokers are asked, you know, has your doctor advised you to quit smoking. They asked smokers, two-thirds say, no, he hasn't
talked to me about it. So that's all I can say.
Q. Okay. Lets talk about Mrs. Hibner. Do you know what year she started smoking cigarettes?
A. I don't. Again, for the same kind of mental process that I've used for Mr. Humpal, if she was typical, she probably began
smoking, you know, sometime in the early ‘50s or late ‘40s.
Q. If she was born in ‘35.
A. It would be around ‘51, ‘52. We don't know for sure. It's not essential for me to know that. But that context of the ‘40s
and ‘50s would be important.
Q. What, if anything, should Reynolds have told Mrs. Hibner before she started smoking cigarettes?
A. Well, if -- before she started smoking, if we assume that she began smoking in 1951, certainly, there were things Reynolds
could have told her shortly after she began smoking.
Q. But not before?
A. I'm not aware of things before, no.
Q. And when you say “things,” do you mean both information about the health risks and the addictive nature of smoking?
A. Yes. That's right.
Q. So there is nothing that, in your opinion, Reynolds should have informed Mrs. Hibner before she started smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
97Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. Well, let me rephrase that just so that I feel more comfortable with the characterization rather than deal with kind of a
hypothetical. And, again, you know, I see Reynolds beginning to understand these processes around ‘53 onward, and largely
acting in concert with the other companies in reaction to the bad press. I mean, if --
In both cases, if an expert is going to maintain that a plaintiff should have known that this product was bad, I think it's a
reasonable imputation from that that the manufacturer also knew that it was dangerous and certainly had an obligation to tell
them. Now, that's -- I think that's a reasonable position to take.
I don't anticipate testifying on that particular issue but, again, if an expert is going to say, I've looked at the history and, you
know, everybody knew it was dangerous in 1935 or in 1950, okay, everybody includes the manufacturer. If the manufacturer
were to persuade people it wasn't dangerous, that's a problem.
But, you know, again, I interpreted your question to mean -- so I'm precise, to mean that a set of documents in which these
issues are discussed within the internal files of Reynolds, and for that I'll include Philip Morris in this answer, I have not seen
those kinds of documents. They may exist, but I haven't researched them and I don't anticipate giving opinions based on those
documents which I haven't seen.
Q. Okay. You mentioned 1951, and I think your words -- and correct me if I'm wrong -- were Reynolds was beginning to
develop an understanding about the risks of smoking as of 1953. Would that be your opinion?
A. Well, its relationship to lung cancer.
Q. Relationship to lung cancer specifically?
A. Yes.
Q. So before 1953, Reynolds didn't have any such understanding about the relationship of smoking to lung cancer?
A. Well, it's hard to say that affirmatively because, I mean, what do they do? They commission Claude Teague to go out and
look into the subject essentially, and he puts together a report for the company where he identifies a set of carcinogens that
they should be concerned about.
Was there no research prior to that? Well, I don't know about the Reynolds company. I've seen information for American
Tobacco, which, I guess, in a way, is kind of part of Reynolds now, but they're distinct in my mind as kind of an intellectual
process, where they are working with the Medical college of Virginia in the 1910s on issues related to smoking and health. So
certainly, with that company, there's some awareness that there's a problem.
And certainly there was scientific research going hack to the 1930s on these issues, although a lot of it was not published in
the united states.
We're getting over to state-of-the-art questions to which I've not testified on in the past, and while I have to answer your
question right now, I don't anticipate testifying on at trial, and I'm reaching the frontier of where I feel comfortable intellectually
discussing that issue.
Q. And I appreciate that. I don't want to go too deep into the specifics of the science, but what I want you to tell me is whether
you can point to anything you've ever seen in the files of Reynolds that suggest that prior to 1953 there was any understanding
that cigarettes could cause lung cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
98Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I have not seen anything, but then again, I have not completely researched all that because I've been focused on the public
debate and the role of the industry in shaping the public's understanding and public knowledge.
Q. So you can't point me to nay documents or sets of documents or research prior to 1953 that Reynolds could have disclosed
to Mr. Humpal or Mrs. Hibner before they started smoking?
A. That's true. But I'm qualifying that, just to let you know, that they may exist in there. I have not done a comprehensive and
systematic review of materials to answer that question.
Q. But as far as you know, there's nothing?
A. As far as I know, but I'm just qualifying what I know. They may be there, but I just haven't made an attempt to find it.
Q. Okay. Let's talk about the American Tobacco Company. When would you say that the American Tobacco Company gained
an understanding about the relationship between smoking and cancer?
A. Well, I mean, I know that they were -- at least based on the evidence, that they were concerned about health risks of smoking
in a quiet way by developing a close relationship with the medical college of virginia in the 1940s, at least in the ‘40s. So I
think that's evidence that they were concerned, very concerned. So for that particular situation, I have seen evidence to suggest
that, yes.
Q. You are talking about evidence of concern about the health risks of smoking?
A. Concern, yes, and indeed, knowledge. To the extent that they were beginning to see that cigarettes can cause serious disease
and began to initiate a program of biological research.
Q. When do you think it would be fair to say that the American Tobacco Company knew that smoking caused lung cancer?
A. You know, I can't -- you know, I just haven't done the research to answer that because, certainly, all of the companies, I
think, essentially know there's a problem by 1954. It may go back earlier. But, again, my answer would be the same as the
one I gave you for the Reynolds answers. You know, I have not looked at that particluar question. I have focused on public
understanding and public debate and have not held myself up as an expert in science.
Q. So you can't point to anything definite from any tobacco company that evidences an understanding that smoking was related
to lung cancer prior to what year?
A. I'd have to -- there are more forthright documents. But, again. I don't intend to give an opinion in this area. It's not part of
my area of expertise, in terms of evaluating the science. I know that among the industry, certainly by 1957, I think it's widely
known in the industry that these things do cause cancer.
Later documents -- and I'm not remembering the specific documents -- but if you follow the -- in the philip Morris company, the
correspondence of Helmet Wacom, beginning in the late ‘50s, this is very clear, you know, that he makes his opinions known
to the non-technical management above him, the non-scientists that he reports to, in terms of the company leadership. Certainly
in the ‘50s, yes, the industry is knowing -- there are lots of discussions from lots of different perspectives.
Q. And so by the time the tobacco industry had an understanding about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer. Mr.
Humpal would have been smoking for roughly 20 years?
A. Well, less than that, somewhat less than that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
99Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. 15 years?
A. Between 15 and 20. But, again, I don't intend to offer opinions on this issue. This is not an area that I have held myself
out as an expert in.
Q. Do you agree that a person's parents can influence that individual's awareness or belief about the hazards of smoking?
A. Sure. That's true.
Q. What do you know about Mrs. Hibner's parents?
A. I don't know anything.
Q. What do you know about Mr. Humpal's parents?
A. I'm not recalling anything in particular.
Q. You agree that a person's spouse can influence an individual's awareness or belief about the hazards of smoking?
A. Sure. That's part of the mix.
Q. What do you know about Mrs. Hibner's first two husbands?
A. Not much. Was she married to both of them? My recollection is -- maybe she was married to both of them.
Q. You don't even know how many times she was married?
A. Well, there are two men prior to Mr. Hibner, but -- and, of course, the children that are the products of his relationship. It's
complex. It's a complex family history.
Q. And you agree that a person's education can influence their knowledge and beliefs about the risks of smoking?
A. Yes. And that changes over tine. You have to be very careful about locating that in historical time and contextualizing it
properly.
Q. What do you know about Ms. Hibner's education?
A. I believe she went to high school and she graduated from high school. That is mentioned.
Q. You don't know anything beyond that?
A. No.
Q. You don't know where she went to high school?
A. Virginia.
Q. Beyond that, you can't be more specific?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
100Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No.
Q. What do you know about Mr. Humpal's education?
A. I'm not recalling.
Q. Do you know when Mrs. Hibner's family first got a television set?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you know when Mr. Humpal's family first got a television set?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you know what newspapers, magazines, books were available in Mrs. Hibner's house at any time?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what newspapers, books, magazines were available in Mr. Humpal's house at any time?
A. Well, he mentions reading the Cleveland newspapers, as he mentions earlier. Aside from that, no.
Q. I think we've already talked about employment.
A. Yes.
Q. You don't know what Jobs either Mr. Humpa?? or Mrs. Hibner had, correct?
A. No. Mr. Humpal, he worked in the laundry business. That's pretty clear in the deposition. Mrs. Hibner worked in a variety
of occupations, including -- I guess assisting with this bar that they owned.
Q. Do you know anything about the religious background of Mrs. Hibner?
A. No.
Q. Do you know anything about the religious background of Mr. Humpal?
A. No.
Q. I think you've testified before that 90 percent would be a very, very high level of awareness, if you were to get that response
in a poll, correct?
A. Well, it depends on what the poll asks. I mean, I think, more accurately -- I've usually been asked this in terms of, you know,
what would satisfy your definition of common knowledge, which I've testified to, which is what everybody knows, mutual
knowledge.
Well, at least on a polling instrument, 95 percent, which allows for a normal distribution, two standard deviations from the
normal distribution, with some acknowledgment for error, you know, that people didn't understand the question or were
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
101Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
distracted or whatever. So 95 percent is as close to totality as you are going to get, in most forms of social phenomena when
you measure things, at least in the social science research that I do. It nay not be good enough for drug research. Every field
has its different standards. 90 percent is high, though.
Q. So, currently, polls of the American people indicate that they have about a 90 percent belief that smoking causes Serious
disease.
A. Well, I mean, I feel more comfortable saying that in the very late 1950s and the early 1990s, when the Gallup reasked its
standard polling question, which although it changed somewhat in its wording is, do you think cigarettes are among the causes
of lung cancer. For some areas, you reach the 90 percent point, either in the late ‘80s or the early 1990s, and that's very high.
Q. But there are still, even though it's very high, there's still some number of people who don't believe that smoking is related
to disease in the late ‘80s and early “90s?
A. That's true. And I think it's -- you know, just as there are people that Cent limed to smoke. And, in many ways, you know, the
industry strategy has been to attack Just that, to work the margins, you know, of the problem, the margins of the market, to probe
those areas where people have some level of doubt, to focus Their efforts to get more specific segments of the population, to
refine their marketing efforts so that they go for the market Segments with the greater precision. Yes. It's a fascinating story of
the industry learning about its clients over time in response to the challenges posed to their business by the health information.
Q. You are not suggesting that everyone who smokes today doesn't know that smoking can cause cancer, correct?
A. No. I'm not suggesting that.
Q. I must have misunderstood you.
MS. CASE:
Let's Switch real quick.
VIDEO REPORTER:
Stand by. We're going off the record. This concludes Tape 4. The time is 1504.
(off the record.)
MS. CASE:
Q. Professor, we talked before about your St. Petersburg Times research. Have you completed that?
A. No, I haven't. I'm not including that in any of my reliance and am not going to present it in this case as something I rely upon.
Q. Have you completed your research for The Miami Herald that Gary page asked you to do?
A. Yes. I gave that to you all.
Q. Do you remember who you gave it to or what deposition it was?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
102Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. I thought I gave it to the Barbanell people, but I can -- I don't have a problem giving that to you. I can send you another
copy. I'm happy to do that. It's a small set of articles and they're in digital form.
Q. If you were to answer the question of what information was available to Betty Jane Hibner during her lifetime about the
dangers of smoking, what sources would you use?
A. I would say what was available to the American public, I would review. The sources I've reviewed, which are a variety of
newspapers. Basically, we've long ago reached the point of diminishing returns on this because this is a national issue. The
stories are AP stories, united Press. New York Times and other wire services.
Look at those. Look at national magazines. Look at television, all mass media. I've looked at educational materials. I looked at,
you know, points -- point to the educational materials. I've looked at etiquette books, and cultural materials like that, looked at
film. I've looked at patterns of culture, speaking ways, slang, the things I've talked about. The kinds of things I've talked about
in the past, I Would stay consistent with that.
Q. The question I asked you is information available to Betty Jane Hibner throughout her lifetime, if you were trying to review
or trying to get a sense of what that was, would you say that internal tobacco company documents are a part of the universe of
materials that were available to Betty Jane Hibner during her lifetime?
A. Mo. Those are secret documents. They fulfill another function in my testimony.
Q. They don't help us understand what was available to her at any given time?
A. Well, there's an exception to that. The industry has -- and I've testified about this -- extensive evidence related to radio and
television broadcasts in the 1550s and 1960s, lots of transcriptions of news information and things like that that are not, at least
as far as I Can tell, available anywhere else or in any other archive. And so that's an important reason.
If you are looking for publicly available information and following that criteria, you still have to consult industry internal files
because of the massive records that they kept on radio broadcasts and television broadcasts.
Q. Wouldn't -- but that would be limited to those specific broadcasts, Correct, broadcasts that aren't available anywhere else
that were technically available to the American public at the time that they were broadcast?
A. That's right. But you've got to have evidence of those broadcasts. And in the ‘50s, especially before the widespread
introduction of magnetic recorded tape and things like that, we just don't have good records of the actual broadcasts, we have
some, some TV and some TV news. But you want to augment that with the industry documents. I discussed this in my article
with the Grand ??ole spry, is where you can go to to get that.
Q. According to your CV, you received your Ph.D. in 1997.
A. That's correct.
Q. And you began wording for the university of Southern Mississippi that year.
A. Yes. As soon as I graduated, I started working here.
Q. So that's been 12 years?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
103Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. When you first started working for the university, what was your job title?
A. Assistant professor of history.
Q. What is your current title?
A. Associate professor of history and director of the Center For Oral History and Cultural Heritage.
Q. Is there a level of professor above associate professor?
A. Full professor.
Q. So if you were promoted, you would be then called a full professor?
A. That's right.
Q. When were you first eligible to be promoted to full professor?
A. It's five years of service once you are promoted, so that would be -- I guess -- I think I was first eligible -- if I had not gone
on a two-year leave of absence for my post doc, I would have been first eligible last year or the year before, it was something
like that. But I took a two-year leave of absence from my position, unpaid, from the university to pursue a post doc, and so I've
-- you know, I've -- although I was tenured in the absence of that, I was tenured while I was at the University of North Carolina,
I believe I -- that set me back a little bit on promotion to full.
Q. So when are you eligible to be promoted to full professor?
A. I could go now. I could go up for it now.
Q. What do you have to do in order to go up for it? Do you have to fill out a form, put in your name?
A. It's a pretty big deal. You know, you have to -- I have one book and a number of articles. You have to show, you know, a
pattern of accomplishment, according to our tenure and promotion rules, in teaching and service and scholarship, things like that.
Q. So why haven't you applied for full professorship?
A. Well, one, I had this two-year leave of absence that set me back.
Q. But you are currently eligible?
A. I am Currently eligible.
Q. So why, as you sit here today, have you not applied for full professorship?
A. Previously, I didn't think that I had fulfilled some of the -- some of the requirements, particularly on the service.
Q. What do you mean by ‘'service”?
A. Community work.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
104Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. So as you sit here today, you wouldn't say you are qualified to be promoted to full professor?
A. Oh, no, as I sit here Today, I do think I'm qualified.
Q. And so why wouldn't -- maybe I'm misunderstanding you. If you feel you are qualified, why haven't you sought full
professorship?
A. Well, I didn't think I was qualified last year, and I didn't think I had the time requirement, but I'm going to apply for it this year.
Q. You are going to apply for it by the end of 2009?
A. Yes. BUT, you know, it's subject to a vote. You may not get it. At my university, sometimes for full professor, people have
to go up for it more than once. I don't know. It's a complex process.
Q. What is involved, in tetras of how do you submit your name?
A. Well, you put together a very elaborate portfolio, documenting what you've done. It's voted on at multiple levels of the
university, history department, your college, university, the institutions of higher learning, the very top of the university. I got
that wrong once, so it's -- you know, it's an elaborate process.
Q. Are there opinions that you have about Mrs. Hibner or Mr. Humpal that we haven't discussed today?
A. No.
Q. Just a couple more questions. The e-mails that you had originally not produced to us this morning that you then produced to
us after lunch of your communications with Mr. Quinn and his paralegal, that wasn't exactly about how to use your testimony
at trial, was it?
A. Mo. That's why I was clear it was about my testimony.
Q. And it wasn't about trial strategy, broadly, those e-mails weren't?
A. Well, it was about my testimony here in this deposition, which is part of the trial. I mean --
Q. It wasn't about how to use your testimony at trial or how to present your testimony at trial? That was not the subject of
those e-mails you produced?
A. No, not before the jury, but it was how to respond to the testimony.
Q. Now. The CD that you produced To us this morning, there are ads on here that you've not produced to defense counsel
in the past?
A. Well, I wasn't sure. And what I have on there, in kind of an abundance of caution perspective, I sent over -- or put on that
document -- I mean, that disk, pardon me for misspeaking, a folder Called Commercials because I pulled together a lot of
commercials in the last few months.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
105Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Now, most of those, I used in previous trials, but to be honest with you, I couldn't keep it straight. I don't keep records on that.
So just as a -- for me to make sure that I've disclosed everything that I might want to use and given it to you, I put that on
the disk. So that's on there.
I had sent to Mr. Quinn my standard generic expert report, which I've given you many times, but I put a copy on there, as
well, just for your convenience. And a couple of other things in there that are kind of new. There's an Excel spreadsheet with
additional documentation of the showings of an advocacy film called “The Need to Know,” “smoking and Health, the Meed
To Know,” which I've shown in past trials on occasion.
Q. Can I interrupt you just for a second? I want to let you know where I'm going with the question so we can save a little time.
As far as you know, defense counsel may or may not have the materials that appear on this disk; is that true?
A. That's right.
Q. So if there are materials on here that defense counsel hasn't seen before that defense counsel hasn't had a chance to examine
you on, that's a possibility, we may find things we don't have. Correct?
A. That's true.
Q. And since this was produced in disk form today, it's not like I can review them at this time.
A. I'll make myself available to you.
Q. And you are willing to do that, as I know you are.
MS. CASE:
Mr. Quinn, will you also be willing to make him available for additional questions about any reliance materials we weren't
produced before today?
MR. QUINN:
I will, but please keep in mind we have other schedule deadlines in other cases -- well, not in these two. You are well aware
of the ones in these Two, but we have others, too.
MS. CASE:
And, certainly, I don't think it would be necessary to pull together a whole other deposition. I'm sure we could tack it on the
end of some other examination That had been scheduled. I would be perfectly willing to do that.
MR. QUINN:
That's would be what I would suggest.
MS. CASE:
Q. I just have one more question. You don't find me intimidating, do you?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
106Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MS. CASE:
Okay. That's all I have for now. I'll turn it over to Mr. Henk.
we're going to mark the CD as Exhibit Number B.
(Exhibit 8 was marked.)
A. The intimidation is not in the individual. It's in the broader strategy pursued by the law firm and the client, just to be precise.
You, you are fine.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. HENK:
we are on the record, right?
VIDEO REEPORTER:
Yes, sir, we are.
MR. HENK:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, we've met before, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And just to pick up on the last discussion, do you find me intimidating?
A. My answer is the Same.
Q. You do not find me intimidating?
A. You are not, personally, intimidating.
Q. Okay. But you mentioned -- do you feel you know what my law firm's strategy is with respect to you?
A. Not in its completeness, no, because I'm not privy to your internal discussions, but --
Q. I was going to ask that. YOU have not seen any discussions between counsel for Philip Morris and anyone about strategy
with respect to you, have you?
A. No. All I've seen is the products of your actions, from which I have to infer.
Q. And you haven't seen anything from my client, Philip Morris USA, to or from my client with respect to anything about
strategy related to you, have you?
A. No. All I can do is infer from, say, for example, your subpoena and deposition strategies.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
107Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. I'm not interested in your inferences.
Let me ask you, have you done any research as to any Philip Morris documents specifically for the Hibner case?
A. Not specifically for Hibner or Humpal.
Q. You anticipated my next question. Do you intend to offer any opinions in the Hibner case about Philip Morris USA's conduct
that you have not offered in a prior case?
A. No.
Q. And would the same go for the Humpal case?
A. Yes. My answer is no for both of those cases.
Q. Do you plan to discuss any Philip Morris USA documents in the Hibner case that you have not discussed in prior testimony?
A. No. I think my opinions are going to be consistent with prior testimony. And you mentioned that earlier set of cases, when
Ms. Case was asking me. So, no, I don't plan to go outside of that.
Q. Okay. In other words, I heard what you said, but that would also apply to documents specifically, as well, correct?
A. Yes. And the underlying documents, that's correct.
Q. And the same would go for the Humpal case, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And then while I'm at it, then, let me ask you about “Breakthrough!” because this book that I'm holding that we have not
marked as an exhibit because it's your only original -- this is your original book, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And just for the record, the title on the cover of the book says, “Breakthrough! ”Merit Presents History-Changing
Achievements, 1851 to 1976. As Reported By the New York Times,” correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And where did you get this book?
A. That particular one. I bought from a used book dealer, through the internet.
Q. And when was that?
A. That particular copy, I ordered last week because my other copy, I can't seem to locate it. They're widely available and
inexpensive. So I had an earlier copy, and I moved my office around a couple of times and who knows where it is.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
108Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. And this “Breakthrough!” book that you've brought with you today, that had not previously been a reliance material of
yours, correct?
A. That's true, yes.
Q. And what is your explanation as to why it became a reliance material now?
A. Well, the smoker in this case, in one of these cases actually used that brand.
Q. Is there any other reason?
A. No.
Q. What are the opinions that you intend to give with respect to the “Breakthrough!” book?
A. If I'm asked about it and incorporate it into my presentation to the jury, I'll simply point out That the document presents itself
as offering breakthroughs and headlines selected from The New York Times of what Merit, by implication, Philip Morris, thinks
were the most important things that happened during that time period, and then point out that, for example, there was no mention
of events that Philip Morris counsel often talks about as being very important, Such as the 1964 surgeon General's Report.
Q. DO you intend to offer any other opinions, about “Breakthrough!”?
A. That's it.
Q. You don't intend to offer an opinion that “Breakthrough!” provides any false information, do you?
A. No. I mean, the headlines in newspaper stories that are reprinted are reprinted accurately in that regard. You know, simply
sins of omission would be the issue. But I don't intend to offer that opinion in any case. Simply, it's an example of a Philip
Morris communication.
Q. And just so we're clear, I'm not referring specifically to headlines. I'm talking about any work you see in this book, whether
it's on the front of the cover, the back of the cover, any page therein, any print you see in the “breakthrought” book, you are
not going to opting that any of it is false information, correct?
A. Well, false, I don't think along the same terms as you do when I incorporate these into my analysis. To me, what it represents
is philip Morris' attempt at what they thought was the most important and they certainly didn't think the smoking and health
issue was most important.
So I accept it as their statement of their beliefs. So I accept the document as being a true statement of philip Morris's position.
Much like when I've used in previous trials the philip Morris youth antismoking pamphlets. I accept those as a fair and accurate
statement of philip Morris' views. So no, I'm not going to say anything is false in that.
MR. HENK:
I'm going to ask the court to strike as no responsive everything up to the very last part of your answer, where you actually
were responding to my question.
A. That's fine. That's your job.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
109Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Do you intend to offer any opinion with respect to this “Breakthrough!” book, any word that's anywhere on it or in it, offer
the opinion that it's misleading?
A. No. No. I'm going to simply present it the way I just described, you know, as a statement of what philip Morris thought the
most important breakthroughs of the time period under consider action there.
Q. You refereed to sins of omission. What sins of omission do you think philip Morris committed?
A. Well, my personal view is that they -- I guess I would disagree with philip Morris. I would think the 1964 Surgeon General's
Report was a breakthrough, but, you know, that's a disagreement. They're entitled to their view on that. And that's the only --
that's the extent of it. That's what I was referring to.
Q. Okay. Anything else?
A. That's it.
Q. Okay. Could you refer to the page in the book “Breakthrough!” where philip Morris says that that report was not a
hreakthrought?
A. Well, it's not a breakthrough because it's not in the document. That's --
Q. I see. You are reading the “Breakthrough!” book to be philip Morris' representation of every single breakthrough that had
ever occurred, do you believe in the united States or worldwide, from that time period?
A. Well, they say history-changing achievements. As a point of fact, they have things like sputnik in here and others, so that
would be world history. And simply that, in their position, things that are not in this don't meet their standard of history-changing
achievements as reported by the new York Times.
Q. Where does philip Mosses make that position, do you believe? Where do you see that position stated?
A. Well, it didn't make the cut. That's all I'm going to say about it. It didn't make the cut.
Q. So it's your opinion, Dr. Kyriakoudes, that if something doesn't appear in the “Breakthrough!” book, that's philip Morris'
representation that it wasn't a breakthrough?
A. Not a breakthrough -- not enough to be included in this particular document. And I'm not aware of volume 2, the update.
Q. Do you have any information about how philip Morris decided what to put in the “Breakthrough!” book?
A. No. I can just rely on the document, itself. That's all I have.
Q. Okay, So for all you know, Dr. Kyriakoudes, philip Morris could believe, as of the time they published that “Breakthrough!”
book, that there were thousands of other breakthroughs that took place during that time period, but they just decided not to put
them in this particular book, correct?
A. Yes. I think that's fair.
Q. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
110Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. And I wouldn't to any farther than that in my analysis.
Q. Did Mr. Humpal see the book “Breakthrough!”?
A. I have no idea. I cannot answer that question.
Q. And so you don't know if Mr. Humpal relied upon anything in the book “Breakthrough!, correct?
A. My answers would have to be consistent with the lines of question that Ms. Case offered in terms of placing Mr. Humpal
and Ms. Huber in front of any particular document at a particular time in any particular place.
Q. Have you seen any polls with respect to the book “Breakthrough!”?
A. No.
Q. Any reports?
A. No. I don't have any other documentation on that particular book.
Q. Of any sort, correct?
A. Of any sort.
Q. So I wouldn't have to ask you studies, articles. I wouldn't have to go through the whole litany? You don't have anything else?
A. I have no other documents in my reliance set or in my research relevant to that document.
Q. In other words, you are not award of any other documents, correct?
A. That's right. Yes. I have not reviewed any.
Q. Do you know if the public health community suggested that tobacco companies market a cigarette like Merit brand cigarettes?
A. Some people did call for safer cigarettes, and so, yes, particularly in the 1960s, there were some that were calling for -- ‘50s
and ‘60s calling for a safer cigarette.
Q. And you mentioned Johnny -- what did you call him, Johnny philip Morris earlier in your testimony?
A. Well, his nickname. That would be his nickname.
Q. And was there a slogan that you can remember that Johnny philip Morris would say?
A. Yes.
Q. What was that?
A. Shall I sing it for the camera? don't think I have the same pitch that the did, “Call for philip Morris.”
Q. Mr. Humpal never got that call, did he?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
111Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. What do you mean by that?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. I don't know that that question means.
MR. HENK:
Q. He never smoked philip Morris brand cigarettes, did he?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. I don't know. Maybe that was the other person involved in this deposition. I'm not aware that he smoked philip Morris brand,
but that's not -- that was a ubiquitous advertising slogan. I would still talk about that. It's critical for understanding the rise
of the cigarette market.
MR. HENK:
Q. When you said that other person involved in this deposition, do you mean Ms. --
A. Ms. --
Q. Hibner?
A. The other -- yes, this is a double deposition.
Q. Well, Mrs. Hibner didn't smoke philip Morris brand cigarettes, did she?
A. I'm not recalling. You know, the -- you know, on this whole issue of brand history, particularly for these two cases, the
data is very, very sketchy. I mean, the evidentiary base here is very sketchy. We don't have any direct testimony form the
individuals, themselves. So --
And given that there's a wide number of brands discussed for both of the decedent's involved in this litigation, you know, who
both began smoking at periods quite distant in modern historical times, it's not an unreasonable position to take that they smoked
a wide variety of brands and that the advertising messages of all the leading brands of cigarettes form the time periods of their
lives would be relevant for my testimony, in terms of the public's understanding of the risks of smoking.
Q. You didn't see any evidence that Mr. Humpal smoked philip Morris brand cigarettes, did you?
A. No. But take into account my caveat that I just mentioned.
Q. You didn't see any evidence that Ms. Hibner smoked philip Morris brand cigarettes, did you?
A. I don't think so, no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
112Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. If Mr. Humpal saw a cigarette advertisement of any tobacco company, you don't have any idea whether he relied upon it
in any may, do you?
A. That's correct. And nor would I present myself as having that knowledge. And you can refer to the previous line of questioning
relevant to that, that Ms. Case gave, and just about every other deposition I've given.
Q. The same goes for Ms. Hibner, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Would you agree that Ms. Hibner was an adult in 1974?
A. Yes.
Q. By 1974, cigarette advertisements had been pulled from television and radio, Correct?
A. Yes.
MR. QUINN:
I'm going to object to the form. Sorry. I didn't get it out in time.
A. Actually pulled off a little sooner than that, pulled off of TV, '71.
MR. HENK:
Q. Right. Which would be before '74, right?
A. Right.
Q. You would agree that Mr. Humpal was an adult in 1980?
A. Yes.
Q. In fact, he would have been about 60.
A. He would have been 60.
Q. Let me ask about the Blosser cigarettes. And I apologize if I am going over ground we covered. But you didn't do any
research to confirm the authenticity of this Blosser's -- what would purport to be a Blosser's box of cigarettes, did you?
A. Yes.
Q. What did you do?
A. I've looked at similar packaging, the historical archives, and I also have the advertising of the Blosser's brand in my $ reliance
materials.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
113Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
VIDEO REPORTER:
Can you put your mic back on?
A. Let me restate what I've just said since it probably didn't show up on the recording. What I've said was. I've done research on
that very type of package in other -- in archives, and I've seen that same packaging with authenticated documentation in other
archives, and I've Seen the advertisements in newspapers for that particular product.
Q. When did you do that research?
A. When did I come across those ads? They had been in my reliance documents for some time. A couple of years ago, maybe
even more. It's been a while. If you look under The Atlanta Constitution newspaper files, which I've given to you guys, they're
in there.
Q. Okay. You even remember what newspaper they were from?
A. That's right.
Q. I'd like to ask you about the e-mails we're going to mark as Exhibits 4 and 5. And you will have to forgive me. I'm going to
have to step over by the court reporter so that I can look at them while I'm asking you the questions.
A. Sure. If you can strive for new and unique questions, I'd be grateful.
Q. I think I can.
A. Good.
Q. I'm not intimidating you standing over here, am I?
A. No. I've answered that question.
Q. I just wanted to make sure now that I've moved closer to you.
MR. HENK:
Is Exhibit 4 Dr. Kyriakoudes's e-mail to Mr. Quinn? I'm sorry, to Tammy Todd. Is that Exhibit 4?
MS. CASE:
Yes. I believe Mr. Quinn's e-mail is Exhibit 5.
MR. HENK:
Q. In Exhibit 4, you Specifically asked an assistant of Mr. Quinn to remove you as an expert in these two cases immediately,
correct?
A. Yes. I was trying to get somebody's attention.
Q. Well, I didn't ask you why you did. Let me ask it again. In Exhibit 4 --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
114Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form. He gets to answer the way he wants to.
MR. HENK:
Q. In Exhibit 4, you specifically asked an assistant of Mr. Quinn -- and I'm going to quote you -- “Please remove mo as an
expert in these two cases immediately.” Correct?
A. That's what I wrote.
Q. And Mr. Quinn did not comply with that request of yours, did he?
A. No. What was behind that was my sense that they weren't going to object to what I thought was a request, as I described
it in there, and as I've described it frequently today, overly broad and invasive and not relevant, et cetera. I've talked about
that quite a bit today.
Q. Are you saying that your request to remove you as an expert in these two cases immediately was for effect?
A. Well, the implication was, if they -- I wanted to get somebody's attention at the other end of that line. I didn't know who
was at the other end of that line. I haven't had a lot of experience with this group and so I wanted -- I wanted some sense that
there would be an objection lodged to what I thought was an overly broad and invasive request for documents, as I've described
many times today.
Q. Was your statement in Exhibit 4, “please remove me as an expert in these two cases immediately” a false statement by you?
A. Well, it can neither be true nor false. It's a request, it's not a statement of fact. How could it be true or false? It's just what
it is. It was a request. That makes no sense.
Q. And when you said in Exhibit 4. “I've answered extensive questions about the underlying matter and am unwilling to answer
further questions,” what were you referring to specifically?
A. The things that we talked about this morning related to this business in which I've been a bystander in regard to the contact
with the university of Florida graduate students.
Q. In other words, you were referring to the actions that Dr. Proctor took with respect to research assistants, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And so, in other words, because you thought you were going to be asked about Dr. Proctors actions, you asked to be removed
as an expert in these two cases immediately, Correct?
A. No. That's incorrect. You haven't read the e-mail. What the e-mail goes onto say or maybe it says prior to that. I don't have
it in front of me, that there's -- the e-mail explains why. And I've explained it multiple times today, but I'll repeat myself at
the risk of being redundant.
It says -- here, up at the top, before I say -- I've got to scroll up a little bit to read the whole thing. I say, “I cannot comply with
Item 17 in the schedule A...” pardon my misspelling there “... Notice of Deposition. It is remarkably and unconscionably broad.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
115Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
To comply would require me to produce privileged materials relating to litigation in cases across the nation and internationally,
including the many asbestos cases where I serve as a defense witness on issues of smoking and health.” That's the reason.
And we established -- and pardon me for expressing a little bit of frustration with this, but we have established extensively, in
my the examination by Ms. Case, that that was the issue, and that things relating to Florida, to case materials, Engle progeny
litigation. I have no problem with that. But as the thing was written in Item 17, it asks for everything I've ever done, and that
was, as I said, unconscionably broad.
Q. Earlier in this, deposition, both you and Mr. Quinn described Exhibit 4 and Exhibit 5 as trial strategy communications,
correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Those were not trial strategy Communications, were they?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. Well, no. That's -- not testifying in the trial and not participating in the litigation certainly impacts trial strategy, wouldn't it?
MR. HENK:
Q. Sir, you have described Exhibits 4 and 5 as trial strategy to try and keep from producing them to defense counsel, correct?
MR. QUINN:
I'm going to object to that. He didn't make any decision regarding that. I did. So accuse me.
MR. HENK:
That was just a ridiculous speaking objection.
MR. QUINN:
So what? Don't ask him the question then.
MR. HENK:
So what? You've suggested the answer to him. That's the problem.
MR. QUINN:
Don't ask him an improper question that you already know the answer to.
MR. HENK:
Well, we're going to decide what was improper here, I can tell you that. We'll see if the -- if others agree that these were trial
strategy communications.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
116Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. What I said, and you can go back to the record and read this, as related to my testimony. And I think not testifying is an
expression of my testimony. I mean, that certainly is an issue. That's what I was thinking when I said -- I mean, I was quite
precise. I was not talking about overall trial strategy. I have no role in that. You know, I wouldn't begin to think that I had the
ability to understand how a complex activity for which I have no training or experience, like a trial, should proceed. I mean,
I'm not a fool.
But, you know, precisely that point, you know, at that point in time, if I could be confronted with that kind of broad sweeping
subpoena request or schedule A request. I guess to be more accurate, that impacted the trial, as far as my testimony went. And
I was quite clear about that this morning, that pertains to my testimony. And not testifying is a function of my -- you know,
that impacts my testimony, me not being there.
Q. You testified earlier today that Exhibits 4 and 5 were trial strategy communications to try and cover up the fact that you
had asked --
A. You are out of line.
Q. -- removed as an expert in this case, didn't you?
A. You are out of line. Look, I could care less that you see this document. You know, at the request of the attorney here, he
wanted to keep that privileged or whatever. But, you know, you are out of line in these accusations, absolutely, and I resent
it. I resent your unbaseless accusations. I think you are being unprofessional. I think you are misrepresenting what I said this
morning on the record. And if you've got a legitimate question, ask your question. Move on.
Q. Did you not testify earlier today that Exhibits 4 and 5 constituted trial strategy communications?
MR. QUINN:
Objection. Asked and answered.
A. I said trial strategy as it related to my testimony, and I think that's a reasonable and accurate reflection of what the document
says.
Look, not participating in the trial, removing myself from giving my testimony, you know, impacts the way one would conduct
the trial. And if you can't accept that, then, you know, you are trying to put words in my mouth to make baseless accusations,
to impugn my integrity. All of these are false and I resent them.
MR. HENK:
Objection, nonresponsive.
A. Fine.
Q. If you did not care to have defense counsel see Exhibits 4 and 5, why did you not agree to produce them this morning?
A. In discussion with the attorney, he said these are privileged documents, and I relied on his understanding of the process and
-- you know, you well know that there was a discussion at lunchtime, I guess it was off the record. You clarified the rules.
And once you two attorneys, referring to Mike and you, worked out the details related to the law and what the rules are, then
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
117Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
I produced them. I mean, you know, that's -- there's nothing -- and there's nothing more to it than that. Again, you are trying
to make something of nothing.
Q. Do you have the Koballa deposition transcript in front of you?
A. I do.
Q. You were given an opportunity to read and sign that deposition, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. You chose not to avail yourself of that opportunity, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. You're not regretting that decision, correct?
A. No. I think Monica is a very good court reporter. I think it's accurate.
Q. I would like to direct your attention to Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. I would like to direct your attention specifically -- I'm sorry, actually Page 230, Line 16. I asked you, “You believe the
situation relative to Dr. Proctor to be a serious one?”
And at the end of the answer you gave, the last sentence of your answer, you said. “I mean, a subpoena is a serious matter.”
Correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. The next question I asked you, Page 231, Line 7, “Have you ever had any e-mail communications with Dr. Proctor
about this situation?”
What was your answer at Lines 10 and 11?
A. Not that I can recall. I don't think so, no.
Q. Actually, your answer was, “Not that I can -- not that I can recall. I don't think so, no.” Correct?
A. Un-huh.
Q. That answer you gave on Page 231 of that transcript, Lines 10 through 11, was not the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, was it?
A. Well, the next question that I answered, I did identify the e-mails.
Q. No, you didn't, sir. But we'll get into the next two questions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
118Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. The next page.
Q. But I'm asking you about this question. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you understand that you are still under oath, correct?
A. That's right, That's what I said.
Q. Well, that's not what I asked you. Let's try it again.
A. And, no --
Q. Your answer at Lines 10 to 11, to my question that started at Line 7, on Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript, your
answer was not the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, was it?
A. Well, in the sense that I had those e-mails, no, that was inaccurate.
Q. In fact, that answer you gave at Lines 10 and 11 of Page 231 was a false answer, correct?
A. I have the e-mails. That's right. So it was not accurate. But then I later did correct that.
Q. And, in fact, when you gave that answer at Lines 10 to 11 of Page 231 of the Koballa transcript, you knew that your answer
was false when you gave that answer, correct?
A. Well, you know, I had -- I had those e-mails, and I was wanting to give them to you, as I said, later. And as you read the
transcript, I basically do identify them. So at that point, yes, it was not accurate, but I did correct that later in the deposition
through my actions of identifying them to you.
Q. That's not what I asked you. I'm going to try it again. You answer at Lines 10 to 11 of Page 231 of the Koballa transcript
was a knowingly false answer at the time you gave it, correct?
MR. QUINN:
I object to the form of the question.
A. It was not accurate, and I corrected that on the next page.
MR. HENK:
Q. That's not what I asked you either. Let me try it again. Let me try it this way. At Lines 10 to 11, your answer to my question
that started at Line 7 on Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript, at the time you gave that answer, you knew that to be
a false answer, didn't you?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. Well, after I gave that answer, I -- you know, as we were talking, I realized that I had -- I had to give up these e-mails, and
I did realize that I was not accurate and so that's why I corrected it very shortly, within probably 60 to 70 seconds afterwards.
MR. HENK:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
119Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you walked into the Koballa deposition hours before you gave that answer on Page 231 of the transcript
intending to share those e-mails with me, correct?
A. I was -- yes. I was wanting to -- wanting to relieve myself of those e-mails and I was -- I have to say I was personally
embarrassed that I had not correctly recalled all that I had in my e-mail file in the first deposition, and that caused me some
stress, and I responded in a stressful manner. It was a very stressful event, as you recall. But I delivered those to you. So that's
what happened.
Q. It wasn't a stressful event for me. You are referring to yourself, correct?
MR. QUINN:
Objection. That's not a question. That's a statement.
MR. HENK:
It was a question.
MR. QUINN:
The end of it.
MR. HENK:
Then I'll ask it differently.
Q. When you just referred to the situation being stressful, you are describing that you were feeling stress, correct?
A. Yes. That's what I intended. I mean, it's always stressful to be on this side of the table, so to speak. You have an easy job.
Q. When you gave the answer that you gave at Lines 10 to 11 of Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript, at the time you
gave that answer, you knew it to be a false answer, correct?
MR. QUINN:
Objection.
A. As soon as I said it, I realized that I needed to give you those e-mails, and so the next opportunity, within a few seconds, the
next question or two, I sought to make that right. That's true. So in that regard.
MR. HENK:
Q. If I keep asking you to answer this question about whether you knew it was a false answer, are you ever going to answer
that question?
A. I'm giving you the answer, the same answer. I'm answering your question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
120Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Well, you haven't answered whether you knew it was false when you gave the answer, and if what you are telling me is you
are not ever going to answer my question, then I'm going to ask the judge to order you to answer it. I'm not going to waste time
here because I've already asked it five or six times now.
A. Once I gave that answer, as I said a minute ago, it was -- I realized I had those e-mails and I had to give them to you, and so,
yes, I answered the question the way I did. I realized, you know, I've got to give these e-mails up because I have them in my
possession and the next opportunity -- and we're talking 30 seconds or so -- I did identify those e-mails to you.
Q. And you also realized that at the time you gave that answer at Lines 10 to 11, it was a false answer, correct?
A. As soon as I said it, I realized it was false, and I sought to make it right.
Q. Okay, well, let's talk about the next question and see if you did seek to make it right. The nest question I asked you at Line
12. “Dr. Proctor never sent you any e-mails about the situation that led to the documents being subpoenaed?” And why don't
you read us out loud what your answer was.
A. “He -- no. He's not -- I've had no conversation about any of these hearings or anything with him on e-mails, none of the stuff
going on in Volusia County with the judge, no e-mails on that whatsoever.”
And I had no Conversations with him. I didn't reply to any of these matters. So that's a true statement.
Q. You believe that your answer from Lines 15 to 19 was a true statement, all of it, a true statement in response to my question?
A. The statement is true, yes. I had no -- I did not reply to these e-mails. I did not discuss it with him in a conversation.
Q. Okay. Well, let's go through the answer because I think you may be thinking that information that was responsive to the
question. Let's go through it line by line.
A. Sure.
Q. All right. When I asked you the question at Line 12, the question was -- this is Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript.
“Dr. Proctor never sent you any e-mails about this situation that led to the documents being subpoenaed?”
Now, let's go over the first sentence of your answer. “He -- no,” sir, that answer was a false answer, correct?
A. Look, it's a sentence. You've got to -- you've got to read the whole thing.
Q. I'm going to get to the rest of it. Trust me. I'm just asking you about the first sentence of the answer, when you gave the first
sentence of the answer on Line 15 of Page 231, that was not the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, was it, sir?
MR. QUINN:
And I object. It's out of context. You need to read the whole answer.
A. My meaning of this is what I said. I've had no conversation about him, with him on any of these hearings.
MR. HENK:
Q. Did you understand my question, starting at Line 12, to be asking about conversations you had?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
121Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. That's how I answered it.
Q. That's not what I asked you, sir. Are you having trouble understanding my questions today?
A. No.
Q. Then let me ask it again. My question, starting at Line 12. On Page 231, did you understand my question to be asking about
conversations you had with Dr. Proctor?
A. No. But that was the answer I gave, That was what my answer was.
Q. I wasn't asking about conversations, was I?
A. No, but that's what I answered about.
Q. The part of your answer, starting at Line 15 and ending at Line 19 that referred to conversations, was nonresponsive to my
question, correct?
A. Yes, but the next question is the follow-up clarification.
Q. I know that you want to get to that third question.
A. Well, I mean, this is --
Q. But I'm the one taking this deposition, so we're focusing on the two questions before it. Now, the first --
MR. QUINN:
And I want to interpose the same objection that I made earlier, and especially based on your conduct in the last ten minutes.
And that is this: This gentleman does not have a lawyer here with him. I am not his lawyer. He was brought here to testify
about testimony as an expert. He was not brought here to impugn his veracity for truthfulness because, in doing that, it appears
to me that you guys are going somewhere else other than simply determining what this man's testimony is going to be and
whether it's relevant and whether it is based an bias or not. You are beyond that with these last questions. And you need to
understand that, doctor.
Now, go on.
THE WITNESS:
I want to take -- I want to take a break.
MS. CASE:
If his answers to two out of three questions during his Koballa deposition were false, that's certainly relevant to his being able
to comply with the oath.
THE WITNESS:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
122Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
I'm going to take a five-minute break since there's no question pending and use the bathroom.
MR. QUINN:
We can go off the record.
VIDEO REPORTER:
We're going off the record. The time is 1608.
(Off the record.)
VIDEO REPORTER:
We are back on the record. This is Tape 6 in the deposition.
MR. HENK:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, you decided to take a break during this questioning, correct?
A. Yes. I went and used the bathroom.
Q. Are you prepared now to answer my questions?
A. Yes.
Q. I'd like to direct your attention to Lines 10 to 11, on Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript. When you gave that
answer reflected at Lines 10 to 11, you knew, at the time you were giving that answer, that that was a false answer, correct?
A. No. After I gave that answer, I sought to correct it later on the next page. I did not intend to give incorrect testimony and
that's why I cleared it up later. I mean, not later, but immediately, two or three paragraphs down the page.
Q. So when you gave the answer to -- at Lines 10 to 11 of Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript, your testimony is that
you did not know that to be a false answer but you decided it was a false answer after you gave the answer?
A. No. I -- look, I've answered this question already. You've asked me this one. I've given my answer. I stand on the answer
that I've given. If you are not happy with that answer, you can go to the judge and make a motion, and proceed and go farther
with it. But I've answered that. I'm not going to answer any more questions about that particular question.
Q. Well. I am going to ask Judge Parsons for permission to have you answer the primary question that you've been refusing to
answer, which is whether you knew at the time you gave the answer at Lines 10 to 11 that that was a false answer.
MR. QUINN:
And I'm stating that he's answered that question probably five times.
MR. HENK:
Really? What was his answer, Mike? Why don't you Summarize it for me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
123Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
You've heard it.
MR. HENK:
No. I would love to hear what his answer was. Did he know it to be a false answer when he gave it?
MR. QUINN:
You know he didn't. You know good and damn well he didn't. Now, let's move on.
MR. HENK:
I know the exact opposite.
MR. QUINN:
That's the reason you keep asking him because that's the answer you want.
MR. HENK:
And we all know why he doesn't want to admit it.
MR. QUINN:
That's your thought process, not mine, Certainly not mine.
THE WITNESS:
Keep your gratuitous remarks to yourself, Ask me a question on the record and I'll work with chat, but the editorializing, I
don't appreciate.
MR. HENK:
I was talking to Mr. Quinn. I wasn't speaking to you.
Q. Let's direct your attention to the first sentence of your answer at Line 15, and the question I asked, starting at Line 12 on
Page 231 of the Koballa deposition transcript. The first sentence of your answer, “He -- no,” that answer was not the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth, correct?
A. I've answered that question already. I'm not going to answer it again. If you again want to go to the judge to compel me to
answer the question, I'm happy to go through that process. But I've already answered that. I'm not going to answer it again.
MR. HENK;
Let the record reflect that no objection was stated by counsel to the question and Dr. Kyriakoudes is refusing to answer the
question because it was asked and answered.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
124Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
And that's because the question has been objected to previously, and if you need another objection, then I will make another
objection.
Q. Let's focus now on the last line. That would be Line 19 of your answer to my question, Starting at Line 12.
A. What page are you on?
Q. That would be the same page we've been talking about for the last ten minutes, Page 231. You do have Page 231 of the
Koballa deposition transcript in front of you?
A. Yes. I thought you were moving to the next page.
Q. No.
A. Okay.
Q. I'd like to focus on Line 19 of Page 231. The last line, last words you gave in response to my question, starting at Line 12,
was, “No e-mails on that whatsoever.” Do you see that?
A. Yes. I see that phrase.
Q. Did I read it correctly?
A. You've read that phrase correctly.
Q. Your statement in response to my question starting at Line 12, “no e-mails on that whatsoever,” was false, correct?
A. Incorrect.
Q. Why do you believe that answer to be a truthful statement, sir?
A. Because it's part of a sentence, complete sentence. “I've had no conversation about any of these hearings or anything with
him on e-mails, none of this stuff going on in Volusia county with the judge, no e-mails on that whatsoever.”
So that applies to what I was saying. I had no conversations on e-mails, and that's true.
Q. So, sir, at line 19 of your answer on Page 231, when you said “no e-mails on that whatsoever,” did you mean no e-mails
on conversations?
A. That's right, no e-mails through conversation. That's what I said.
Q. I see. Now, that wouldn't have been responsive to my question, would it?
A. That's the answer I gave, and you are asking me whether it was truthful, and it was truthful or is truthful. I should say.
Q. Do you see the word “conversation” in my question starting at line 12 and ending at 14 of Page 231?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
125Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
A. No.
Q. Why did you answer my questions starting at Line 12 of Page 231 by talking about whether you had conversations if I wasn't
asking about conversations?
A. Well, that's the answer I gave and the answer is truthful.
Q. Sir, I'm asking you why you gave that answer.
A. I gave the answer that I gave.
Q. Why did you give that answer?
A. I gave that answer because I thought that was a truthful response to your question and that's my answer.
Q. Your testimony, as you sit here today, is that every word of your answer, starting at Line 15 and ending at Line 19 of Page
231 of the Koballa deposition transcript was a truthful statement?
A. Yes. I was talking about a conversation through e-mail. That's truthful. And then, you know, the next question, you clarify
it, and then I tell you the truth. I mean, I tell you the --
Q. I know. You have been wanting to tell me about that third question for quite a long time now.
Now, when you spoke with Matt Schultz on August 22nd, and you asked --
MR. QUINN:
Are you not going to give him an opportunity to talk about that part of his deposition testimony? You are going to move onto
something else now?
MR. HENK:
What are you asking me? Are you telling me how to take this deposition?
MR. QUINN:
Are you going to let him now tell you that he told you the truth in this deposition about The e-mails or do you --
MR. HENK:
You mean the third time I asked him after the two times he lied?
MR. QUINN:
How many depositions have you ever been involved in where you say something -- you get something wrong and then you get
it right again. We don't persecute people for that.
MR. HENK:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
126Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
I've never had this situation come up.
MR. QUINN:
Well, then you haven't been practicing very long, young man.
MR. HENK:
You can demean me all you want, Mr. Quinn.
Q. Let me ask you, Dr. Kyriakoudes, when you had your conversation with Matt Schultz on August 22nd, Matt Schultz told
you about the hearing in Volusia County pertaining to the Proctor matter, correct?
A. Yes. He mentioned it.
Q. And in response to that, you mentioned that you had the two e-mails, Exhibits 9 and 10 to this deposition, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. You said that in response to what Mr. Schultz told you, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. I'd like to direct your attention to Pages 164 to 165 of the Koballa deposition transcript. And I'm going to start reading at
Page 164, line 3. And would you follow along and let me know if I've read anything incorrectly?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Starting at Page 164, Line 3 of the Koballa deposition transcript, question; “Okay. Are you familiar with Dr. Proctor's
contacts with a professor at the University of Florida?”
Answer: “I am now.”
Question: “Okay. Regarding research assistants?”
Answer: “Yes. I'm familiar with this and I've had discussions with attorneys who have filled me in with just the basic outlines.”
Question: “Okay. Which attorneys have you talked to about that?”
Answer: “Matt Schultz of the Pensacola Levin firm.”
Question: “When did you talk to Matt about it?”
Answer; “He called me this weekend.”
Question: “What did he tell you?”
Answer: “He said that they had had a hearing on Friday and that certain documents were being subpoenaed from Mr. Proctor.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
127Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Question: “Okay. Did you say anything to Mr. Schultz about that?”
Answer, starting at line 24, Page 164, running to Page 165, Line 1, your answer was; “I told him that, you know, that's -- I
didn't really have any response. It doesn't involve me.”
That answer you gave, starting at Line 24, Page 164, and ending at Line 1 of Page 165, was a false answer, wasn't it?
A. No. That's not false at all. I made no contacts with anybody related to this. I took no actions on this. I was simply a bystander.
And that's why I'm not responsible for any of it and have no involvement in it in that regard.
Q. Ms. Lawson didn't ask you that in her question, did she?
A. She was asking me about that part of the conversation and that's true. I mean. I -- you know. I didn't do anything, make
any contacts with the university of Florida or any of those activities, which were the reason why this subpoena had been issued
for Mr. Proctor.
Q. Well, let's focus on Ms. Lawson's question because that's not what she was asking you. Ms. Lawson's question, starting at
Line 22, page 164, was question: “Okay. Did you say anything to Mr. Schultz about that?”
A truthful answer would have been, yes?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
MR. QUINN:
Q. I did say something to Mr. Schultz about that, correct?
MR. QUINN:
Object to the form.
A. No. I didn't think it involved me because I had not done any actions on that. I'm simply a bystander on this. That's my
answer. Take it to the judge.
MR. HENK:
Q. Are you refusing to answer more questions about this question and your answer?
A. I think I'm going to stop on This entire line of questioning.
MR. QUINN:
That is strictly up to you.
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
128Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
I still have follow-up questions, to the extent that that needs to be stated, if Or. Kyriakoudes is shutting down the deposition.
MR. HENK:
Is that what's happening?
MR. QUINN:
Well, it's beyond the scope, totally and completely. It also involves testimony in a case that I am not counsel in and there's nobody
from -- in that case present here today who was at that deposition in any way to defend what was said and what was answered.
This is totally a one-sided assault, and so I think that it is perfectly within his purview, because I can't represent him and I don't
represent him, that if he thinks that you've gone far afield, yes, he can shut it down any time he wants to. He might suffer the
consequences, but it does't mean he Can't shut it down.
MR. HENK:
Well. I disagree with everything you said except for that he might suffer the Consequences. I agree with that.
MR. QUINN:
You don't agree that he can shut it down? You don't agree that an expert can shut it down?
MR. HENK:
Absolutely. I disagree.
MS. CASE:
Not legitimately.
MR. QUINN:
And so that you believe, as I'm afraid many, many lawyers do, and I don't know why they do, that you control this deposition
rather than him?
MR. HENK:
If you want to cite a rule to me --
MR. QUINN:
And that you Can act any way you want to act, and ask any question any way that you want to ask it, and that this gentleman
has to sit here and he has to answer it. If that is what was intended by the rules, then the rules are wrong. And I don't believe
that it was ever intended that a deposition turns into an interrogation. And once it does. I do believe that a person who is being
interrogated can shut it down.
MR. HENK:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
129Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, are you stopping this deposition because of a desire to hire counsel with respect to your testimony?
A. I'm not sure. I'll have to think about that. But I'm stopping it because it's gone far afield, and all the reasons he mentioned
over the course of this day, and I'll think about that particular issue.
MR. QUINN:
Are you willing to answer his questions dealing with your testimony --
THE WITNESS:
And my opinions? Yes.
MR. QUINN:
And your opinions that you will give in these two cases?
THE WITNESS:
And have done so extensively in this deposition without hesitation, and with precision and accuracy and all the things I'm
supposed to do.
MR. HENK:
Well. I was just asking about his testimony, as I understand that that's the reason he's stopping the deposition.
MR. QUINN:
You and I are talking about different things when we use the word “testimony.” I'm talking about --
THE WITNESS:
Well, I've got things to do. If we're not going to go on any further --
MS. CASE:
Before we go off the record. I just want to say that if we do come back to ask the professor more questions with regard to this
situation. I would not anticipate that it would be on my client's dime.
MR. QUINN:
And let me offer this possible suggestion. Maybe we should do this in front of the judge. Maybe me Ought -- there are times
when it is -- when it is prudent. Because I've got concerns. You've got concerns. We don't agree on a whole lot. Maybe we
should ask the judge if he would like to sit in on the rest of this deposition and then he can determine what you can and you
can't ask and how he should answer. Would you be willing to do that?
MR. HENK:
I would a hundred percent willing to do that. I think that's a fantastic idea.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
130Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. QUINN:
I Think we need to explore That because I think he needs to see the whole content. You know, you read a deposition and you
don't get the context of the deposition.
Now, luckily, we've got a video here, and so we've gotten some of that. But you don't get the whole context, and I -- you know.
I think -- I think that that may be the -- you need to talk to your people and see if maybe that ought not to be the way we proceed
with the rest of this Proctor issue.
MS. CASE:
I want to make clear that Reynolds is not agreeing to shut down the deposition by any means, but to the extent that the professor
is deciding to shut it down, we'd be willing to discuss a remedy in how to complete the deposition. But we are not acquiescing
to shutting it down at this point.
MR. QUINN:
Professor, let's make it clear why you are shutting it down.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. QUINN:
Q. Are you shutting it down because you will not answer any more questions about your opinions --
MS. CASE:
Objection, leading.
MR. QUINN:
Q. -- in the either Humpal case or the Hibner Case?
MS. CASE:
Object to The form.
A. No.
MR. QUINN:
Q. Are you willing to answer questions regarding the opinions you intend to give in each of those cases?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you, since 9:00 this morning, been asked repeatedly about your prior testimony in the Koballa deposition?
MS. CASE:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
131Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
Object to the form.
A. Yes.
MR. QUINN:
Q. And are the questions that you are being asked now repetitive?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you feel, at this point in time, despite the fact that you don't think that the individuals are intimidating, that, in fact,
the line of questioning is beyond the scope of what you were asked for here today and that, in fact, are intimidating?
MS. CASE:
Object to the form.
A. Yes.
MR. QUINN:
Q. And, you know, earlier, it Seems to me that the whole reason for this is that there is some idea that there was some sinister
attempt to try and persuade some defense experts either not to testify or not to gather information on behalf of the tobacco
companies. Was that ever something that you even ever thought about or discussed with anybody?
MS. CASE:
Object to the form.
A. NO. I Would never do that.
MR. QUINN:
Q. And the conduct that you've witnessed here today from the defense lawyers for the tobacco companies that are here, has
that intimidated you?
A. The line of questioning, as I said earlier, yes. I feel like I'm being set up.
Q. And is it -- do you believe it is ironically an attempt to do the same thing that they have accused Mr. Proctor of doing?
MS. CASE:
object to the form.
MR. QUINN:
Q. And that is, not testifying for the plaintiffs in tobacco litigation?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
132Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. HENK:
I'm objecting to this whole line of whatever it is.
MR. QUINN:
Answer the question.
MS. CASE:
Are we shutting this down, really?
MR. HENK:
He ended the deposition and we're now leaving.
MR. QUINN:
Answer the question and keep it on the record. Answer the question.
A. Yes. I mean, they would rather I did not participate in this or any other trial. I'm sure that that opinion has been made clear
to me today.
MR. QUINN:
That's all.
MS. CASE:
Okay. So Dr. Kyriakoudes is shutting down the deposition and we'll take it up with the Court.
MR. QUINN:
Unless you want to ask him questions about his opinions, and then he's willing to stay -- as he already told you, he's willing to
stay until 5:30. So if there are any other questions about that, we are certainly here to answer these.
MS. CASE:
Questions as to bias are always relevant.
MR. HENK:
For purposes of the record, I was stating my personal opinion that I think it would the a good idea to conduct the rest of this
deposition in front of Judge parsons. But obviously, I'm one lawyer, and I will have to confer with my client. I'll note for the
record that Mr. Quinn is laughing at my statement about that. I think that's unfortunate. But I do think it is a good idea.
MR. QUINN:
I'm laughing at your equivocation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
133Barbara A. IZZARELLI, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2010 WL 3000717...
MR. HENK:
well, it's not an equivocation, sir. You may not appreciate this, but I can't make decisions for my client.
MR. QUINN:
I know.
MR. HENK:
I can state what I personally believe.
MS. CASE:
Off the record.
VIDEO REPORTER:
If there are no further questions, this concludes tape 6.
MS. CASE:
I'm sorry. Kathleen.
MS. KAPETANOVIC:
I think I'd just add, despite Mr. Quinn's statements, Liggett's going to reserve any questions for Dr. Kyriakoudes, whether they
pertain to bias or pertain to factual matters in the Hibner and Humpal case until this is resolved. We're not waiving our right
to ask questions on that basis.
VIDEO REPORTER:
I'm going off the record. The time is 1637.
(Exhibit 11 was marked.)
(Deposition concluded at 4:37 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
134
