State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34665268 (PDF)
1997 WL 34665268 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
Fifteenth Judicial Court.
Palm Beach County
State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs,
v.
AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY, et al., Defendants.
No. CL 95 1466AH.
May 9, 1997.
Deposition of: Augustus M. Burns, III, Ph.D.
Name of Expert: Augustus M. Burns, III, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Palm Beach County, Florida
Representing: Defendant
Appearances.
On Behalf of the Plaintiffs: Wayne Hogan, Esq.
Brown, Terrell, Hogan, Ellis, McClamma & Yegelwel, P.A.
233 Bay Street, Eighth Floor Street
Jacksonville, Florida 32202
(904) 632-2424 -- and -- Charles J. Mikhail, Esq.
Scruggs Law Firm
P.O. Drawer 1425
Pascagoula, Mississippi 39568
(601) 762-6068.
On Behalf of the Defendant (Philip Morris): Steven P. Lockman, Esq.
Charles Lemley, Esq.
Arnold & Porter
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004-1202
(202) 942-5999.
On Behalf of the Defendant (R.J. Reynolds): Elizabeth P. Kessler, Esq.
Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
1900 Huntington Center
Columbus, Ohio 43215
(614) 469-3852.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
On Behalf of the Defendant (UST, Inc.; U.S. Tobacco Company): Eric S. Sarner, Esq.
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, L.L.P.
919 Third Avenue
New York, New York 10022-3897
(212) 735-3000.
Also Present: Steve Hosford, Videographer.
TIME: 9:09 A.M
LOCATION: ANA Hotel
2401 M Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C.
TAKEN BY: Counsel for the Plaintiffs
REPORTED BY: Doreen M. Dotzler
(Index appears following the transcript.)
PROCEEDINGS
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are now on the videotape record. The time is 9:09, May 8, 1997.
This is the beginning of tape 1 in the deposition of Augustus M. Burns in the matter of State of Florida versus American
Tobacco Company.
This deposition is being held at the ANA Hotel, 2401 M Street, Washington, D.C. The videographer is Steve Hosford. This
deposition is being videotaped by Legal Video Services located at 1431 Center Street, Oakland, California.
Counsel.
MR. HOGAN: I'm Wayne Hogan for the State of Florida and plaintiffs in this action. Whereupon --
AUGUSTUS M. BURNS, III, Ph.D. A witness, called for examination, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified
as follows:
MR. LOCKMAN: Should each of the others identify ourselves for the record.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm Charles Mikhail, also counsel for the State of Florida.
MR. LOCKMAN: Steve Lockman of Arnold & Porter, counsel for Philip Morris.
MS. KESSLER: Elizabeth Kessler of Jones Day and counsel for R.J. Reynolds.
MR. LEMLEY: Charles Lemley, Arnold & Porter, counsel for Philip Morris.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. SARNER: Eric Sarner from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.
MR. LOCKMAN: The usual stipulations and rules that have been in effect in the depositions, Mr. Hogan?
MR. HOGAN: They are.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. HOGAN.:
Q. Tell us a little bit about where you grew up?
A. I was born in Roxboro, North Carolina and grew up there, spent all of my young years in that town.
Q. Go to high school there?
A. I went to high school there, yes.
Q. Where did you go to undergraduate, college?
A. What was then Wake Forest College which is now Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Q. Was it located in Winston-Salem at that time?
A. It was, yes.
Q. When was it moved to the --
A. The first year that I enrolled in 1956 -- excuse me, 1957, the fall of 1957 it had just moved from Wake Forest, North Carolina
to its new home in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Q. Do you know something about the history of Wake Forest College?
A. Yes.
Q. Is it called Wake Forest University now?
A. It is now, yes.
Q. What's the history of its move from its original location to Winston-Salem?
A. It was the outgrowth of an offer from the Reynolds tobacco heirs in Winston-Salem who were eager to have a major university
-- university located in Winston-Salem.
And so they approached the North Carolina Baptist State Convention which at the time was the controlling agency for Wake
Forest. It no longer is.
Wake Forest was an institution at the time which was beleaguered financially, although it had a rich intellectual history. And
they accepted the terms of the proposal by the Reynolds and the Babcocks in Winston-Salem --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Were the Babcocks part of the Reynolds family?
A. Yes.
-- to relocate the institution 120 miles west essentially from Wake Forest, North Carolina which is 15 miles outside of Raleigh
more in the eastern part of the state to Winston-Salem.
Q. And it moved there the year before you started school?
A. It moved there in 1956, yes.
Q. Did you have any scholarships that you received when you were in school undergraduate?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. What were the source of those scholarships, if you recall?
A. I do recall. I had been awarded a $1,000 Alexander Hamilton Bicentennial Fellowship Scholarship as a result of debate
activities in high school.
Q. Did your -- what sort of business or work were your parents in?
A. My father was an attorney and my mother was a schoolteacher.
Q. What sort of work as a lawyer in terms of clientele do you know that your father had?
A. He was a small town general practitioner. He did a lot of trial work. He was at some part of his legal career the county
solicitor or the prosecuting attorney for the county. He did work as the city attorney for the town of Roxboro.
Q. How long were you there in Winston-Salem?
A. I graduated from Wake Forest in June 1961.
Q. After that was there any other scholarship that you had?
A. No. Well, I got some assistance to be a student grading assistant as a senior.
Q. From the university?
A. From the university.
Q. What was the principal source of funding for the university during those period of years that you were there?
A. The principal source of funding was tuition.
Q. Was there funding at the university, that Wake Forest was receiving during that period of time from the R.J. Reynolds family?
A. I really don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. What you do know is that the facility was built by the R.J. Reynolds family?
A. It was built with the assistance of the R.J. Reynolds family. There was a wide range of sources that contributed to the support
of the institution.
Q. And then during that period of time when you were in college -- let me ask you this. Were you yourself a cigarette smoker?
A. I was an occasional cigarette smoker in college.
Q. And how long did you remain a cigarette smoker?
A. Until 1962.
Q. And you stopped in 1962?
A. I stopped in 1962.
Q. At what rate did you smoke up until 1962?
A. Ten cigarettes a day.
Q. What brand were you smoking?
A. I don't remember.
Q. Do you recall whether they were Reynolds brand?
A. No, I really don't.
Q. You don't recall whether they were Winstons or Salems?
A. I never did like menthol cigarettes.
Q. So whatever it was, it wasn't menthol cigarettes.
After you left Wake Forest, where did you go for schooling?
A. I went to Duke University.
Q. How long were you there?
A. I was there for two years.
Q. Did you have any scholarships, funding support for your time there at Duke?
A. Yes.
Q. What sources?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Excuse me.
I was on a Ford Foundation grant to pursue a master of arts in a teaching degree at Duke.
Q. And that was the focus of ,your study there, teaching?
A. Education and history. And as part of my -- the conditions of that grant, I was also a secondary schoolteacher, 7th and 8th
grade schoolteacher in Burlington, North Carolina. We would matriculate to Duke in the summer time and once a week each
night -- one night a week for three hours I taught a single class during each of the regular sessions.
Q. So for employment as a side supplement for money for school, that is what you did?
A. It was part of the grant that we would -- that we would essentially practice teach for a year, but we would be full time faculty
members of the schools where we were teaching.
Q. When you stopped smoking, why was it that you stopped smoking cigarettes in or around 1962?
A. Because of health concerns.
Q. What health concerns did you have that you stopped smoking in 1962?
A. Well, as an undergraduate the common term we used to identify cigarettes in the fraternity and across the campus was
cancer sticks.
Q. This was when you were there going to school in Winston-Salem?
A. Yes.
Q. And the common term that you were using was cancer sticks?
A. Yes.
Q. At a university the original support for which and the offer to come there was from the R.J. Reynolds family?
A. No. The notion that -- the idea that R.J. Reynolds was central to the life of the campus is I think incorrect.
Q. I didn't -- you may have interpreted the question as implying more than it did.
A. I'm sorry.
Q. But that was at that campus that had been built and supported by R.J. Reynolds?
A. In part.
Q. Principally?
A. And the Reynolds heirs.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Your answer a minute ago was specific reference to what you fellows talked about at the fraternity house as to why you
stopped smoking. Was there any other health concern that you had about cigarette smoking in 19627
A. I was aware that they stained my teeth. I was aware that they kept a bad taste in my mouth. I was aware that they cut my
wind. And I was aware that as a general proposition there was probably some risk associated with the use of tobacco products.
Q. The time when you were there at Winston-Salem, what were you studying?
A. I majored in history as an undergraduate.
Q. In majoring in history, what did you learn as the basics of history, the work of a historian? What did you learn them to be?
A. Well, we learned how to write and do basic research as undergraduate history majors i at Wake Forest. We learned of the
necessity of performing the basic research skills that historians nurture in order to do their work.
Q. And apart from that are there any other basics of learning to be a historian other than basic research skills?
A. You learn how to deal with massive amounts of material as your work continues as a student in history. You learn how to
interpret source materials. You learn how to find source materials. You learn how to use library archives. You learn how to
interpret documents. How to identify documents in the historical context in which they originate. You learn the importance
of understanding historians points of view and historians methods of organizing and presenting complicated and sometimes
difficult material. You learn the importance of the element of time in history or of time in learning.
Q. In follow-up study when you were -- when you moved from Wake Forest at Winston-Salem to Duke, what was it that you
learned further about the role of a historian, what the basics are of what a historian does?
A. The work at Duke required a more sophisticated analytical framework to interpret and understand historical materials. A
more sophisticated method of research, more keen analytical skills and an understanding that historical research is painstaking,
laborious and demanding.
Q. After you were at Duke -- where is that?
A. That's in Durham.
Q. In North Carolina?
A. In North Carolina.
Q. What was the original funding source for Duke?
A. It was originally a Methodist institution called Trinity College.
Q. And it's original funding source?
A. From the Methodist Church.
Q. And after that?
A. After that it was transformed by a major grant from James Buchanan Duke.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Do you know what business he was in?
A. I do indeed.
Q. What business was he in?
A. The cigarette business.
Q. Do you know what company he was involved in?
A. He formed the American Tobacco Company. He is the entrepreneur who created the American Tobacco Company.
Q. How long was it that -- you know something about the history related to that. How long was it?
A. Until 1911.
Q. And in 1911, what happened to his holding of the American Tobacco Company?
A. By government decree, the trust was divided.
Q. And did he continue to retain part of the American Tobacco Company at that point?
A. He did.
Q. And kept the American version of that?
A. That's right.
Q. And what happened to the other part of it?
A. It was divided into other companies.
Q. And did it at some point become the British American Tobacco Company?
A. It did.
Q. And then in recent times are you familiar with the fact that there has been a rejoining of the -- a rejoining of the British
American Tobacco Company with the American Tobacco Company?
A. I'm not.
Q. And as parents of Brown & Williamson?
A. I'm not.
Q. Have you met with lawyers in this case for American Tobacco Company or Brown & Williamson?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Perhaps. I'm not sure which companies they represented, the attorneys that I've met, except some of the people with whom
I've worked more closely.
Q. Have you worked more closely than say with Brown & Williamson lawyers with lawyers for R.J. Reynolds?
A. Yes.
Q. And Philip Morris?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know whether you have been working with and met lawyers in the course of the State of Florida's case against the
cigarette industry representing BAT or British American Tobacco Company?
A. I don't know.
Q. The further work that you did there at Duke when -- and you've given us some information that I will ask you some more
about in a little while -- you went then to another university?
A. Yes.
Q. And that is the University of North Carolina?
A. That's right.
Q. Where is that?
A. In Chapel Hill.
Q. What did you learn further about the subject of history in terms of the role of a historian and how one goes about doing
that work?
A. The lessons that I had gleaned from Duke were intensified.
Q. Go ahead.
A. Because the work was more demanding at Chapel Hill. I was in a Ph.D. program.
Q. In that situation, was that focused on a particular piece of work that you were undertaking and then applying the skills and
approaches that you had learned in the -- earlier at Winston-Salem, Wake Forest University and then at Duke?
A. That was part of my active training at Chapel Hill, yes.
Q. Was there anything that was new to you from the standpoint of the kinds of skills or basics that you would need in order
to undertake the work of a historian?
A. The research demands at this program at Chapel Hill were much more intense. We wrote many more papers. We worked a
lot more on original source materials, and we read an incredible volume of published works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. So there was more in the direct opportunity when you were studying there at the University of North Carolina for your access
to and use of original source materials for research than you had experienced in the two previous --
A. Well, at that level you do what we call multi-archival research. You work in archives wherever the subject in which you
are interested require you to go.
Q. During the time that you were at the University of North Carolina, did you have any scholarships that supported you?
A. Yes.
Q. Where were they from, what sources?
A. They were from the department of history at Chapel Hill.
Q. You had applied for and received a scholarship from the department of history?
A. They were grants for which I performed some services. And in exchange for those services I was given financial assistance.
Q. Did you do any work outside of the university setting during the time that you were there at the University of North Carolina?
A. I did some part-time work of various endeavors.
Q. What time frame was it that you were at the University of North Carolina?
A. 1963 to 1967.
Q. And did you have a dissertation --
A. I did.
Q. -- that you did. And what was that?
A. My dissertation topic was Race Relations in North Carolina From the New Deal to the Brown Decision, 1930 to 1954.
Q. Let me go back and ask you about a few points of learning that you discussed earlier about the basics of a historian. You
talked about identifying documents, finding research -- finding documents. When you say documents, what do you mean?
A. Any written record from the past is a document.
Q. Would that include the writings of others who had gone before and studied a particular subject?
A. It could.
Q. Would it include -- what else would it include? What types of materials?
A. Government publications. Letters, papers, diaries. Memoirs.
Q. Written by the people involved in the events themselves?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Unpublished source materials primarily.
Q. How would you gain access to these unpublished source materials?
A. Most of them are housed in archives in manuscript collections that are found usually in research libraries or in places like
the Library of Congress or in the National Archives.
Q. Where say a person may have died or I suppose could still be living and their correspondence and papers that they wrote
during the course of their life, whether in business or otherwise, is at some point transferred over to some other location?
A. That's correct.
Q. Does it go further than that in terms of going directly to the source to ask for the opportunity to review the documents that
they still hold that haven't been turned over to libraries or public archives?
A. It may, but most of the time the library holdings are the major repository and the major place that you would look because -
Q. Where the student or the academic historian would go?
A. That's right. Because there is always a time and efficiency element involved here. In almost any 20th century subject that
you want to examine, you have to find a way to get through so much material that you want to focus your time which is always
limited.
Q. Is that what you meant by the importance of the element of time, or is that something different?
A. No, that is a historical concept.
Q. So you're talking, one, about your ability to manage your own time within some plan for getting the project completed, I
suppose?
A. No.
Q. All right. What is it that --
A. I'm talking about time in history as a force in interpretive discipline.
Q. My question was trying to clarify the two.
A. Fine.
Q. That you had made a reference to the time involved in your obtaining materials, I thought, and I got the impression that that
had to do with your using your time that was the most efficient?
A. Fair enough. That's correct.
Q. And ordinarily in the field of history the idea would be to see whether there are materials in the public archives or public
libraries, and if they are there and they are accessible and you think that they are complete or reasonably complete, then that's
the source material that you would use?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. That's right. The documentary holdings are staggering in their volume.
Q. Depending upon the subject matter, I suppose?
A. In 20th Century affairs, that almost applies to any subject.
Q. If you have something that happens that is a specific discrete event, say a criminal act that is specific by way of a murder,
does that limit the scope in any way of the types of materials that you would attempt to recover?
A. It depends on the event.
Q. And who is involved?
A. That's right.
Q. If you had a situation where there were two people involved in a situation where one was the victim in a murder and the
other was the person accused of having done the murder and they were not people in the public eye, how would you go about
-- would it be correct that there would be a more limited set of materials that would be available to you in trying to do historical
research on that subject?
A. It would depend on the focus on your research first, and it would also depend on the record that accumulates as this event
proceeds.
Q. So we talked about your trying to manage your time in collecting materials. There might not be things in the public archives
except for criminal reports of the investigators and prosecutors. Apart from that, what would you do to try to write a history
of a particular event like that?
A. I have never done that particular research assignment. I'm not sure how I would initiate it.
Q. But it would be something probably outside the obvious public record materials?
A. It is very difficult to generalize about a specific hypothetical research assignment.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you more about your statement that one of the things that you learned about in the basics of history has
to do with the importance of the element of time. What did you mean by that?
A. The first meaning is that you only have so many months, years to do any specific research assignment. Historians, if they
are careful historians, try to be thorough. But they have to be thorough with the focus in mind of the research assignment that
is their specific objective.
You cannot know everything about everything.
Q. So in that sense you may engage in a particular project where you have a specific objective, and that then because of the
limitations of time -- but are there other factors that would cause you to limit what you would look at?
A. The sheer volume of material.
Q. One of the things that you said that you would learn when learning about the basics of history would be understanding the
points of view of authors, and what did you mean by that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Historians -- historians write history through the process of interpreting documents and materials. And the careful historian
tries to be fair -- must be fair to the historical record. But history is written in a time and a place. That is it's written in a
historical context.
And so you have to understand that a history of the Civil War that is written in 1875 may be a very different volume of the
Civil War than a history written in 1975.
Q. And that relates to the matter of the historian's point of view?
A. And the time difference, yes.
Q. How is it affected by the time difference?
A. Well, interpretations change. Historians change their focus about what is important in specific historical events as time
changes perspective.
Q. What does it mean in terms of point of view or are those two the same?
A. One is influenced by the other.
Q. You mentioned the question of objectivity. That is a point of some importance in the field of history?
A. It is to me.
Q. Is it something which is the subject of rules, so to speak, that apply to the field of being a historian?
A. There are rules. They are not uniformly applied. Historians vary in what they mean by the use of the term “objective.” And
there is no universally agreed meaning for that term.
Q. For the term “objectivity”?
A. That's right.
Q. Is it -- are you a member of various professional organizations apart from the university community?
A. Yes.
Q. What professional organizations are you a member of?
A. The Southern Historical Association. The Florida Historical Association. Or the Florida Historical Society, to be correct.
And the St. George Tucker Society.
Q. Which --
A. Which is an association of southern historians.
Q. Any other professional organizations you're a member of?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Not currently.
Q. You have been at some point a member of some other professional organizations?
A. At some point I was a member of the American Historical Association.
Q. When were you a member of the AHA?
A. I don't recall the specific dates. For about 20 years.
Q. Does that organization -- do any of the organizations that you are currently a member of have a canon of ethics or a set of
guidelines which are agreed upon to be used by historians in approaching the subject of researching and writing history?
A. Not to my knowledge.
MR. LOCKMAN: I just want to object to the form. I know that you started on American History Association, and then you
went back to the ones that he was a member of.
Was that a question that only dealt with the three that he is currently a member of?
MR. HOGAN: Yes.
THE WITNESS: I'm not aware of any canon of ethics.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. And the American Historical Association, is there a canon of ethics or set of rules that address the question of what a historian
should or should not do, how a historian should approach that work?
A. No. This is a subject that has been under intense discussion, but so far it has not concluded in any set of specific guidelines.
Q. So in that sense what is it that operates as a form or guideline for persons out there in the public to be able to rely on the
objectivity of historians?
A. The first guide is the scholarly evidence that an author presents in published material that is supporting documentation for
the record as it is presented in any piece of work.
Q. Anything else?
A. The process of review by other historians who read each other's work and comment upon them in various periodicals.
The discussions that occur at professional meetings, informal exchanges, all of which is a fairly intense process and a fairly
active process.
Q. But nothing that is formalized in terms of a code or rules or regulations of professional conduct?
A. No. The ,trend in fact has been in the other direction, away from agreement that there is a set of recognizable universal
standards.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Who was Dr. Frank?
A. Frank Porter Graham was the president of the University of North Carolina from 1931 to 1949 when he left that position
to accept employment to the United States Senate.
Q. Have you done some work related to Frank Porter Graham?
A. I have done extensive work, yes.
Q. Have you done that in conjunction with someone else?
A. Yes.
Q. Who is that?
A. A colleague named Julian Pleasants.
Q. He is also at the University of Florida?
A. Yes.
Q. Originally from North Carolina?
A. Yes.
Q. Where did he take his training?
A. At Chapel Hill.
Q. University of North Carolina?
A. Yes.
Q. How did it happen that you wrote a book with Julian Pleasants on Frank Porter Graham?
A. Our dissertation topics overlapped. We were contemporaries in graduate school, and he is the biographer of one of the people
who was in the Senate campaign in 1950 that became the subject of our book. There were three candidates in that race.
Q. Julian Pleasants was the biographer of what person?
A. Robert Rice Reynolds who is the third candidate in that race.
Q. And how was it that your dissertation that you told us about a little while ago overlapped with his dissertation about Reynolds?
A. Frank Porter Graham's legacy is as a racial -- southern racial liberal in the American south in the 1920s, '30s and '40s. He's
generally recognized as the most highly visible racial liberal in the south in those years.
My interest was drawn to him because of my interest in southern -- in North Carolina race relations.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
And the campaign in 1950 became an epical event, not only regarding the history of race relations in North Carolina, but also in
the history of the politics of the state, but in the history of race relations in the south and in the United States and in the nation.
Q. And so in your doing work back when you were in college on a dissertation on race relations in -- was it in North Carolina?
A. North Carolina.
Q. And you said it was from the New Deal up until 1954?
A. My dissertation stops in 1950, actually.
Q. Okay. So it does not go up to the completion of Brown versus Board of Education?
A. That's right. My dissertation doesn't. I have subsequently done some work beyond that 1950 date.
Q. So it stops in 1950 which was the date of that campaign. Did it --
A. The date of the campaign is 1949.
Q. Known as the 1950 Senate election?
A. I beg -- I stand corrected. If I may correct myself.
Graham's appointment to the Senate came in '49. The campaign came in '50.
Q. Because the name of the book is Frank Porter Graham, 1950 Senate Race in North Carolina?
A. That's correct, and I'm sworn to tell the truth.
Q. And having misrecalled that specific thing, you wanted to clarify?
A. I did indeed.
Q. Because it would be important to try to include information if information was known to you and available and needed to
be disclosed in this setting?
MR. LOCKMAN: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm going to ask you to repeat that question if you will.
MR. HOGAN: Would you read the question back, please.
(The record was read as requested.)
THE WITNESS: I still don't understand it.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You made a mistake in what you said earlier?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Thank you.
Q. You knew that the correct information was different from the information that you had just given us?
A. Yes.
Q. And under those circumstances you felt that it was important to give us the information that was accurate; is that correct?
A. Now I understand the question; and the answer is, yes.
Q. Had other work been done in the time after the 1950 Senate race before your dissertation and Julian Pleasants' dissertation
on Robert Rice Reynolds? Were there other historical treatments that had been done of that race, political race?
A. We have to make some chronological distinctions here.
My dissertation was completed in 1969. I'm not sure -- his maybe two years later.
Q. Okay. Approximately 20 years --
A. But the book came out in December 1994.
Q. Right. And I want to get to that time differential, too.
My question is in the approximately 20 years between the time of the race in 1950 and the publication or the writing of your
dissertation and Pleasants' dissertation, had there been other work done by people who were studying the field of history or
were historians in the in between time?
A. There had been some work done.
Q. Was there anything new that you felt that your dissertation added to the question of the -- related to the 1950 Senate race
that was anything different than what was already in the work of other people involved in history or historians?
A. Yes.
Q. What different perspective were you able to bring to it and did you bring to it with your dissertation?
A. We are distinguishing it between the dissertation and the book?
Q. Yes.
A. The perspective I think I provided was a fuller understanding of the racial implications of that campaign and what it told us
about the changing nature of race relations in North Carolina in the post war period.
Q. And how was it that you were able to provide that additional or supplemental information when you wrote that in 1969?
A. Primarily --
Q. Different from what other people had done before?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Primarily because I think I was one of the first people who worked through all of the Graham manuscripts.
Q. What were --
A. Those are his personal papers that are collected and available for researchers in the Southern Historical Collection at the
University of North Carolina, and there are probably about 300 boxes of them.
Q. And you worked through those boxes?
A. That's right.
Q. And your impression was as of 1969 when you did your dissertation, that ones who had gone before you to comment on
that race had not gone through those papers in that detail?
A. Correct.
Q. Had they had access to those papers or do you think you were the first?
A. I think the access was there.
Q. Did they -- they went through them, the ones before you?
A. I can't say how thoroughly other investigators looked at those papers.
Q. But you did go through them thoroughly in preparing your 1950 -- or your 1969 dissertation?
A. Correct.
Q. These papers were things that he wrote, things that he received?
Describe them more generally, although I realize there are 300 boxes?
A. They are personal and professional correspondence when he was running the university, president of the university. They
are files of his political activity. He was a very active public -- a very active public person in the 1930s which is an age of
intense political ferment in the United States.
He is a man of causes.
Q. He had held appointments in addition to presidency of the University of North Carolina,; is that correct, in governmental
posts?
A. His major governmental appointments came during his tenure as president in the Second World War when he was named to
serve on the War Labor Board for one and divided his time between Chapel Hill and Washington during World War II.
Most of the other appointments were honorary or voluntary appointments that were work that was done in addition to his
presidential duties and for which he wasn't compensated.
Q. And he was involved in a number of organizations and his correspondence -- go ahead.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Literally thousands. And there is an incredible volume of material comes across his desk.
Q. And the volume of material coming across his desk and coming from his desk is what made up a substantial part of the
300 boxes of materials?
A. Yes.
Q. In the Frank Porter Graham --
A. The 300 boxes is an approximation.
Q. Yes, sir. I don't mean to hold you to a specific number. It might have been 305.
A. It might have been 400.
Q. It could have been. Whatever it was, you considered those papers of Mr. Graham to be important to the work that you did
in writing your dissertation in 1969 in helping to fill out the picture of race relations during the period of time from the New
Deal up until 1950?
A. They were central to my topic.
Q. And really without that the dissertation that you wrote would not have been as comprehensive or complete in the picture
that it presented; is that correct? Or you tell me. What was the value?
A. I don't know the answer.
Q. What was the value --
A. The value.
Q. -- of you going through those boxes?
A. I can tell you the value. What I can't tell you is what the outcome would have been in a different set of circumstances.
If those papers-hadn't been available, I can't tell you what my study would have looked like because I don't know where else I
would have gone but I would have -- I think based on the work that we did subsequent to those dissertation projects, we would
have found -- I would have found other materials that would have been equally useful.
But that's a speculation. I don't know that with any certainty.
Q. What you do know is that in fact you were able to see Dr. Graham's papers?
A. Correct.
Q. Over that period of time and they were of substantial help to you in setting out the historical review that you did in your
doctoral dissertation in 1969?
A. That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. What overall conclusions did you reach that supplemented the understanding of what went on during that time frame that
were based on the Graham papers?
MR. LOCKMAN: I note an objection. That is pretty convoluted. If the witness can handle it.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. I'll take the assistance.
A. I'm going to ask you to direct that to me again, please.
Q. I take it that you thought when you made this dissertation in 1969, the object of that was to provide some supplement to the
fund of knowledge that was available about the subject matter of your dissertation?
A. Right.
Q. And tell us the degree to which you think it was important that reviewing these papers of one of the principal actors during
that period of time in North Carolina, what that added to your ability to do that and what new did you add to the public fund
of knowledge?
A. The picture of North Carolina race relations that I derived from that examination was that the race relations in the state were
in a condition of ferment. That race relations were changing rapidly. That they had been in a process of change beginning with
the 1930s, but that the Second World War and the subsequent readjustment that took place in our society at the end of that
conflict had accelerated a pace of racial tension and racial change.
And that North Carolinians, many of them for the first time, especially white North Carolinians, were becoming aware that the
current status of race relations in North Carolina was unacceptable to the people who were being discriminated against and that
they were going to be much more aggressive in addressing their discontent, and that the courts both in the state and the nation
were going to be attentive to their concerns, the concerns of the African American minority.
Q. These perspectives that you've just described added to the fund of knowledge that existed -- my real, question earlier which
you may well have answered and I just want to clarify it, what new you added to the public fund of knowledge you added by
your dissertation in 1969 compared with other perspectives that might have existed in 1950 to 1969? And in answering that,
the answer that you gave just then, that's what's new?
A. That's right.
Q. And how was it that those papers helped you reach those conclusions which were new and supplemented the public fund
of knowledge?
A. First because they were so massive in their representation and they --
Q. These were the Graham papers?
A. The Graham papers. They were representative of a very broad range of opinion on a host of subjects. People would write to
Frank Graham about their concerns without fear that anything they said to him would be misinterpreted or would be returned
with anger.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
He got a lot of hate mail. And he got a lot of adoring mail. He was one of these polarizing personalities.
Q. So in seeing the papers, you were able to see the level of both sides involved in that issue at that time from the papers of a
person who was high profile and well known, and then you were able to place that in your dissertation and draw conclusions
from it?
A. Yes. Because the papers were a focal point of a public record and specifically focused on the concerns that I was interested
in investigating.
Q. And how did it show that, for example, as you said the courts were going to be more attentive, how did that add to the public
fund of knowledge when you did your dissertation that the courts were going to be more attentive to the concerns of blacks?
A. Because it reinforced -- the opinions and the volume of material was a reinforcement of other source materials and other
developments that I could identify from court rulings and other evidence.
Q. You could in a sense see it from the inside?
A. See what from the inside?
Q. What was going on? In other words rather than simply reading an opinion decided by a court, you could see the underlying
social concerns that were leading up to decisions like that?
A. Yeah. I think saying that you see it from the inside is not a very useful way to say it.
Q. What would be a better way to say it?
A. Well, it's a different perspective. It is neither inside nor outside in the sense that it is a secret or that it is something that
is hidden from public view.
These concerns are in the public arena already.
Q. What does your dissertation then add?
A. A richness, and it adds a clearer view that the distance of my perspective afforded me so I could see a clearer procession or
progression of events than the participants at the time could understand.
Historical actors do not have perfect forward vision of the consequences of their actions.
Q. So that by reviewing the materials and working at that, you felt that you were able to in this dissertation -- really that would
be its purpose to have something worthwhile to supplement the fund of knowledge?
A. Yes.
Q. When was it that you and Julian Pleasants undertook to write the book, the work that turned into the book Frank Porter
Graham's Senate race in 1950 in North Carolina?
A. We started serious work on that book about 1986.
Q. And you published it when? Or the University of North Carolina published it when?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. 1994.
Q. What new work -- you said that your dissertation and his dissertation, Julian Pleasants' dissertation sort of crossed over and
-- was the idea that they gave you a base to work from?
A. Some of the basic research for this particular campaign we had already done because of our previous inquiries.
Q. You had reviewed, for example, the papers of Frank Porter Graham. He had reviewed the personal papers of Mr. Reynolds,
Robert Rice Reynolds?
A. That's correct.
Q. What, if anything, new did the two of you do when you began in the mid-1980s to -- which resulted in this -- the book
that was published in 1994?
A. We found -- we initiated that whole process of historical research anew, and we broadened our search procedures and we
found other manuscripts which time had prevented us from examining.
Q. When you say that, what do you mean? When you say that you found other manuscript collections that time had previously
prevented you from seeing?
A. Well, a dissertation is a research project that one tries to complete within a lifetime.
Q. Or maybe before they sit for completion of their doctorate?
A. Precisely. And so the challenge is to try to draw this project to a conclusion.
Q. So you drew your -- your process to conclusion in 1969, thereabouts on your dissertation and he did in 1971 or so?
A. About.
Q. Thereabouts?
A. Yes.
Q. And then in the meantime, from around 1970 to the mid-1980s, I take it from what you said earlier, other manuscript
collections became available to you?
A. Some did, and some were just manuscript collections that had been available earlier that we just didn't get to.
Q. Because of the time factor?
A. Yes.
Q. Time management?
A. Precisely.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And then time became another factor because some of these collections of private papers or private/public papers became
available during the time --
A. Some did.
Q. What was the value to you and your co-author in putting this book together, writing this book of reviewing these other
manuscript collections that had become available to you during -- that you had reviewed, either ones that you didn't have time
to get to before or ones that had come into availability between time?. What was the value of those materials?
A. Some of them were new information. Some represented a richer mix, different advantage points on the specific campaign.
The documents -- the manuscripts that were most important to us were the manuscripts from other principals in this race. I
mean involved in this race.
Q. I see. So you had reviewed the Graham papers and Graham was one candidate in the race in 1950 having been appointed
to the U.S. Senate?
A. That's correct.
Q. And he was running to hold onto the seat?
A. That's right.
Q. And Julian Pleasants had reviewed the papers of Reynolds who was another candidate in the race?
A. Right.
Q. And then you were able to gain access to papers of another participant in the race?
A. The other candidate's papers became available only very late in our research process and were of limited usefulness to us.
Q. The other candidate being Smith?
A. A man named Willis Smith.
Q. So the Willis Smith papers became available to you pretty late in the work that you were doing between the mid-1980s
and 1994?
A. Right.
Q. When you say they were of limited value to you, did you not have an opportunity to review them all or did you not have
an opportunity to analyze them?
A. Our research was essentially completed and writing the book was essentially complete.
In addition, the materials turned out to be of very limited usefulness because they didn't contain very much useful information.
Q. Mr. Smith eventually won the election?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. And died a few years --
A. Shortly thereafter.
Q. -- a few years later?
A. Yes.
Q. And he had been a private attorney, not a public office holder?
A. He had been a public office holder earlier in his career.
Q. At an earlier time?
A. Yes. In fact, he had been speaking of the North Carolina House for one session.
Q. Some substantial period of time prior to his coming out of his private law practice and challenged Senator Graham?
A. Correct.
Q. So he had more limited numbers of papers, is that the -- or why were they not as valuable? Or maybe that's the wrong term.
A. They were less substantive.
Q. Did they deal with the race, the election?
A. To a limited degree.
Q. The election was called on a sort of short notice?
A. By contemporary standards, yes.
Q. He didn't begin actively campaigning until 10 or 11 or 12 days before the race?
A. We need to identify the chronology of the campaign.
Q. Yes, sir?
A. It's all a Democratic primary.
Q. Right.
A. As we all know in southern politics, if it is not a Democratic primary, it's not an election.
Q. Although there was a substantial continuing Republican electorate in North Carolina during that period of time?
A. But never sufficiently strong to elect anybody, but you're right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And even at that time, the Democrats needed to be concerned about who they might nominate because there were a hundred
or sixty or seventy thousand or so Republicans who would come out and vote Republican in the general election?
A. That's correct.
Q. Compared with around 300 or so thousand Democrats?
A. That's right.
Q. So in that setting, setting the chronology, you were going to tell us the time frame?
A. There is an initial primary in which Graham gains almost a clear majority of the field. And the primary concludes and Smith
has the option to call a second primary. He has two weeks to make this decision. He waits until the day before the deadline to
make a decision whether to call a second primary or not.
He is persuaded to do that, and at that point the race changes character and intensifies and becomes essentially a racial
referendum.
Q. Jesse Helms, a current United States senator from the state of North Carolina was at that time a radio personality?
A. Yes.
Q. And at that time was a Democrat?
A. Yes.
Q. And he undertook, along with others, to persuade Smith to call the second primary?
A. That is correct.
Q. Even developed some radio ads and his own little campaign, Senator Helms did, to try to help push and persuade Smith
to do that?
A. That's correct.
Q. So the race -- the second primary was scheduled and there was a short period of time then before the election happened?
A. That's right.
Q. I ask a number of those questions to get to why it was that you found that the papers of Mr. Smith, the candidate that won
the election, were of limited value?
A. Because they were insubstantial in substance. Whether they had been intentionally altered or whether there was sloppy record
keeping, I can't tell you. But the papers proved to be of limited use because of the lack of substance in them.
Q. What did you do then to try to supplement and get the whole picture, so to speak, given the limited value of those particular
papers of Senator Smith?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Our work had been concluded by then. We were satisfied that for our narrative the research that we had done was appropriate
for our subject.
Q. So his particular collection of papers was not key, but you said you were able to get other manuscript collections. Who else's
besides the three major candidates?
A. We found papers --
Q. And by the way, Reynolds at some point I think in your book was described as a political buffoon?
A. He was.
Q. And so do you take it then that his -- were his papers particularly valuable? Julian Pleasants did his dissertation --
A. They are more valuable than one might think because of that characterization. A political buffoon is not necessarily a buffoon
in all things.
Q. So there was some value in reviewing even the papers of Reynolds?
A. Yes. And he was more of a political buffoon in 1950 than when he had been elected to the Senate in 1936.
Q. U.S. Senate?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And so what were the other papers besides Graham and Reynolds?
A. There is a long list of them of manuscript collections that we examined. Some of the most helpful were the papers of a man
named David Burgess who was a labor union organizer in North Carolina who kept a journal of his activities.
Q. And who had he assisted in the race?
A. He had assisted Graham. Graham had strong labor support in that campaign.
Q. And Mr. Burgess, there was a substantial collection of his --
A. It was a journal, a diary of his daily activities.
Q. So you could trace through what he was doing and thinking to attempt to move the campaign in one way or the other?
A. Yes.
Q. To move segments of the electorate in one way or the other?
A. To talk -- to organize the campaign in Graham's behalf, yes.
Q. What other manuscripts? I realize that there is a long list of collections of papers that you've attached to the book, but I really
want -- it doesn't -- the list doesn't necessarily pick them out and say this is the most important and this one is not, and so I just
want to ask you about the ones that you thought were the most important.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. The Charles and Gladys Tillett papers were very revealing.
Q. Tillett?
A. Tillett. T-I-L-L-E-T-T.
Q. What about them was very revealing?
A. Tillett was one of Graham's closest friends and had always taken a very active role in managing Graham's life. And his wife
was a very active Democratic political woman, including being a member of the Democratic National Committee at the time.
Q. So it was Charleton?
A. And Gladys Tillett.
Q. That is single person and that is a lady?
A. No, it's two people.
Q. That's what I'm asking?
A. Charles and Gladys Tillett.
Q. I misunderstood you.
A. I'm sorry.
Q. So it is Charles and Gladys Tillett. Go ahead, please.
A. The papers of others of Graham's friends and close associates were also very useful to us, including some of his associates
at the university.
Q. Other professors on the faculty at the University of North Carolina?
A. And administrators at the university.
Q. What was particularly helpful or revealing about the papers of those professors and administrators?
A. Primarily their analysis of Graham's personality and his aptitude or his lack of ability as a political candidate.
Q. A better university president than a political candidate?
A. Yes.
Q. Was part of the information that they were able to provide to you an insight on why that was the case?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Okay.
A. The papers of Jonathan Daniels who was at the time the editor of the Raleigh News and Observer and who was a key figure
in the Graham campaign.
Q. And what about those papers, was -- he had a newspaper so I assume that he published things in his newspaper that a person
could read?
A. That's right.
Q. That anybody could read during that time frame to see what he was saying about the race, correct?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. What about his papers was particularly helpful or revealing?
A. They disclosed to -- delineated the level of his participation in the campaign.
Q. Was that important for any reason for the overall work that you did on the 1950 campaign?
A. Yes, because he was an active participant.
Q. What did that add?
A. It added his vantage point, his point of view and his assessment of the progress of the campaign as it went forward.
Q. So apart from what he might have written by way of editorials or had his newspaper publish during that period of time, this
was his own personal understanding and knowledge of what was going on in the campaign at that time?
A. Right.
Q. Does it reflect his own contributions to -- by way of ideas and activities to support Graham's campaign?
A. To some extent it does, yes.
Q. And it helped you to analyze what aspect of the overall outcome of the campaign?
A. It fills the record and it provides another perspective that is appropriate for the specific focus of our research. As a major --
as a major person, personality involved in this campaign and as someone who has national visibility.
Q. Because that newspaper had itself had national visibility?
A. And because of Jonathan Daniels' own achievements as an author. For example, he had been -- at one point -- he was a close
friend of Harry Truman, and at one point had been Franklin Roosevelt's press secretary.
Q. So this was a person with some substantial political background and contact in addition to his having this -- the Raleigh
News --
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. -- and Observer?
A. Yes.
Q. And Mr. Graham had also had appointments and knew President Truman?
A. Yes, very well.
Q. And Franklin Delanor Roosevelt?
A. Yes.
MR. LOCKMAN: When you get to an appropriate point, may I suggest that we take a mid-morning break.
MR. HOGAN: I will want to ask you about other ones that you thought were key, but the timing is good for a break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are going off the videotape record at 10:27.
(A brief recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the videotape record. The time is 10:45. This is the beginning of tape 2, May 8, 1997.
MR. LOCKMAN: May 9.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: My apologies. May 9.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You were giving us the main collections of papers of individuals who were involved in that campaign that were useful to
you in writing the book with Mr. Pleasants about the 1950 Senate race. What other ones were of significance?
A. I had just mentioned the Jonathan Daniels papers?
Q. Yes.
A. There was a group of papers found at East Carolina University in Greenville that was useful in fleshing out the picture of
the campaign.
Q. They were the papers --
A. The name of the collection escapes me.
Q. Were they a particular individual's w papers that were found?
A. Yes.
Q. And this was a participant in the election process?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. That's right. And one of these people who had been a long-time political observer.
Q. Were there any other principal collections of papers that you reviewed of people who were actually involved in the events?
A. There was a set of papers from a newspaper editor in Ashville, a man named Hiden Ramsey, R-A-M-S-E-Y.
Q. And for what reason were they particularly helpful?
A. Again, he was a long-time political observer and participant.
Q. So not only was he observing, but he was participating in the race, the election?
A. Correct.
Q. What side of the election was he on?
A. He was a Graham partisan.
Q. And the papers at East Carolina University, that person, which side of the election was he on?
A. The Graham side.
Q. Were there other papers that were principally important that you were able to review of people who were on the Smith side
of the election?
A. There were the papers of --
Q. Well, let me ask you, and do you include them among the papers that were important for evaluating this entire subject?
A. Yes, we do.
Q. Who are they?
A. The papers of a man named John Park, P-A-R-K, who is the editor of a newspaper in Raleigh that was the evening paper
and was written from a very different political viewpoint than the Raleigh News and Observer, and Park was a stout Graham
advocate -- excuse me, I misspoke, Smith advocate.
Q. He supported Willis Smith?
A. Yes.
Q. How were those papers helpful to you in analyzing and presented to the public in your book what happened? s
A. They gave a fuller picture of some of the reasons why some people thought Graham's candidacy for the Senate was unwise
for the state.
Q. Can you tell more about what fuller picture it was that they provided? Or of the reason -- the reasons why some felt that
Graham shouldn't run?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. These were North Carolina people who didn't like the changes that had occurred in the Democratic party in the 1930s. They
were what I would describe as more traditional Democrats who were believers that, among other things, that the racial patterns
in the south should be sustained as they were currently structured.
Q. More in the nature of segregation?
A. Precisely. Or that the pace of change should be more deliberate.
Q. Who besides John Park on the Smith side of the election in terms of the papers that you reviewed that were helpful --
A. Smith's publicity manager was a man named Hoover Adams, and he has been a very visible figure in North Carolina politics.
From that day to this he's still active.
Q. But even though he is still active, you were able to gain aspects of his papers?
A. And they were at East Carolina.
Q. So it's not a situation where the person -- where a person has to have died before their papers become available or become
a part of the--
A. Not always.
Q. -- of an archive that you can obtain. And how were the Hoover Adams, this publicity manager, helpful to you in writing
this book?
A. They were especially useful in describing the process whereby Smith was persuaded to call the second primary, and also
in enunciating and clarifying Smith's campaign strategies.
Q. And from that what were you able to learn -- from reviewing those papers, from reviewing those papers, what were you able
to learn about the process of persuasion that got Smith to call for the second election or the second primary?
A. In describing what we gleaned from each of these collections, it's very difficult to be precisely accurate as to where specific
information originates given that -- especially given the time lapse that has taken place since we wrote this book, and I don't
want to be misleading.
Q. I understand, and you have an overall impression, though, concerning the Adams -- the Hoover Adams papers, that they
gave you particular help with insight into the process that helped persuade Mr. Smith to call for the second primary?
A. I do, and your characterization of an overall impression is appropriate.
Q. And also that it was helpful in the same way to see the campaign strategies that were used by the Smith campaign?
A. Yes.
Q. And with your having clarified, you are not able to pick out each piece of paper from there for the moment without your
notes available to you, what did the review of the Adams -- Hoover Adams papers inform you and your co-author about the
process that led to Mr. Smith calling for the second primary?
A. Specifically it was Hoover Adams who told us that Smith had originally decided to withdraw, to step down.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. To let--
A. To yield to Graham's plurality.
Q. Yes. Graham had less than 50 percent of the vote in the first primarily?
A. 49.3.
Q. And Smith could have just let him be made the senator and the winner of the election, but he had the right to call for a
second primary?
A. That's right.
Q. And so from Mr. Adams you were able to learn that Smith originally had decided to step aside?
A. Correct.
Q. And then what else did you learn about the process of persuading Smith to demand the second primary?
A. I can't recall the specific source of the information. I think it came from several different sources.
Q. On the Smith side?
A. Of what happened in those last two days.
Q. Several different sources of information?
A. Which corroborate a general story with some differences as to nuance and as to specific detail.
Q. But these are general -- these sources are sources on the Smith side of the table?
A. Yes.
Q. And what these did put together was describe the process by which Smith was persuaded to change his mind?
A. Correct.
Q. And call for the second election?
A. (Witness nods.)
Q. What did you learn from the Hoover Adams papers about the campaign strategies? What was particularly helpful from those
papers on that point?
Hoover Adams --
A. I'm not sure I can make you -- give you a clearer answer to that question in distinction -- to distinguish his papers' contributions
from others that provide corroborative information.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Others on the Smith side of the table?
A. Yes. Yes. And if I may, much of what we learned about the Smith strategy we learned from the public record. The intention
of the Smith campaign is very clear from press accounts. It's very clear from the commentary of people who are writing in
newspapers who are political observers who are talking to campaign people sometimes -- and oftentimes publishing things
without attribution and who are putting their opinions about the campaign into the newspaper, both at the local weekly papers
that small towns produce and in North Carolina and in these days, in the 1950s, in 1950 there is a profusion of these papers.
Q. So to clarify that, you're saying that there were -- apart from the private papers, there were a number of people on the Smith
side of the election that you reviewed and found helpful in understanding the campaign strategy, you also were able to look at
reports from a variety of newspapers, maybe weeklies or whatever they were during that time frame --
A. The weeklies and the daily papers in the larger communities.
Q. Where people who were reporters, were reporting what they were learning?
A. Correct.
Q. From people involved in the campaign, including people involved in the campaign on the Smith side?
A. Yes.
Q. About what strategies Smith was undertaking and that sort of thing; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Were there any other sources on the Smith side that were particularly helpful? You mentioned that there were a number and
we have talked about two or three. Were there others that you thought were particularly helpful?
A. I think from the Smith side those are the collections that are most vivid in my memory.
Q. Were there other materials from -- did Reynolds throw his support in one way or the, other in the election, to the extent
that he had support?
A. Reynolds supporters divided in the second primary, and the effect of the division was to render his involvement in the second
primary marginal at best.
Q. What did you -- through reviewing -- you wrote your book in terms of research and writing from 1986 -- is that the --
A. The writing of it took about two years.
Q. The researching went on from the late eighties?
A. Yes. And continues.
Q. And continued up to when you were writing as well?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. That book was written in the -- late 1980s and published in -- researched and written late eighties and published in '94?
A. That's correct.
Q. What did it add to the fund of public knowledge apart from what was known as of the time that you and Mr. Pleasants,
Julian Pleasants, published or made your dissertations back in the late -- around 1970? What was new in your book that was
added to the public fund of knowledge?
A. First, it's the only comprehensive account of that campaign that has ever been written. And the thoroughness of our
scholarship was something that reviewers did note as they evaluated the book.
Q. And there was in fact -- the comprehensiveness was what was particularly noted by the reviewers?
A. The comprehensiveness and the perspective.
Q. And what aspect of the perspective was important? In other words, what were people, historians I take it who reviewed your
book, what were they saying concerning the perspective that it presented?
A. I think most of the critics who reviewed the book commented that it gave the campaign an importance historically in terms of
the developing trends of southern politics that made the campaign an event that could be distinguished from an event that was
completely sensational, but that instead it had broader consequences in terms of the developing patterns of southern politics.
Q. What were those broader historical consequences that the book identified, that these authors or writers were commenting on?
A. First that the campaign reveals a growing disaffection among southern white voters in North Carolina for the mainstream
Roosevelt Democratic party.
Willis Smith is a traditional southern Democrat, and in a sense the campaign had a polarizing affect on these people and their
political attitudes. And it helped a lot of these people to clarify their thinking about the future course of southern politics and
where their sympathies would rest.
Q. So those two keys, the comprehensiveness and the perspective that it brought and the light that it shined on the real facts
about the race and what it meant --
A. Perhaps I would say -- the ability of the book to reveal some persistent trends in southern politics.
Q. Was it important that you were -- in doing this book, that you were able to expand on or maximize the source materials
that you were able to review in order to give a comprehensive analysis of that event and a perspective to the historical trends
that it identified?
A. It was helpful, but I would not necessarily characterize the book as comprehensive in any sort of finite sense.
There are still manuscript collections that we didn't get to. There are source materials that we didn't see. There are other
perspectives that perhaps would have been of benefit but perhaps not, but they are just roads not taken because, as I said before,
the research responsibilities of such an undertaking have to be limited and you have to keep your focus on the specific task
at hand.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. When you make that -- in answering that question, when you make note of the importance of manuscripts that you didn't
get to or sources that you didn't see or roads not taken, why do you qualify your response about the importance of your book
by giving me that response?
A. Because I'm reluctant to be boastful enough to tell you that this book is in any way some sort of unusually complete
achievement. I'm simply trying to be honest with you without trying to sound fulsome in my own praise here. That would be
wrong to me if that impression were drawn, and I wouldn't want you to think that this manuscript is complete in any sort of
finite sense, but it is a book.
Q. And it is a book that came as a result of your effort within all the time available to you to review as many manuscripts or
archives as you possibly could; is that accurate?
A. That's correct.
Q. And to see as much in the way of source materials as you conceivably could see and absorb and analyze during that time
given the circumstances of the time available?
A. Not as many as we conceivably could see, but I understand your point.
Q. What would be a better way to say it then?
A. That given the task that you identify for yourself, that you are able to examine the materials that were essential to the
completion of that task.
Q. If you were to let's just say -- let's take an example of sources not seen or manuscripts that you didn't get to, if it turned
out that Smith's grandson or granddaughter had in the attic a letter written on the day when one of the gentlemen said he had
decided to withdraw, that instead his own letter indicated I'm not withdrawing, I'm going to have a second election and there is
nothing that suggests that he wavered from that, would that be important in the future in reassessing and in the second -- if you
were to do a second edition of your book, would that be an important factor to include in the second edition?
A. It's really hard to tell you that as a hypothetical proposition.
Q. Assume something of that sort, a letter written by him which refutes or rebuts what somebody else involved in the events at
the time has said and accepted in your book, would that be valuable in essence in setting the record straight? I'm asking you to
assume it because I certainly don't know if there is a letter from Mr. Smith to that effect?
A. Nor do I.
Q. Yes.
A. The possibility does exist, but it would depend on the context of the-letter. It would depend on who wrote it, the closeness
of that person to the campaign. The context would be highly important.
Q. And it would be necessary then to see it in the overall context of the case -- of the case of the election that you would be
investigating historically, correct?
A. Probably so.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. The book -- apart from the commentators about its comprehensiveness and its perspective, and the quality of the perspective
provided and realizing that you don't want to be boastful, but it received an award in large measure of its comprehensiveness
and the perspective that it brought to the issue; is that correct?
A. Somebody called it an outstanding book. What they meant by outstanding is not for me to say.
Q. And it was felt to be quality historical work because of its comprehensiveness by others who reviewed it; is that correct?
A. In part, that's correct.
Q. And the other part had to do with its perspective that it brought?
A. And the willingness I think -- a willingness to evaluate the evidence that -- to be fair to the evidence that we found.
Q. What does that mean, willingness?
A. It means to be faithful to the record of the historical process as you find it.
Q. And on that point, being faithful to the record of the historical process as you find it, what does that -- what does being
faithful in that way mean?
A. It means that you have to have respect for the motives and for the context of the historical actors. That you write the history
of that process or -- it doesn't always have to be the history of the event per se, but you write it with the understanding that these
people, these actors should have their actions understood within the context of the time in which they are acting.
Q. And in that sense, objectively reviewing and it and objectively reporting it?
A. Objective in the sense that you are faithful to their record. In the sense that objectivity means here a point of view that is
without perspective or that exists without the ability of someone else to challenge it, no. Objectivity doesn't mean -- it doesn't
mean the concluding summary with which everyone will agree forever and ever.
Q. But it does mean what?
A. In my judgment to me it means fidelity to the historical record and a willingness to look at things in context and to evaluate
the process as the research that you do discloses it.
Q. And to the extent that that book -- the book that you wrote does that, that is the appropriate way for history to be written
by a historian; is that correct?
A. To me it is. That's not a view all historians would endorse.
Q. But it is your view that's what's really -- that's kind of the essentials or the basics of doing the work of a historical consultant?
A. Yes.
Q. Let me ask you -- not that I want to leave the topic of the 1950 election, but others here have endured our conversation
about it. Let me ask you about your -- any other training that you have had in terms of professional training. You've taken
degrees in history and education?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. Have you had training in psychiatry?
A. No.
Q. In other words, I'm talking about professional training?
A. I have not.
Q. Psychology?
A. No.
Q. Medicine?
A. No.
Q. Biology?
A. No.
Q. Public health?
A. No.
Q. Sociology?
A. No.
Q. Polling?
A. No.
Q. Pharmacology?
A. No.
Q. Communications, schools of communications?
A. No.
Q. You were a debater in high school?
A. I was.
Q. But that was in I guess the speech class?
A. Public speaking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. How does political science fit so far as your field of history? Is political science a different discipline?
A. It is a different discipline.
Q. And that in a sense is not a field that you have made a study of?
A. I do write the history of politics, but it is not political science, it's history.
Q. And the subject of -- I don't know that they give degrees in it, but the subject of lobbying, is that a field that you have made
a professional study of?
A. No.
Q. How a bill becomes a law, so to speak?
A. As a historian, I have some sense of how that happens.
Q. But on the detailed level of what the lobbying process is and when it is effective and how it is effective and who does what,
is that something that you have made a professional -- have had professional training or education in?
A. I have done some work in legislative history.
Q. Uh-huh.
A. The significance of statutes, the importance of statutes, how courts interpret statutes.
Q. When a statute makes the books, in other words when a statute gets passed, you've reviewed the effect that it has?
A. And what I would call the normative implications of statutes. What they tell us about the society as it deliberates. What the
statute reveals about the society's decision relative to any specific activity or subject.
Q. Have you written other books besides or had a part in the writing of other books besides the book on Mr. Graham in the
1950 Senate race?
A. No.
Q. You have provided some excerpts -- excerpted some court decisions that have been included in a --
A. In the Oxford Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court.
Q. And that's a book that gives brief descriptions of the content of decisions by the Supreme Court?
A. Yes.
Q. And has some references to individuals or subject matters that have been important before the United States Supreme Court?
A. Correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And some of the decisions that you have abstracted or made a summary of are ones that related to the integration of law
schools?
A. Yes.
Q. And particularly, for example, a case that involved Lloyd Gaines?
A. Yes.
Q. Who was Lloyd Gaines?
A. He was a Missouri citizen who petitioned the State of Missouri for admission to the University of Missouri law school in 1938.
Q. He petitioned and was he -- a case, a lawsuit came as a result of his petition to be admitted?
A. That's correct.
Q. And he was denied admission initially?
A. He was denied admission, and the court held that -- eventually he was ordered admitted.
Q. Eventually the United States Supreme Court heard the case?
A. Correct. Making the claim that if the equal facilities that state -- this was actually saying that the state could not fund his
legal education at a school outside the state's boundaries that would accept his application for admission. They had the duty,
had the responsibility to provide for his legal education within the boundaries of that state in which he was a citizen.
Q. That being the ruling of the court, what then happened in the case of Lloyd Gaines, do you recall?
A. He disappeared.
Q. Did he instantly? In other words -- was there any other historical record of Lloyd Gaines in any other location after the
day of the decision?
A. To my knowledge, no.
Q. There were a couple of other cases around the same time that you excerpted for that encyclopedic treatment for the Supreme
Court that were similar?
A. Yes.
Q. There is the Sweatt?
A. Sweatt, yes.
Q. And that plays or becomes somewhat involved in the reporting that is included in your book with Mr. Pleasants in the 1950
Senate race?
A. It does.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Have you undertaken previous projects or projects like the one that you've been asked to do here in this case by the State of
Florida and its entities and Governor Chiles against the cigarette industry defendants?
Have you had other projects that you've been asked by outside companies or entities to undertake where you review materials
at their request and then provide, opinions?
A. Let me qualify your question, if I may.
I accepted a research assignment from them. I did not review materials at their request, if you mean that I reviewed materials
that they provided to me as the research assignment.
Q. We will go ahead then and clarify it.
What was the research assignment that they gave to you and -
A. They gave me a research -- a research suggestion. They said we want you to examine the state's involvement with tobacco.
Q. The State of Florida?,
A. Yes. I told them I would be glad to undertake a study of tobacco and the history in the state of Florida.
Q. We got to that point by my asking you whether you had ever before that been approached to do a research assignment by
some outside entity, somebody outside the university or somebody outside your own mind telling you this is a subject that I --
a particular subject that I would like to research and write about, have you ever been approached by anyone else before?
A. Yes.
Q. What sort of work have you previously done?
A. I was approached to assist in a documentary film on the life of Frank Porter Graham.
Q. Coming as a result of the work that you were doing on the book?
A. Yes. Subsequent to the publication of the book.
Q. Since 1994?
A. Yes.
Q. Since that publication you were asked to work on the public documentary?
A. I need to correct the record.
Q. Is it a different --
A. The book was published in 1990. Accept my apology.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Yes, sir. Just so we are clear on the record with that, it was research from around the mid-1980s, and the last couple of years
before 1990 was when it was being written?
A. That is correct.
Q. When you were doing some research as well and then it was published in 1990?
A. That is correct.
Q. After that you were approached about doing a documentary. Who approached you?
A. A documentary film maker named John Wilson.
Q. And the documentary has been produced?
A. It has been produced.
Q. And was there additional research that you did in producing the documentary?
A. Yes.
Q. What additional research did you do, and let me leave it there for the moment?
A. We did intensive videotaped live interviews with surviving members of Graham's immediate family, with historians who
gave us commentary on Graham's significance as a historical character, with his political comrades in various of his concerns
across his long and very active life. With people who were on the other side, for example Hoover Adams.
Q. You interviewed him?
A. We interviewed Hoover Adams for this film, for this documentary; and others who had opposed Graham for much of his
political life.
Q. And was any of that -- the interviews that were done with those who opposed him, was that of value in assisting in creating
this documentary film?
A. Yes.
Q. In what way was it of value?
A. It provided a fuller perspective on Graham's life and on the -- it gave us information about the level of controversy that
his career evoked in people.
Q. The strength of feelings that it produced among those that were opposed to him, for example?
A. Precisely.
Q. And did it get into providing information as to steps that they took in reaction to that?
A. Perhaps. I'm not sure I can answer that question specifically.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. As to any particular individual?
A. Yes.
Q. Mr. Adams is still living?
A. Yes. To the best of my knowledge.
Q. You mentioned the interviews and I had asked earlier about archives and your reviewing the private papers of individuals or
those involved in the campaign back in 1950. Did you in preparing the book, researching the book, did you conduct interviews?
A. We did conduct some interviews, yes.
Q. Approximately how many interviews of people who were participants in the events surrounding the 1950 Senate race?
A. To give you a really accurate answer I have to consult the bibliography because I frankly haven't looked at the bibliography
in five years.
Q. 15 people?
A. 15 to 20 people. Maybe more, maybe less.
Q. Were they people on both sides of the election?
A. Yes.
Q. Smith supporters and Graham supporters?
A. Yes.
Q. Those who were actively involved in the situation?
A. Yes.
Q. And you asked them probing questions, I take it about -- you asked them questions?
A. Yes.
Q. If probing is troublesome to you.
A. I hope they were probing. I'm not an authority on whether my questions were probing or not. I appreciate the contribution.
I'm not being smart.
Q. No, sir. I understand that someone else reviewing the interview transcript might feel that it was not necessarily probing?
A. It would be my hope that they were probing.
Q. That was your intent?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. In order to obtain as much important information as you could to help you provide a comprehensive historical perspective
on the events of that race and its overall importance?
A. Yes.
Q. Apart from -- well, let me ask about this public or -- was it a public television documentary?
A. Yes.
Q. Did they ask you at all to restrict yourself to the public record materials that you would review in order to help them prepare
that documentary?
A. And who is “they”?
Q. The producer of the film, of the documentary? Did they say, look, we only want you to tell us from what you can see in the
public record, meaning newspaper reports or the state documents, for example?
Did they limit you in any way in terms of what they asked you to look at?
A. The creation of a documentary film as a research exercise is very different from the research that goes into the making of
a manuscript or a book.
The range of the research that you produce for a documentary is much more limited.
Q. There are time restrictions and --
A. And money restrictions.
Q. And money restrictions. But did they place any limits on -- did they say just go look at the newspapers and what's in the
state legislative archives? Or did they ask you to comment on the election or did they want you to use the broad materials that
you had used in researching and writing your book on that 1950 election?
A. The best answer to that question based on my experience is that they didn't state specific limits on what we should do, but
that the nature of the process imposes very strict limits on what you can do.
Q. The project itself was to do a documentary following up on your book?
A. Yes.
Q. And they wouldn't say to you the subject matter of the materials you should look at, but you were in a position to determine
which ones you would and would not look at; is that correct?
A. That's true.
Q. That project that relates to your book that you did on the election, is that the only other project besides this project that you
have been doing now over a period of a couple of years for the cigarette industry defendants in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Is that documentary the only other project that you've done during your professional career?
A. As a graduate student I did some genealogical research for which I was compensated.
Q. At the request of a person who wanted you to try to learn for them their -- their parents and their grandparents and great
grandparents and try to carry that back over time?
A. Yes.
Q. And you did that?
A. Yes.
Q. Is there any other project that you've done?
A. I'm trying to remember.
I have been a consultant for some time and I'm trying to remember specifically to answer your question.
I'm going to give you a qualified yes, that that is the sum and substance of these projects that I've done.
Q. As a--
A. If I remember, I will inform you as we proceed.
Q. When you say that you've been a consultant for some time, does that mean something broader than those three projects?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. What other kinds of projects have you been a consultant --
A. The reviewing of manuscripts as a -- as part of the process of accepting or rejecting manuscripts for publication.
Q. Someone else writes a book, for example, and you'll be asked by the publisher to review it to give your comments on good,
bad --
A. On its merits.
Q. On its merits?
A. (Witness nods.)
Q. Any other kind of work that you've done as a consultant?
A. I have done academic consulting, assisting students -- for pay, assisting students in college choices.
Q. Where they would ask you to help evaluate --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. Whether this is the right place to go?
A. For that particular individual.
MR. LOCKMAN: Let the questioner ask a full question so we have a clear question and a clear answer.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. It is particularly good if we talk over each other it be on that question in the sense that it won't be the main topic today.
Any other work as a consultant?
A. I think I'll say that's what I remember at the moment.
Q. Do you have any thought or plan of writing an article or a book stemming from your research that you have been asked to
do as a consultant for the cigarette industry defendants in this case?
A. Yes.
Q. What sort of article or book do you intend to write with respect to that research?
A. I project a book on the history of tobacco in Florida.
Q. Was this something that the cigarette industry defendants when they asked you to undertake this project suggested would
be an additional thing they would like for you to do?
A. No.
Q. It is a thought that you have that has come to you as a result of your getting involved in doing this research?
A. The richness of these materials is very attractive.
Q. Have you done all the work that you would think that you would need to do to be able to publish such a book?
A. That's a difficult question. For the reasons that I have been alluding to as we have proceeded, I'm close.
Q. I asked earlier about rules or regulations or codes that the American Historical Association may have. Are there any rules
or regulations that the State of Florida or the University of Florida has with regard to consulting arrangements that its faculty
members engage in with outside parties who ask for you to engage in a consultancy?
A. Yes.
Q. What sort of rules are those and how would they -- how did they relate to your undertaking this particular project for the
cigarette industry defendants?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Well, as I have stated, I have been a consultant for some time. My consulting work is independent of my work at the
university. First of all because I'm on a nine-month contract.
Q. A nine-month contract, what is that?
A. That means that my appointment is for two academic terms.
Q. Okay. Pardon me, I don't necessarily know all the --
A. It means that I'm paid from August to May.
Q. Okay. I'm still not grasping what that means so far as any rules or regulations that apply to your making arrangements for
consulting for pay from people from the outside of the university. How does what you just said about nine-month contract and
two academic terms, what does that mean?
A. It means that -- it means in the summer my time is for me to structure in my own pursuits.
Q. I see. Is that an arrangement that's available to you through your having tenure with the university? In other words, is that
something that comes along with your status as a tenured professor?
A. I don't know.
Q. Is it any different than any other professor there at the university?
A. To my knowledge it is not.
Q. And in that sense, just to go back to my earlier question so I can understand because you mentioned the idea of this book, are
there any rules or regulations that apply to -- or in any way restrict your ability to enter into consulting arrangements or publish
a book during the time that you're a professor at the University of Florida? Any rules or regulations, contract requirements or
anything like that that you're aware of?
A. May I ask you to repeat the question.
Q. Yes. I had asked about your writing a book and then it revolved around to my asking about whether there are any rules
or regulations that apply to your becoming involved in doing a consultancy arrangement or writing a book on your own or
anything along those lines.
Is there any kind of application process that you have to do with the university or with the state to be permitted to do any
work of that sort?
A. There are conflict of interest requirements.
Q. Of what sort?
A. That require me to declare that the work that I'm doing is not work which creates a conflict of interest.
Q. How long have those kinds of conflict of interest requirements been in place?
A. I'm not clear exactly how long, but for several years.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Five, ten years or more, do you know?
A. Not more.
Q. Ten years or less?
A. Yes.
Q. More than five?
A. Perhaps.
Q. And what are -- what are those rules related to declaring conflict of interest? Well, let me just
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm going to object to the extent that I think you are asking for a legal conclusion. If you want him to state
what his understanding is, that's fine. But he is not sitting here and citing regulations or interpreting them.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. And what are those rules?
A. Relative to conflict of interest?
Q. Yes, sir.
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm just going to have a standing objection unless you concur what you're really asking is his understanding.
MR. HOGAN: Well, let me just ask it two ways then.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. What is your understanding of what those rules are?
A. My understanding is, first of all, that conflicts of interest have to do with activities at the university which would create a
situation that would compromise my academic contribution to the university.
Q. Have you consulted with anyone concerning the conflicts of interest rules in order to obtain chat understanding of what
those rules are?
A. I've looked at the contract provisions and the guidelines that are copied when I signed my contract.
Q. With the university?
A. Yes.
Q. And you signed that on -- every --
A. On an annual basis.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Annually. And in this instance of this project that you're doing at the request of the cigarette industry defendants in this case,
did you make any disclosures pursuant to those conflicts of interest rules?
A. I have made a disclosure, yes.
Q. You made a disclosure to whom and when?
A. I made a disclosure two days ago to the associate dean of arts and sciences at the college at the University of Florida.
Q. And in making -- then if I had taken your deposition this past Monday, it would be the case that you would not have at that
time filed a conflict of interest disclosure?
A. Correct.
Q. When you did this disclosure two days ago, what were the circumstances that prompted you to file this disclosure with the
university?
A. The dean called me and asked me if I was involved -- if I was a potential witness in this case. And I said that I was.
Q. Did anything else transpire that prompted you to file this conflict of interest disclosure?
A. No.
Q. He asked are you a witness in the case?
A. I said I'm -- I said I'm potentially a witness in this case. I have been designated -- is that the word?
Q. That's as close as we get.
A. Okay.
Q. And so he made the call and you responded that way, and then you undertook on your own to file that disclosure?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you consult with anyone before filing that disclosure? Did you make any phone calls to anyone about that?
A. To the dean. I talked to the dean.
Q. After he called you, I guess?
A. He called my wife.
Q. I see.
A. At home and she called me.
Q. Did you -- when you spoke with him, you called him back, I guess, that's what you're saying?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. I did.
Q. Apart from that conversation, did you ask him whether he thought you should file a conflict of interest disclosure?
A. We agreed that I should.
Q. Do you recall how it came up? In other words whether he suggested you might consider that or whether you said should
I, or how did that go?
A. I'm not sure.
Q. Did you speak with any other person about whether you would or should file a conflict of interest disclosure after your
telephone conversation with the dean?
A. I discussed the form with the attorneys in this room.
Q. When you say the attorneys in this room, do you mean the attorneys who are in this room who represent the cigarette industry
defendants?
A. Right. But the nature of the discussion was not whether or not to file a form.
Q. Did it --
A. I informed them that I was filing the form.
Q. Did you then discuss with them what the content of the disclosure, what it would say would be?
A. The content of the disclosure?
Q. In other words -- yes. Is there something that when you file a disclosure form as you did two days ago, is there some place
there where you are supposed to -- or where you set out the reasons that you think that there is a disclosure -- the reason that
you think that there is a conflict of interest?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to that. He hasn't said that.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Is there a place where you set out the reason for setting -- the reason for filing the conflict of interest disclosure form?
A. The reason for filing, yes.
Q. And what did you state on this form?
A. That I was a potential witness in this case.
Q. Did you say anything more than that on that form?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And--
A. Not that I recall.
Q. Do you have a copy of that form?
Counsel, do you have a copy of that form?
MR. LEMLEY: Not with me.
THE WITNESS: I didn't bring anything with me.
MR. HOGAN: I just have not seen the form and don't know about the form and so I'm just --
MR. LOCKMAN: Are we going through lunch, do you think?
MR. HOGAN: Definitely.
MR. LOCKMAN: We will take the request under advisement, and if we decide to grant it we will bring it with us after lunch.
MR. HOGAN: Thank you, judge. Mr. Lockwood applied to the bench and nobody knew it.
MR. LOCKMAN: It's Lockman. I certainly don't mean to sound that way. It's a request and we have to decide whether we are
going to give information in response to your request.
MR. HOGAN: Now I recognize you as Mr. Lockman.
MR. LOCKMAN: That's good. I always wanted to be a judge.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. When you make a disclosure of this sort, are you obligated under the form to disclose the source of funding for the project
that you're doing?
A. I think the answer is yes. I was asked -- I think the form asks for whom are you performing the service.
Q. And what --
A. Which is I guess the same thing.
Q. And what did you say?
A. I said the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue.
Q. Which was one of the law firms representing the cigarette defendants in this lawsuit?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. You've consulted with lawyers from law firms other than lawyers from Jones Day?
A. I have.
Q. Representing cigarette industry defendants?
A. Yes.
MR. LOCKMAN: Consulted about what, just so the record is clear?
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Over the entire course that you've been doing this project; is that correct?
A. I have consulted --
Q. At various times?
A. I have given them the benefits of my research effort. Consulted not in the sense that I sought guidance from them as to
this research.
Q. You're saying then in none of the times that you've communicated with any of the lawyers representing the cigarette industry
defendants in this case, did you ask them for any guidance on your research; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Did they at any time make any suggestion to you as to what potential areas of research might be?
A. No.
Q. You originally were given a broad description of a project and then you provided to them an outline of what you proposed
to do?
A. No, I didn't provide an outline.
Q. At all?
A. No.
Q. At any point did you provide what would be an outline of what you had found up until that point in time?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you ask them for any suggestions or information or guidance then?
A. No.
Q. Did they tell you to go forward with your project given what you had found and what you were able to outline at that point?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. They told me to continue my work.
Q. After your telephone conversation with the -- well, let me ask specifically, which of the lawyers representing the cigarette
industry defendants did you speak with concerning this disclosure form?
A. Ms. Kessler, Mr. Lemley and Mr. Lockman. And Mr. Steve Kaczsynski who was also present.
Q. Was this in person?
A. Yes.
Q. Was that in Gainesville or was that up here in Washington?
A. Up here in Washington.
Q. You came here to Washington when?
A. Tuesday night.
Q. Tuesday night. You met with them on Wednesday?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And so this was an in-person meeting with the lawyers who are here?
A. Yes.
Q. Where was the form typed?
A. I filled it out with a pen in my hand.
Q. At the offices of -- which law firm?
A. I filled it out in my hotel room and then took it to -- took it with me when we had our first meeting.
Q. To the meeting with these lawyers?
A. Yes.
Q. What was the reason for showing them the form?
A. It was a matter of information to inform them that I had had an inquiry and I had responded in this fashion.
Q. And did they -- what advice did they give you?
MR. LOCKMAN: If any.
THE WITNESS: In reference to filing the form, none. I mean, I said -- you know, that -- I said here's this form. I'm filing it,
and this is what it is.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Did they give you any advice to -- to seek the advice of independent counsel, somebody other than cigarette industry
defendant lawyers?
A. Yes.
Q. And did you?
A. I have not.
Q. Did they say to you why they thought it would be advisable for you to seek advice from your own lawyer?
A. They said at some point our interests might diverge.
Q. Whose interests might diverge?
A. The attorneys for Jones Day and Arnold & Porter and my interests. Their interests and mine as a consultant.
Q. You did you understand or did they explain in any greater degree of detail as to how they thought potentially your interests
might diverge?
A. Yes. Well -- yes.
Q. What did they say?
A. That I would have to -- the university and I would have to resolve this. If the university fails to approve my request, if they
look at my disclosure and say our judgment is that your testimony in this trial would constitute a conflict of interest and that
we will not permit it, I'm just speculating, I don't know what their response would be, at that point I would have to determine
a course of action that would be concerned with my legal interests in this situation.
Q. Did they explain anything further to you about how that would involve your interest diverging from the interest of the
cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. So at this point at least you've not consulted with private counsel?
A. No.
Q. And you don't at this point see any divergence of interest between you and the cigarette industry defendants?
A. Not at this point.
Q. Did the form that you filed indicate the matter that you're consulting with the cigarette industry defendants? Does it ask
what's the --
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. It doesn't ask about the name of the lawsuit?
A. No.
Q. Does it indicate that Jones Day -- is that the name of the firm that you put on the form?
A. Yes.
Q. Does the form indicate that they are representing the cigarette industry defendants in this case?
A. Yes.
Q. So the form says that to the best that you recall?
A. I'm not clear that it does.
Q. Does it indicate in any way, shape or form how it is that you consider this potentially to be a conflict?
A. No.
Q. Do you have, just for other kinds of reasons of any sort, do you have a lawyer who you periodically might be in a position
to consult or have consulted over time to advise you about contract rights on your book or anything along those lines?
A. My wife's an attorney.
Q. I see. And have you consulted with her about this in her position ---this issue of this conflict of interest disclosure form
in her role as an attorney?
A. No.
Q. In her role as an attorney she has acted previously as your legal adviser --
A. Yes.
Q. -- on matters for example like the contracts related to your book or the documentary? Or did you have other counsel is
what I'm asking?
A. No, I didn't have other counsel.
Q. Where does your wife practice law?
A. In Florida. In McIntosh, Florida.
Q. She has a general practice there?
A. Yes.
Q. How long has her practice of law been established?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. She has been practicing in Florida since 1985.
Q. When did she complete law school?
A. 1978, I think.
Q. At the University of Florida College of Law?
A. Yes.
Q. When did you become a professor there?
A. 1974, I think.
Q. Approximately?
A. Yes.
Q. And then did you -- when you began there at the University of Florida, that was when when you first --
A. 1967.
Q. And in what capacity?
A. Assistant professor.
Q. Had you been a professor any place else before that or did you come straight there from --
A. From Chapel Hill.
Q. -- from Chapel Hill at the University of North Carolina.
And you then became an associate professor?
A. (Witness nods.)
Q. When did that happen?
A. I think it was 1978.
Q. And then after that did you become a professor at what's called a full professor.
A. I'm still an associate professor.
Q. Was there a time frame or a point in time when you were considered for a full professorship?
A. No, I have never gone -- I have never put forward my papers for promotion.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Never made application for that. Is that something that you considered that you would like to do?
A. Yes.
Q. Is there any reason that you have not applied for a full professorship since -- over the last 15-plus, 20-plus years? What is
it, since '78, almost 20 years?
A. The prospects for success have not been promising, so I didn't apply.
Q. What is it that caused you to draw the conclusion or has caused you over these 19 or so years to draw the conclusions that
the prospects for success were not promising for promotion to full professor?
A. There is some concern that my publication record is not sufficiently prolific.
Q. Can you -- some concern on whose part?
A. On the part of the people who make the decisions relative to promotions.
Q. Have those people over the years been the same people or have there been different people who have held the positions
of making those decisions?
A. Different people.
Q. And your understanding is that over that stretch of years, that those professors -- I take it that they are professors?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Full professors?
A. Yes.
Q. I take it that they have consistently concluded as far as you're aware that your academic record as far as publication is
concerned did not merit promotion to full professor, is that what you're saying?
A. Yes.
Q. What is it about your publication record that you understand that those professors over those years have found not sufficient?
A. I think you need to ask them.
Q. Have they communicated that to you? Have they given you any information along those lines?
A. Only informally and not in any complete or comprehensive manner.
Q. To the extent that you can assist by telling in an incomplete and not a comprehensive manner, what information have they
given you on the subject of their views on whether they would advance you to full professorship?
A. Is your question what would it take for me to get promoted?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. My question is really what they said to you?
A. The question is the question that you asked.
Q. Yes, sir.
A. Would you ask it again.
Q. What information have they given to you, whether complete or comprehensive, as to the reasons that they have made it known
to you that they don't feel that you should be promoted to full professor? And you've pegged it particularly to your publication --
A. I have.
That the record is not complete. That it is -- it is not as full as it should be. What I have published has been of high quality,
but there hasn't been enough of it.
Q. And when they deal -- when they review publications, do they look at what are called peer review publications as opposed
to publications in some -- in a popular magazine?
A. Both count, but the peer reviewed publications have a greater weight.
Q. What is the peer review process?
A. It is a process where one submits articles to a journal, professional journal. It has a board of editors and the piece is assigned
to one of the editors or -- or it is read by a series of them or they select someone in the field who is familiar with the subject
and have that person review the piece and comment on it as to the appropriateness for its publication in that journal.
Q. And because of going through that peer review process for approval for publication, that's what gives it greater weight
when it's reviewed by the professors who would make determinations about the question of promotion -- promoting you to
full professor; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. What have been the subject matters of the peer reviewed publications that you've had over this period of years since 1974
at the University of Florida?
A. The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court pieces were all peer reviewed by the board of editors of that publication.
Q. Those were the summaries that you did?
A. Yes.
Q. Summarizing a --
A. Yes.
MR. LOCKMAN: Let him finish the question.
MR. HOGAN: Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. -- summarizing a written decision handed down by the United States Supreme Court and putting it into several paragraphs;
is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. What else have you written that has been peer reviewed and --
A. There are a series of journal articles that have been peer reviewed.
Q. What is their subject matter?
A. They vary. There is a piece published on the Southern Journal of History on the course of graduate school integration in
North Carolina schools from the New Deal -- which is in a sense the same general area of interests of my dissertation. A short
piece on graduate school desegregation.
Q. So it is in a sense sort of a subset or subpart of what you did when you got your -- did your graduate dissertation?
A. And it was amended with additional research.
Q. What other areas have been the subject matter of peer reviewed publications by you?
A. There have been entries from the Encyclopedia of Southern Culture which is a volume not dissimilar from the Oxford
Companion to the Supreme Court on a broader subject, the subject of southern culture.
Q. What is the subject matter of those particular articles?
A. A colleague and I did a piece on southern roadhouses which are -- roadhouses. You know --
Q. Time frames, over what time frame?
A. The 1920s and '30s, these gatherings places in the rural south where people would go for their entertainment.
Q. And so you published an article about those roadhouses?
A. Right.
Q. What other scholarly subjects have been the subject of peer reviewed publications by you?
A. This same colleague and I have done several pieces on southern blues music and the importance of this music as a historical
artifact, as it were, for the understanding of southern culture in the 1920s and 1930s.
Q. So during that same time frame that we mentioned about the roadhouses, and is that -- by location would that music be in
a different location than those roadhouses or would that be the same, approximately?
A. It would be different.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. But it's during the same time frame?
A. Yes.
Q. Apart from those two subject matters, what other articles have you written that have been -- or publications have you written
that were peer reviewed?
A. I think we have been through most of them.
Q. Was it -- when did it first -- when would you first have been eligible to apply for a position as a full professor at the University
of Florida?
A. I'm not sure.
Q. Do you know an approximate number of months or years after you became an associate professor that you would have been
allowed under rules to apply for a full professorship or can you do it right away?
A. The timing of an application for promotion is really dependent more on your accomplishments than the timetable.
Q. And at what point did you come to the point of view that your accomplishments were such that you could apply for --
professional accomplishments were such that you could apply for a full professorship?
A. Well, I considered applying for a full professorship when the Graham book was published.
Q. And you did not do that?
A. I initiated the process and was advised to step down by the then-chair of our department.
Q. Do you have any other works underway that you expect to submit for peer review?
A. Yes.
Q. What works are those?
A. Well, I'm working on an article now, a paper that I will give this year at the meeting of the Southern Historical Association
on Frank Porter Graham and the building of a modern university, meaning his contribution to the development of the University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill as a major source of educational leadership in the south.
Q. And after the presentation of that paper then it would be your hope to submit that to a journal to --
A. I will submit it to the North Carolina Historical Review.
Q. Which is a peer reviewed publication?
A. Yes.
Q. Any other publications that you presently are working on or have in mind that you expect to submit for peer review?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. What are those?
A. I'm working on an article on Graham's political activities in the 1930s which would be a long piece, 40 to 50 pages.
Q. To whom will you submit that for peer review?
A. It will probably be submitted to the Journal of Southern History. I'm not sure exactly now where I will try to place that piece.
Q. Any other work that you're doing that you expect to submit for peer review?
A. No. I'm under -- I'm in negotiation with Prentiss Hall considering the possibility of writing a two volume American history
textbook, but that process is simply under discussion.
Q. That's a conversation that you're having with them?
A. Right.
Q. There are -- and that would be submitted -- if it were, it would be submitted for a peer review -- would go through a peer
review process or would --
A. No, textbooks are really not peer reviewed.
Q. I was asking about peer review.
A. I know.
Q. Is there any other?
A. No.
Q. Let's go back to the subject of the potential book about tobacco. Before you were retained as a consultant for the cigarette
industry defendants, did you -- had you previously done a study of tobacco, the tobacco industry, cigarettes in the State of
Florida?
A. No.
Q. Had you any previous publications or research that you had done on the subject of tobacco or cigarettes related to any other
place or state?
A. The question of support for tobacco farmers was an important question in the Graham campaign. North Carolina politicians
understandably have to be concerned about those programs that the Federal Government implements to assist tobacco farmers.
And so it was important that we be able to understand and clearly articulate the degree to which those concerns informed the
Graham campaign.
Q. Why do you say understandably?
A. Since North Carolina is a major tobacco producing state.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And that means what so far as a person running for political office in North Carolina? In other words, this was information
that -- knowledge that you had in your mind at the time?
A. Yes.
Q. That you were approached by the cigarette industry defendants in this case because of your previous work?
A. Yes.
Q. In North Carolina -- about North Carolina?
A. Yes.
Q. Why was that topic, support for tobacco growing important understandably to North Carolina politicians?
A. Because tobacco is a central economic force in the life of the state.
Q. The companies, the cigarette companies themselves, where do they come in in that mix?
MR. LOCKMAN: Object to the form.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Where do the cigarette companies come in in North Carolina on the question of the importance to North Carolina politicians?
And I'm asking about what you knew before you were approached by the cigarette industry here?
A. The term “cigarette companies,” can be broken down into several constituents.
Q. Do that for me, please?
A. We are referring first to all of the people who work in these factories who are quite numerous, as we both understand, and
who are active participants in North Carolina politics as citizens of the state.
The people who direct/manage the companies are also another group.
The people who --
Q. Another group that what?
A. That participates politically.
Q. And you were continuing to break it down?
A. If we go beyond the production of the product itself and go back to the tobacco as it is grown and cultivated --
Q. Beyond the production of cigarettes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. That's right. Then we have a much broader group of people, the farmers themselves and their families who are -- who are
important politically in the history of the state, and they range in a geographic sense almost all of the way across the state.
Now, the concentration varies from one region to another, but they are -- especially more in the 1950s than now. They were
more numerous and they were more important politically than now. They still are important, but they were more then.
Q. So to the extent that that was involved in the time frame surrounding the -- leading up to and surrounding the 1950 Senate
campaign, that was a subject that you had knowledge of and had paid attention to and analyzed earlier and is referred to in
your book?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you had any other kinds of reviews of -- related to products other than cigarettes or tobacco as they related to that 1950
campaign before you were approached by the cigarette industry defendants in this case?
A. I'm going to ask you to say that question again.
Q. The question is really whether you had looked at any other kinds of products and their importance to North Carolina or the
political scene there at an earlier time?
A. The answer -- yes. Yes, I had.
Q. What products were those?
A. Hogs. Pork production is very important in North Carolina. Poultry production.
Q. There was a fourth candidate in the race in the 1950s?
A. Yes.
Q. He was a hog farmer?
A. Yes.
Q. What was his name?
A. Olla Ray Boyd.
Q. And he was a minor candidate in that campaign?
A. Yes.
Q. I interrupted you. It was hogs and what?
A. Poultry.
Q. Poultry. Any other products?
A. Diary farming.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Any other products?
A. Corn.
Q. Are you giving those in a -- sort of in a descending order of importance in North Carolina?
A. Not necessarily. I'm just giving them as they come to mind.
Q. Yes, sir.
A. Peanuts. That's a pretty good list.
Q. Had you done any work previous to being employed in this project by the cigarette industry defendants on addictive
substances?
A. No.
Q. On lung cancer?
A. No.
Q. Emphysema?
A. No.
Q. Heart disease?
A. No.
Q. Cardiovascular disease in any way, shape or form?
A. No.
Q. Any hazards stemming from the use of cigarettes? Had you made any study of that before becoming employed on this project
by the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No formal academic study.
Q. And had you done any study of the subject of public awareness of the addictiveness of cigarettes in Florida?
A. No.
Q. In any other state?
A. No.
Q. Of the subject of lung cancer being caused by cigarettes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: What's the question?
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Have you done any previous research before being engaged by cigarette industry defendants in this case on the subject of
lung cancer being caused by cigarettes?
A. I have not done research leading to publication on these subjects, but as a historian of the 20th century in the United States
and as one who teaches these classes, these subjects arise in the course of the conduct of a class and they require me to read
and be able to intelligently present various controversies as they develop.
Q. And do you have written materials that you have prior to being engaged by the cigarette industry defendants in this case,
written materials that you used or presented to any of your students in any course that you ever taught?
A. Written materials that I have generated?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. No.
MR. LOCKMAN: About anything?
MR. HOGAN: About the subject of cigarettes that we just discussed and their potential --
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Nothing about --
A. No.
Q. And are there written materials that address that subject that you used -- that were used in any of the classes that you taught,
that is the subject of cigarettes, their causing lung cancer, their addictiveness, any of those kinds of topics?
A. No.
Q. Do you have lecture notes that you use in teaching courses?
A. Yes.
Q. Would any of those lecture notes have references to cigarettes, cigarettes causing lung cancer, cigarettes being addictive,
public awareness of cigarettes that exist before you were engaged by the cigarette company defendants in this case?
A. There are some discussions of the changing consumer patterns of the 1920s that discuss a host of substances -- alcohol --
but including alcohol and tobacco.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
There is discussion in the class when we talk about the passage of the Pure Food & Drug Act that discuss similar concerns.
Usually presented in the form of a -- relating to students how this issue becomes a, matter of public debate and the course of
that debate.
Q. And has it revolved around the issue, the lecture as it revolved around the issue of the Pure Food & Drug Act, that was
what timeframe?
A. 1905.
Q. So apart from the time period of 1905 and the period around the 1920s, if we were to review your notes or some future
historian were to look at the Augustus Burns papers, would he find notes for classroom teaching that discuss cigarettes, cigarettes
and lung cancer, cigarettes and addictiveness for any notes that you would have used before you became engaged by the cigarette
industry defendants?
A. Yes, he would.
Q. What else would he find?
A. He would find again references, for example, when I discuss Franklin D. Roosevelt and his health problems.
Q. And what --
A. That Roosevelt, one of his health -- continuing health problems stemmed from his heavy use of cigarettes which some of the
medical historians that I have read have argued was a major contributor to his terminal illness which was a cervical hemorrhage,
and severe circulatory problems.
Q. Stroke following severe circulatory problems?
A. Yes. Hardening of the arteries and difficulty in breathing and so on.
Q. So you would expect that on review of your teaching notes for courses, that it would discuss that aspect of the disease and
final illness of President Roosevelt?
A. Yes. And within the context of the health concerns that were such a significant part of Roosevelt's public life.
Q. Anything else that they would find in those classroom teaching notes after President Roosevelt died in 1944?
A. There would be some mention of Lyndon -- probably of Lyndon Johnson's heart attack when he was Senate majority leader
and his decision subsequent to that heart attack to quit smoking cigarettes.
And then perhaps some mention that before his death he resumed smoking.
Q. And how is it that that, the subject of his resuming smoking before his death after having previously had a heart attack, how
does that come up in your classroom notes?
A. It would be in the form of a discussion to suggest that toward the end of his life Lyndon Johnson was dispirited, depressed
and deeply saddened by the -- the unsuccessful conclusion of his political life in 1968.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And how does that in terms of what -- what you're covering in the classroom relate to his having begun smoking cigarettes
again?
A. I'm going to ask you to say that again.
Q. In response to my last question you said that it would relate to suggesting that he was dispirited, depressed and deeply
saddened, and I was asking how it was that the subject of his taking up cigarettes shortly before he died --
A. I would view it as an indication that he had little regard for his life beyond that point. He was willing to engage in a reckless act.
Q. And what was that reckless act?
A. Smoking.
MR. HOGAN: Why don't we break for lunch now.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the videotape record. It's 12:35.
(Whereupon, at 12:35 p.m., a lunch recess was taken.)
AFTERNOON SESSION
(1:39 p.m.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the videotape record now at 1:39.
This is the beginning of tape 3, May 9, 1997.
MR. HOGAN: Let me ask counsel whether we have the form that -- that Dr. Burns talked about earlier.
MR. LOCKMAN: Yes. I do have something to say, and that is I don't know how much you two, Mr. Hogan and Mr. Mikhail
know about this.
The form was filed on Wednesday. I don't know if you were told about its contents from any other source. All I'm pointing
out, though, is this.
As the witness testified, he talked to the associate dean. The associate dean told him to submit the form and the associate dean
faxed the form to him and said get it back to us, which he did on Wednesday.
Dr. Burns does not believe there is any conflict of interest here as he stated in his form.
He also does not believe that it is appropriate for him to provide the document to you and for him to be questioned about it
today in this deposition.
So in light of that objection, it's not going to be turned over.
Let me say on behalf of the defendants that we -- let me just speak for Philip Morris, that we reserve all of our rights. This
witness and others were designated on April 1. It is now May 9. There is an anti-tampering order in the case. We hope that
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
the state will not try to hinder his testimony, but we certainly reserve all of our rights on that. We would think that the state's
interests should be in a decision on the merits.
Dr. Burns has some information to provide on the merits of this dispute. That's the end of what I have to say. The net is that
we are not going to produce the form to you today.
MR. MIKHAIL: What is the legal basis of that objection? Is it not relevant or what?
MR. LOCKMAN: First of all the request was just made in the course of the deposition, and the witness who told you he has
not had a chance to talk to his own independent counsel, which he intends to do, has said that this is something that he as a
university professor has submitted to the university. It has not been acted on, or if it has been acted on he's not aware of it.
Nobody has called him or sent him an answer or anything.
The witness has said that he does not think that it is appropriate to turn it over. Frankly it's his form. He doesn't want to turn
it over; and, therefore, it will not be turned over today.
MR. MIKHAIL: Dr. Burns testified that the form was shared with counsel for the defendants in this case. That you all have
seen the form.
MR. LOCKMAN: We have.
MR. MIKHAIL: It is certainly relevant to his testimony. I simply --
MR. LOCKMAN: I don't know about that.
MR. HOGAN: You do have a copy?
MR. LOCKMAN: I do.
MR. MIKHAIL: I would like the record to --
MR. LOCKMAN: I now have a copy in my possession which I didn't earlier when you raised the subject.
MR. HOGAN: One of the law firms at least had a copy before we started today?
MR. LOCKMAN: Yes. And we saw it. We saw it on Wednesday. Nobody is trying to hide anything from you.
MR. MIKHAIL: All I would like is for you to state the legal basis for your objection to producing this document which is
related to Dr. Burns' service to the defendants.
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm not certain that it is relevant to his service.
It is something that the dean asked him to send in and he did. That's the basis -- our objection is that in light of his objection,
we don't even have to reach the issue of whether it is producible and we are not going to overrule his feeling about it today.
You can question him about it today. He doesn't want to turn it over today before he has a chance to talk to his own independent
counsel.
MR. MIKHAIL: Does the defense have any objections other than Dr. Burns' wishes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: Probably not.
MR. HOGAN: So you were simply stating Dr. Burns' objection.
MR. LOCKMAN: I was. I don't know if I speak for all defendants. I'm speaking for Philip Morris at the moment. Philip Morris
does not object to having it turned over, but we are not in a position to require Dr. Burns to turn it over.
MR. HOGAN: Do the rest of the defendants have a position or an objection?
(Pause in the proceedings.)
MR. MIKHAIL: Going once, going twice.
MS. KESSLER: Well, I reiterate that --
MR. HOGAN: The question is only whether you have an objection on behalf of your client or clients. I understand that you
are here for R.J. Reynolds.
MS. KESSLER: That's correct. I'd say we probably at this point have questions about its relevancy, and I might have an objection
based on relevancy at this point.
MR. HOGAN: Do you have an objection, not whether you might.
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm not conceding its relevancy, I want to make that absolutely clear. Sometimes we don't object to things
that we have the right to object to.
MR. HOGAN: The question was only whether you have an objection.
MS. KESSLER: Sitting here right now at this exact point, I'm not sure that we have an objection. No, we do not have an objection.
MR. HOGAN: Anybody else here speak for any other defendants?
MR. SARNER: United States Tobacco Company has no objection. I have not seen the form nor is it in my possession.
MR. HOGAN: By the way, I don't agree with your recitation of what Dr. Burns' earlier testimony was with respect to the
document. The record will reflect what it is that he said earlier about his conversation with the dean.
MR. LOCKMAN: The record will also reflect if you ask him what I said is absolutely the truth.
That the dean called him. That his call was returned from Washington. The dean asked him about his role and he said he is a
possible witness. He has been designated, and the dean said you have to fill out this form. I'm not saying those are the exact
words, but he faxed the form to Washington and told him to get the form back to Florida on Wednesday which was done.
I don't think that he has testified in conflict with that, but --
MR. HOGAN: I tried to ask him earlier to describe the conversation, talk about it and he didn't indicate that the dean had told
him to do anything other than simply asked the question of him.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: Well, he told you that the dean called him at home when he was out of the city.
MR. MIKHAIL: He did say that he wasn't quite sure how it came about that --
MR. LOCKMAN: The record will be what it is.
MR. HOGAN: The record is what it is, and the questions that I asked were the questions that I asked and the answers that he gave.
Let me ask this question.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. The book that you contemplate doing related to the subject of tobacco and the State of Florida, how will your time and effort
-- how will the effort be funded on the front end?
A. It's unrelated -- it will be funded by me out of my personal expense --
Q. You have no arrangement with any --
A. No, no.
MR. LOCKMAN: Let him finish the question.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You have no arrangements to be compensated or have an advance from any cigarette company defendant in this lawsuit or
anyone else related to the funding of your efforts in producing this proposed book; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. The book will include the use of materials that you have obtained copies of or reviewed -- and reviewed at a time when being
compensated by the cigarette company and cigarette industry defendants; is that correct?
A. It is correct.
Q. Have you begun a manuscript for that book?
A. No. I have written two working papers which are research design.
Q. One is a little longer than the other. Are they in the form of an outline or a narrative for a talk or presentation that you were
going to -- were going to or did give?
A. That is correct.
Q. And when was it that you gave the first of those presentations based on that outline or summary?
A. The first of those presentations to the best of my recollection was in June 1995.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
The latter presentation was in April 1996. Excuse me, 1997.
Q. April 1997?
A. Yes.
Q. And it is longer than the first one that you gave?
A. It is.
Q. Or prepared?
A. Yes.
Q. And on that particular document, the second, what additional work in terms of additional substantive opinions had you
developed that were included in the second one in 1997 in addition to those that were stated in the one that you prepared and
presented in 1995?
A. The two -- I'll answer that question as best I can.
The two papers are complementary. The latter paper, the longer paper is based on a more thorough inquiry into -- a more
thorough inquiry into the source materials that I have been examining, especially the materials that relate to the areas of Florida
where tobacco is grown and the culture of those people who live in those areas and produce tobacco.
In addition to that, the paper has a fuller grasp of the rich mixture of groups in the state that are associated in one way or another
with the history of tobacco in Florida.
Q. Those are the main substantive differences in your view of the one done in 1997 compared to the one done in 1995?
A. Yes.
MR. HOGAN: Let me ask Mr. Lockman, do you have a copy of page 13 of the one from 1997 here?
MR. LOCKMAN: That's a good question. I noticed mine didn't have one either. Does someone have it?
MR. LEMLEY: I have a sneaking suspicion if you don't, I don't.
MR. LOCKMAN: Which one are you talking about, the first or the second?
MR. HOGAN: The second. The longer of the two.
MR. LEMLEY: What's the heading at the top of the first page?
MR. HOGAN: Tobacco.
THE WITNESS: In the event that page is missing, and I gather that it is, I will be happy to provide you with that page. I can't
provide it to you today.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. MIKHAIL: I have page 13 here.
THE WITNESS: The omission is totally inadvertent.
MR. LOCKMAN: I just figured that I had a bad copy when I read it last night..
THE WITNESS: It may well be in the process of preparing these materials it was omitted.
MR. LEMLEY: No, I've got it.
MR. HOGAN: He found a copy.
MR. LOCKMAN: And at the next break we can have a copy of it made.
MR. HOGAN: Thank you.
MR. LOCKMAN: So we provided the document with the page included and you can keep that one, Mr. Hogan.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. There is a reference on page 14 of the second one, the 1997 one. It's a new sentence that says, “At this point my colleagues
moved their offices to their homes venturing onto campus only to conduct class and hold office hours.”
When you made that -- and that was after a discussion on page 13 that refers to four of my colleagues in the department of
history --
MR. LOCKMAN: May I see that?
MR. LEMLEY: Here, I've got an extra one.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. -- now confined to their offices should they desire a cigarette became extremely nervous.
Do you recall those lines?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Which colleagues -- I just want to see if I understand what you're talking about because it's --
MR. LOCKMAN: Just to -- I want to make sure that there isn't --
MR. HOGAN: Let me give you 13.
MR. LOCKMAN: No, let me have the whole thing.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. It is kind of a cryptic reference unless one knows more about what you are talking about?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Well, this is not a forum for jocularity, but that was an effort at jocularity.
Q. So does it meaning that you were joking?
A. Yes.
But at least two of my colleagues were heavy cigarette smokers, and so the imposition of the Clean Indoor Air Act imposed
an inconvenience on them. And they had to either -- determine to either not smoke at the office or make other arrangements,
at their university offices.
Q. So although you say that you were joking, is it correct that at least two of those colleagues moved their offices to their homes?
A. That's -- they did, yes.
May I add that most faculty work at both places. Most of the faculty with whom I'm familiar have a working office in their
homes as well as an office at the university.
Q. Because it was in a sense out of context I didn't know exactly where it came from or how it got in there so I thought I
should ask you about it.
A. Right.
Q. When you were asked in this case by the cigarette company defendants to undertake this job, what was it that you understood
you were being asked to do?
A. I was being asked to investigate the history of tobacco in Florida in all of its various ramifications. This is a complex historical
undertaking and it has -- the subject has been dealt with masterfully by some other historians in dealing with other parts of the ,
United States and indeed in other parts of the world, too.
Q. So the history of tobacco in Florida in all of its ramifications?
A. Yes.
Q. Was that question put to you in writing by anyone?
A. No.
Q. It was put to you in a telephone conversation or in person?
A. An in-person conversation.
Q. With a visit by --
A. Steve Kaczsynski.
Q. And who is he?
A. He is an attorney for Jones Day.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. He arrived at your office?
A. No, he came to my home.
Q. Well, do you have an office at your home?
A. Yes.
Q. In McIntosh?
A. Yes.
Q. And so he came to your office in that sense?
A. He came to my home office.
Q. You were preparing to conduct some consultation business; is that fair to say? Or preparing to be asked? Did he just show
up one day or did he call and come by?
A. No, he called.
Q. Did he tell you generally what it was -- why it was he wanted to come by?
A. Yes.
Q. What did he say?
A. He said this was -- this was after the state legislature had passed the statute initiating the suit.
Q. The Medicaid Third Party Liability Act amendments in 1994?
A. Yes.
Q. When was that approximately when he called and came by?
A. March 1995.
Q. I assume that there were some more words exchanged between the two of you besides we would like you to do a history
of tobacco in Florida and all of its ramifications?
A. There were, but the request to me was extremely vague.
Q. Okay, in what way?
A. In the sense that he was suggesting a subject for which he wanted a scholar to undertake an investigation.
Q. Uh-huh.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. And that that was the substance of his instruction to me.
Q. To ask that question?
A. Yes.
Q. Specific question?
A. Yes. With specific attention to the State of Florida's association with tobacco in the state's history.
Q. Meaning the State of Florida as a government?
A. The State of Florida as a government.
Q. It's good then that I asked a further question because it was not just the history of tobacco in Florida and all of its ramifications,
but it included the additional limiting phrase with specific attention to what you interpreted to be the government of Florida;
is that correct?
A. Yes, it is in a sense. However, there is hardly a phase of this process -- if you think about the cultures of tobacco, there is
hardly a phase of this process that doesn't involve some exchange between government and other sectors of society.
Q. What I was getting at was what he asked you to do?
A. I understand that.
Q. Would it be correct that he asked you to research and report on the history of tobacco in Florida in all of its ramifications
with specific attention to the government of Florida?
A. That is not a verbatim remembrance of what we -- of what we discussed, but it is a fair approximation of our exchange. I
don't recall the specific words.
Q. Now, when you first reported the one in 1995 --
MR. LOCKMAN: Incidentally, I think there may be an error in the record which of the documents is first and which is second.
THE WITNESS: I think they are inverted.
MR. LOCKMAN: You may want to have the witness identify them both. I'm just alerting you to that possibility.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. One has a heading on the first page, the State of Florida and Tobacco. The other one has a heading that is just the word
Tobacco. Which came first?
A. To tell you the truth, I would have to see both documents.
MR. HOGAN: Counsel, do you have a copy?
MR. LOCKMAN: This is the one that says Tobacco.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
THE WITNESS: This is the first one.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. The one that has the joking reference to your colleagues and moving their offices is the first one?
A. That's right.
Q. The shorter one is the second one?
A. Yes.
Q. This one done in 1997 that begins the State of Florida and tobacco begins with a paragraph number 1 research design it says.
And then you go on and say, “We have been charged first of all to look at the public record relative to the questions and claims
that the attorney general and governor have made the core of their lawsuit against tobacco companies.”
Is that another way of saying what we just discussed a minute ago was your discussion with Mr. Kaczsynski? Is that the same
charge?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So it was more specific, his inquiry to you, than what we talked about just a few minutes ago?
A. No. That's just a restatement, but it's not -- his charge to me was not more specific than what we have discussed.
Q. This says we have been charged to look at the public record relative to the questions and claims. Is that what you were
asked to do?
A. We were asked to -- I would define public record very broadly.
Q. As?
A. As published sources. Newspapers. Whatever we find in the archival -- I define public record as whatever we find in
the archival holdings that we examine. Public meaning accessible to the public more than officials -- than confining ourself
exclusively to official state publications.
Q. Okay. But with that did you understand that it was not to include a review of the internal documents of cigarette industry
defendants?
A. No, I did not understand that it was not to include that.
Q. Have you been provided with -- as a part of the work that you have done with internal documents of the cigarette. industry
defendants?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Since you did not consider that you were limited by the request to public documents in that sense, what is it that accounts
for the fact that you have not reviewed internal documents of the cigarette industry defendants?
A. I'm researching the history of tobacco in Florida, and the history of tobacco in Florida is very rich. It extends over a long
period of time. It is a formative force in the shaping of the socio and political culture of the state of Florida, and that analysis
and that research topic does not require an examination of internal documents of the cigarette companies.
Q. Why does it not require that?
A. Because it's not part of my research design or my research interest.
Q. Well, in being asked this broad question that they asked you and you said when the question was asked you didn't consider
that it limited your inquiry to exclude internal documents of the companies, how is it that you decided not to review any of those?
A. I decided not -- I didn't make a decision not to review them.
Q. Well, the request did not limit --
A. No.
Q. -- you to that you've said-earlier today?
A. The decision that I made here was to examine the materials that were important to the history of tobacco in Florida, and
there is an incredible abundance of those materials.
Q. And so did you not review or seek to review internal documents of the cigarette industry defendants because you did not
consider them important to the question of the history of tobacco in Florida?
A. I did not consider them important to the research task that I have undertaken.
Q. The research task that you've indicated was to look at the public record relative to the questions and claims that the attorney
general and governor have made the core of their lawsuit against the tobacco companies from this document, and then I asked
you whether you considered that to exclude your reviewing internal cigarette company industry documents. And you said no,
that request did not exclude them.
And so I'm asking when you determined or someone determined to exclude them from your review?
A. The only person who determined whether to exclude any document or not was myself, the researcher. The investigator. I
never made a specific decision. Historians don't work in that fashion.
When you are looking at the public record and you are researching a subject like the history of tobacco in Florida, you have to
choose the documents and the archival materials that are of most importance to that particular subject.
Q. And are you saying that you do not consider the internal documents of the cigarette industry defendants in this case to be
of importance to the inquiry related to the history of tobacco in Florida?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to that on the grounds of it has been asked and answered already.
BY MR. HOGAN:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Go ahead and answer, please.
A. That is correct, I do not.
Q. why do you not consider them to be important if --
A. In the hierarchy of important documents, they are not critical to the public record because the public record is so complete
and so full that in an inquiry of this kind one would look first at these documents that are available and that are specifically
dealing with the various institutional and public policy -- public decision -- public policy decisions that effect the tobacco
culture of Florida.
Q. So then let's be clear on this. By internal documents I mean documents, depending upon the time frame, either from the
cigarette industry defendants' own typewriters, including a time when there would be carbon paper and onion skin copies, you
are probably familiar with that and reviewed those kinds of things when you reviewed archive materials related to your book
on Frank Porter Graham? Maybe some carbon copies, onion skin paper copies of correspondence?
A. I'm very familiar with those forms of documentary evidence, yes.
Q. And as time went and moved from manual typewriters and that to different forms of word processors and copying machines,
in reviewing that kind of internal document as well, right up to when they have computers and DDT terminals and the rest.
That's what I mean by internal documents, right on up to desktop publishing.
You considered that not any of that would be important to you in addressing the question of the history of tobacco in Florida;
is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And in terms of what you specifically did not review, you did not review, did you, any internal documents from all of the
cigarette industry defendants in this case?
A. No.
Q. And you've reviewed the third complaint, third amended complaint in this case?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you been told by the defendants who the cigarette industry defendants are in the lawsuit?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any idea besides -- can you name the cigarette industry defendants in this lawsuit?
A. I can name some of them.
Q. Which ones can you name?
A. R.J. Reynolds. Philip Morris. Lorillard. American Tobacco. British American Tobacco.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. U.S. Tobacco?
A. U.S. Tobacco.
Q. Are there others? The Tobacco Institute, are you aware --
A. I'm aware that the list of defendants is very long.
Q. And the Committee for Tobacco Research, Council for Tobacco Research, CTR?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you reviewed any internal documents from any of those cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. Or from the consultant by the name of Hill & Knowlton?
A. No.
Q. And have you looked at all -- did you look only at public archive materials in the State of Florida? Within the physical
boundaries of the state of Florida?
A. I spent some time in the Library of Congress but not very much time. Most of my work has been done in the state of Florida,
almost all of it.
Q. Did you review any of the archived materials related to Hill & Knowlton?
A. No.
Q. Did you review any of the archived materials at the University of California on Brown & Williamson?
A. No.
Q. Did you review the journal of the American Medical Association reporting on and reviewing the Brown & Williamson
documents in the University of California library?
A. No.
Q. Was there any particular reason why you did not review public internal documents of cigarette industry defendants, ones
that had managed to become part of the public within the last few years?
MR. LOCKMAN: We object to the characterization of any documents which may have been pilfered as public documents. And
this witness hasn't seen them and I don't want to get into a prolonged debate about them.
We will reserve all of our rights as has been asserted in previous pleadings, and I hope that we can pass off of this fairly quickly
since he hasn't seen any of them.
MR. HOGAN: It won't take us long if you'll just answer the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
THE WITNESS: I could have, and I hate to ask you to do that, but can you repeat that question.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Did you review any of the Brown & Williamson documents that are part of the public documents in the University of
California library?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any idea what you would have learned from reviewing the internal documents of the cigarette industry
defendants?
A. No.
Q. And -- thank you for the answer, but let me --
MR. LOCKMAN: It was an incomplete question for the record.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Let me complete it.
-- as it relates to the question of the history of tobacco in Florida?
MR. LOCKMAN: Objection to the form of the question. Go ahead.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Do you know, have any means to know what Florida public policy makers would have learned if they had access to internal
documents of the cigarette industry defendants with regard to the hazards of tobacco smoking, .their addictiveness, disease
causing, et cetera?
A. I do not know what they would have learned.
Q. Do you know what Florida regulators would have learned if they had access and had reviewed internal documents of the
cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what Florida legislators would have learned if they had had access to over the years cigarette industry internal
documents?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what the cigarette industry lobbyists themselves would have learned if they had access to cigarette industry
internal documents on the subject of cigarettes, disease, addictiveness?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. No.
Q. Do you know what smokers would have learned if they had had access to internal company documents about the hazards
of cigarette smoking addictiveness?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what non-smokers would have learned with regard to hazards from cigarette smoking if they had had access
to internal company documents?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what teenagers would have learned if they had had access to internal company documents with regard to the
subject of hazards to health from cigarette smoking or addictiveness?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any means to find out what they would have learned?
A. Do I have any means?
Q. Do you have any means to find out what they would have learned if they had had access, this list of entities .and people that
I just read off to you, if they had had access to cigarette company internal documents?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to the question as I think unintelligible.
THE WITNESS: May I ask you what you mean by means?
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Do you have any way to know? Do you have any way to know?
MR. LOCKMAN: Object to the form of that question.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. What do you think the term “means” is?
A. Access.
Q. That's one thing.
Do you have any means to find out what it is that is there in the internal documents of the cigarette company defendants that
could have been learned by that list of entities and people that I just gave you?
A. To the degree that they are publicly known I could learn them.
Q. Apart from that you have no means to know?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. No.
Q. Do you know what cigarette company internal documents would tell you about the legislative and executive branch lobbying
of the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what they would tell you as a historian about the political power of the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. The political strategies of the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. Their successes with regard to legislation and regulation?
A. No.
Q. The lessons that they learned over time in terms of how to better accomplish their objectives?
A. No.
Q. How about their media campaigns?
A. No.
Q. How about their work with allies or coalitions to address the subject of regulation of the use of cigarettes or taxation or
anything along those lines?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what those internal documents would tell you about their work with respect to developing and engendering
grass roots type groups and activities?
A. No. I can't tell you what I would learn from documents I haven't seen.
Q. With respect to any disinformation campaign that the cigarette industry defendants may have conducted, the same question?
A. No.
Q. Any misinformation that they distributed?
MR. LOCKMAN: Do you have a question in mind?
MR. HOGAN: That's the question.
MR. LOCKMAN: Well, you are incorporating the prior question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. HOGAN: Yes, I am because I like saving time.
THE WITNESS: No.
MR. LOCKMAN: That's good, we like saving time as long as the witness is clear on the question put to him.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Misrepresentations by the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No, but I would add that these characterizations of materials are characterizations that I can neither agree to nor disagree to
because I have not seen the documents. These are your characterizations, not mine.
Q. I'm simply asking the question?
A. Right.
Q. And my question is you have no way to know what they would tell you about those -- as a historian about those subjects
that we just covered; is that correct?
A. Because I have not seen the documents, I have no way to know.
Q. And you have no way of knowing what they would tell legislatures, public regulators, public policy makers, consumers in
the state of Florida; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And that's true for the 1940s?
A. Yes.
Q. The 1950s?
A. Yes.
Q. The 1960s?
A. Yes.
Q. The 1970s?
A. Yes.
Q. The 1980s?
A. Yes.
Q. And the 1990s?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. Both in terms of what it would tell you as a historian and what it would tell over those different time frames public policy
makers, legislatures, health care officials; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Do I understand from reading the two reports that we discussed earlier, the 1997 report or speech outline and the 1995 one
and your disclosure, am I to take it that you say that the State of Florida knew at some point that cigarettes cause lung cancer?
A. Yes.
Q. The government of the State of Florida?
A. Yes.
Q. When do you say that the State of Florida knew that cigarettes -- smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer?
A. The state board of health made the connection in the early 1960s.
Q. Did not know it in the 1950s then?
A. There are publications which suggest a causal link in the 1950s, but do not claim it definitively.
Q. When do you say, if you do, that the State of Florida knew that cigarettes cause heart disease, cardiovascular disease?
A. In the early 1960s.
Q. When do you say that the State of Florida knew that emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking?
A. In the early 1960s.
Q. When do you say that the State of Florida knew that smoking cigarettes causes addiction?
A. What I say is that these claims can be found in the public record as early as the early sixties. I don't say this --
Q. I'm asking when is it that you say that the State of Florida knew?
A. Early 1960s.
Q. And when is it that you say that the State of Florida knew that cigarettes contain carcinogens?
A. The use of the term “carcinogen” is -- if you mean in specific reference to that specific word rather than the claim that the
-- that cigarettes are causes, then the word “carcinogen” would be associated with either the late fifties or early sixties.
But the word “poison” is associated with cigarette smoking much, much earlier.
Q. When is it that you say that the State of Florida knew that cigarettes are addictive? Contain an addictive drug?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: We are all agreeing that these are just characterizations that you're making, you are not assuming facts?
These are questions, as you said a few moments ago?
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. I'm asking when is it that you say that the State of Florida knew, if you do, and I've reviewed your witness disclosure, that
the State of Florida knew that cigarettes contain an addictive drug?
A. One finds the generous use of the word “addictive” and “addicting” as early as -- as early as the first decade of the 20th
Century.
Q. Let's go back to an earlier question that you answered, and that is you said there are reports of it, and that had to do I think
with lung cancer when I was asking that question, it might have been one of the other diseases, and you said there are reports
of it in the 1960s?
A. '50s. I may not be correct, but I thought I said the 1950s.
Q. Did you meaning that for lung cancer?
A. Yes. And the public record is full of public discussion about the risks of cigarette smoking earlier than that, and there are
people in the state, physicians and others who are active and making the link between this activity and the medical consequences
of it earlier than that.
Q. My question to you earlier in that list of questions is when is it that you stay that the State of Florida knew?
A. And my answer is the early 1960s.
Q. When is it -- and in that sense are you reporting what is reflected in documents or in other words if I were to look -- look at
the same document as you looked at, would I be able to read the same things as you did and draw the same conclusion?
A. It's my view that you would.
Q. And is that the case for the whole range of the public documents that you reviewed?
A. Yes.
Q. So that I, not a historian, could review those documents and be able to draw my own conclusions?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know when it is that the Surgeon General of the United States drew the firm link to cardiovascular disease from
cigarette smoking?
A. No, I do not.
Q. If it was 1983, do you take it that your view is that the State of Florida knew that before the surgeon general?
A. It would be my view that the State of Florida knew that before 1983.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. From reviewing the state -- the documents that you have said are public record documents, not having reviewed any of the
internal company documents, do you yourself accept the truth that cigarettes cause lung cancer?
A. Yes.
Q. That they cause heart disease and cardiovascular diseases?
A. That they are a major contributing --
Q. Cause?
A. Cause of these diseases, yes.
Q. Emphysema?
A. Yes.
Q. Addiction?
A. Addiction is a word that needs to be used carefully because of the millions of people in our country who have quit cigarettes.
Furthermore, the word “addiction” has changed in meaning over time.
When it was used in the early 20th century, and of course it is used without being defined, but in the context it is used it often
means different things.
Q. My question to you -- earlier my question to you was when was it that you say that the State of Florida knew that it was
addictive, cigarette smoking?
A. The State of Florida identifies cigarettes as addictive as early as 1907, 1906.
Q. Is that when you say that the State of Florida knew?
A. That's when the State Board of Health identified cigarettes as addictive.
Q. From reviewing that, do you accept that as true as of that time if you had been reviewing the historical record at that point?
A. Yes.
Q. Is it your view that a cigarette company having access to the public record documents that you have reviewed in this case in
the -- up through and including the 1960s, would correctly conclude that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to that as beyond his expertise, as all of these questions where you have asked his personal opinion
are. The last five or six questions have all been “do you yourself,” which is his personal opinion which he is really not here
to give you, but he has given it to you.
MR. HOGAN: You are not here to instruct him, either.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm not instructing the witness. I'm objecting to your questions that do not call for expert opinion.
MR. HOGAN: There were several questions that went by, no objection, and you are not here to instruct the witness. You can
refresh your -- you can refresh yourself with the rules that the Supreme Court has put into place having to do with speaking
objections when you are trying to feed information to a witness.
MR. LOCKMAN: I'm not trying to feed information.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Now, please answer my question.
A. Would you repeat it, please.
MR. HOGAN: Read it back.
(The record was read as requested.)
MR. LOCKMAN: You have my objection and I will have an objection to all of these types of questions if you are going to
continue down this line. I'm not instructing him, but I want to preserve our position.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Please answer.
A. I'm not certain.
Q. Would it --
A. I'm uncertain as to the answer.
Q. Would it be -- would it be your view that it would be reasonable to expect that a cigarette company reviewing the same
documents that you tell us that you have reviewed would conclude by the 1960s as you described it that cigarette smoking
causes lung cancer?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Historians have problems with these kinds of speculate questions.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. My question to you is you've read that public record you've said; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you have said what your view is as to what the State of Florida knew?
A. Based on what it has said in the record.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Based on what you have reviewed. And so my question is a cigarette company reviewing the same documents, is it your
view that it would be reasonable to expect that they would conclude that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer as of that time?
A. I don't know the answer to that question. It's a speculative --
MR. LOCKMAN: Give me a chance to object, please, because I have to take these one at a time if he's going to continue
down this line.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Do you think that access to internal company documents would help you answer that question?
MR. LOCKMAN: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't know.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. The same kind of question for each of the earlier diseases that I discussed with you, cardiovascular disease, emphysema,
drug addiction through nicotine, based on what you have reviewed, do you conclude that it would be reasonable for cigarette
companies, the cigarette company defendants in this case, to conclude that cigarettes caused those diseases and addiction?
MR. LOCKMAN: I have the same objection to each and every one of those questions.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You don't know, do you?
A. No.
Q. You don't have any idea, do you?
A. No. I don't have an answer to -- I can't answer as a historian to a speculative question as to what someone else would conclude.
That is not a question that a historian can answer.
Q. My question was whether the internal documents of the company would help you in determining whether they would be
in a position then --
A. Having --
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Having not seen the documents, I can't answer the question,
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. And you have no way to find out, do you?
A. Other than to look at documents that are in the public record because those documents are not part of my research focus.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. By your choice?
A. By my choice.
Q. Thank you.
A. And by the research assignment and its -- and its focus as I have defined it.
Q. As I said, by your choice?
A. (Witness nods.)
MR. LOCKMAN: The witness is nodding. You have to say something so the reported can write it down.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You meant “yes” when you shook your head up and down just then?
A. I just shook it. I didn't mean anything.
Q. It was by your choice that it was limited in that fashion?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object. I think the question is getting too truncated now to have a clear record, and so I object.
MR. HOGAN: I will just stick with the videotape record of whether he shook his head up and down or to the side.
MS. KESSLER: I was just going to ask when you get to a good spot to break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are going off the videotape record at 2:39.
(A brief recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the videotape record now at 2:45.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Did any lawyer or other representative of any of the cigarette industry defendants offer to show you any of the internal
documents of any of the cigarette industry defendants?
A. No.
Q. In what's called the expert disclosure statement which appears for your name Augustus M. Burns, III, did you review that
document or did you write that document? How did it come into existence?
A. I met with a group of attorneys in Orlando. There was a draft of the document in a computer -- in a laptop, and we sat there
and read the document and amended it and edited it and reviewed it for about an hour and a half.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Was it you or was it the cigarette industry defendant lawyers who put the quote marks around the words “addictive” and
“habituating”?
MR. LOCKMAN: I don't know if you have it in hand.
MR. HOGAN: Do you have a copy of it?
MR. LOCKMAN: I have one, but it has my notations on it.
MR. HOGAN: Mine has my notations on it, too.
MR. LOCKMAN: Who has a clean one?
(Pause in the proceedings.)
MR. LEMLEY: No.
MR. LOCKMAN: We don't have a clean copy.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Please answer the question.
A. It was a consensual decision to enclose those words in quotation marks because -- to suggest that those words are words that
do not have commonly accepted definitions across the time in which this study has been conducted.
As I said earlier today, the meaning changes over time.
Q. go that when it talks about Dr. Burns' having an opinion about Florida's knowledge of health risks and about the, quote,
“addictive” or “habituating” nature of tobacco, and then it says “as those terms have been used for decades,” you're saying that
because the term “addictive,” let's just talk about it for a moment, may have meant different things at different points in time,
that it was concluded that you would put it in quotation marks?
A. Correct.
Q. Was it in the draft in the computer when you first looked at it?
A. In quotation marks?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I don't remember.
Q. Was it the subject of discussion between you and the cigarette company industry defendant lawyers?
A. I don't have a specific remembrance of the nature of the discussion.
Q. You indicated that it was by agreement?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. My best memory is that I was the one who suggested those quotation marks be included.
Q. And it covers -- your review of documents covers a number of years back into the earlier part of the 20th century and carries
on up through the decades of the forties, fifties, sixties, seventies, eighties, nineties.
Is there a point in time when you are of the view from your review that the quotation marks should be removed around the
term “addictive”?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to the question as calling for an opinion beyond his expertise. I don't want to elaborate on that
because I don't want to be accused of making a speaking objection.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Go ahead.
A. I have seen the term used in contemporary historical works referring -- in quotation marks to refer to this potential in decades
as early as the 1850s and as late as the 1990s.
The concern with the word is that it is so heavily utilized that there is no clear meaning to what the word means. And so the
purpose of quotation marks is to suggest that the term has been used to the point where in the public discussion of the meaning
of the term it is very hard to know in a precise sense what is meant.
Now, if the word is used in a clinical context, it has a different meaning. If the word is used in the newspaper, it has a different
meaning depending on the time.
Q. From the standpoint of the clinical in terms of your review of the materials that you have had access to, is there a point in
time when the quotation marks are no longer necessary to describe the word “addictive” as related to cigarettes?
MR. LOCKMAN: My same objection.
THE WITNESS: That is beyond the range of my expertise because the word “clinical” to me suggests one should have an
understanding -- a medical or scientific knowledge that I don't have as an expert. That's beyond my expertise.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Let me follow up on that a little bit.
You've reviewed a number of documents that are in the public record but you don't have a medical background to be able to
determine the clinical or medical accuracy of the content of those documents, is that what you're saying?
A. That's a partially true statement. I don't have the expertise to comment as either a clinician or as a scientists
Q. Am I to understand what you're doing is reporting to us simply in essence what you read?
A. I'm reporting the public discussion that occurs.
Q. In other words it's there and you read it and you're saying that somebody else could read it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. The process of historically analyzing information and presenting it is more complicated and more involved than that. I can
report -- I can report and discuss the meaning of terms and the meaning of a debate without having a clinical expertise, and
to say this is what the historical record reveals.
Q. And in order to be able to draw conclusions?
MR. LOCKMAN: I object to that.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Is that what you've done in this case?
I'm looking at a summary that says that you are going to testify about, quote, “Florida's knowledge of the health risks.” Is that
what you intend to do?
A. As the public record reveals it, yes.
Q. The disclosure says you may be asked to comment upon the opinions expressed by other witnesses. Have you reviewed
opinions expressed by other witnesses?
A. Not at this point.
Q. Well, I'm here on -- what day did we agree this is?
MR. LOCKMAN: May 9.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. -- on May 9?
A. May I correct the record?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. I have read two depositions.
Q. Whose were they and where were they from?
A. Sansing and Skates.
Q. Those are witnesses in --
A. Mississippi.
Q. -- the case by the Attorney General of Mississippi against cigarette company defendants?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. When your disclosure statement for you that you approved that was in that computer says, “In addition, Dr. Burns may be
asked to comment upon opinions expressed by other witnesses as well as the evidence they rely upon to the extent that these
opinions relate to his areas of expertise,” what did you have in mind when you approved the inclusion of that disclosure?
A. What I had in mind is the work that remains to be done in this process which could include those activities.
Q. You presently have no opinions and haven't reviewed the opinions of others in this case? Sansing and Skates are not witnesses
in this case by the State of Florida.
A. I have not had opinions from other witnesses. I have not discussed this with other witnesses.
Q. So to the extent that that sentence is in here, I have no means to know what it is or to even ask you about what it is that you
might contemplate saying about the opinions of other witnesses?
A. At this point, the answer is no.
Q. Or about the evidence that they may rely on?
A. Correct.
Q. And do you know whether this disclosure statement that you approved relates to defense witnesses or -- for the cigarette
industry defendants or for witnesses for the State of Florida plaintiffs?
A. I don't follow you.
Q. Well, this statement says that --
A. I don't follow your question, sir.
Q. I understand, and that's why I want to clarify it for you. It says that you may comment upon the opinions expressed by other
witnesses, and when this sentence was approved for inclusion in the disclosure statement, did you have in mind witnesses for
the cigarette industry defendants?
MR. LOCKMAN: That's very tough for him to answer the question without the document in front of him. He can't see the
context of it. I don't want to give him my copy.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Quote -- and this is your disclosure statement, sir. Quote, “In addition, Dr. Burns may be asked to comment upon the opinions
expressed by other witnesses as well as the evidence they rely upon to the extent that these opinions relate to his areas of
expertise.”
Now, what other witnesses did you have in mind when you approved that disclosure statement?
A. I'm not sure.
Q. Nobody you can think of at this point?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Don't know whether they were plaintiff or defense witnesses?
A. No.
Q. Let me show you a marked up copy of the expert disclosure statement and that is the title of it next to your name?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Down in the last paragraph on the first page it says “Dr. Burns is expected to rely upon.” Do you see then a list of nine
categories?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that the extent of what you expect to rely upon?
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you. You do not expect to rely upon internal company cigarette industry defendant documents?
A. No.
Q. You do not expect to see them or review them --
A. No.
Q. -- before the time of the trial in this case?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any interest in seeing them to determine what they would add in the -- to your fund of knowledge between
now and May and the trial which is to occur in August?
A. Insofar as they do not reflect the record of debate and discussion and the public policy and decisions made in Florida, they
are tangential to my research designs.
Q. Suppose it turns out that they do relate to the debate in the State of Florida and you testify in August and you haven't reviewed
them, would there be a deficiency then in what you've reviewed in regard to the public debate in Florida on the issue of cigarettes
and disease and addictiveness?
A. My task is to examine the public record as I have examined the documents that have shaped the debate in Florida.
Q. And you are excluding the idea that internal documents from the cigarette industry defendants would have or could have
played any role in shaping the public debate about cigarette caused diseases or addictiveness; is that correct?
A. There is no way to know what role those documents could have played because they were not known at the time. There is
no way to know how new information is going to affect decisions if the information was unavailable at the time.
That is a speculation that historians are very reluctant -- in fact, a cautious historian would be unwilling to make.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. I want to have a clear understanding. You wrote a book about Frank Porter Graham in the 1950 Senate election, did you not?
A. I did.
Q. Are you of the view that the disclosure at that time of the internal documents from the series of people that you listed for
me earlier today, that if they had been disclosed and had become a part of the debate at that time, that they would have had
no effect on the election?
A. No. The effect that they would have had is what I cannot predict. I cannot tell u you what effect they would have had. I cannot
tell you what people -- what are the consequences of information that is not known or courses of action that are not taken.
Q. Would you think it would be reasonable to conclude that that mass of documentation that you reviewed in preparing your
1990 book on Frank Porter Graham in the 1950 Senate race in North Carolina would have been affected in some way, potentially
an important way, by the disclosure of the kind of information that you reviewed in developing that book in 1990?
A. No. It would be reasonable not to conclude anything about documents that were not known at the time that we now know exist
to comment intelligently on the effect that they would have had on the events that transpired at the time had they been known.
Q. You're over reading my question. You're over reading my question.
My question is whether you believe that they would have had any effect, not whether you can predict what they would -- what
effect they would have had on that election cycle?
A. I don't know.
Q. You don't know?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you have any information, basis for knowledge as to whether what the cigarette industry knew in the 1950s about whether
cigarettes cause lung cancer was more than what the State of Florida knew?
A. No.
Q. You don't know?
A. I don't know.
Q. You have no means to know?
A. No.
Q. Is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. The same for heart disease, cardiovascular disease, do you have any means to know?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
94State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. No.
Q. You don't know whether the cigarette companies knew more than what you say the state knew?
A. No.
Q. Emphysema?
A. Is that a question?
Q. The same question as to emphysema. I'm trying to shorten things if we can because I understand that there are airplanes
and the like. Emphysema?
A. Irrespective of the time, I ask you to repeat the full question.
Q. Yes.
You do not know, have no means to know whether the cigarette industry defendants knew more than what you say that the
State of Florida knew about cigarettes causing heart disease, cardiovascular disease in the 1950s?
A. No.
Q. You don't have any means to know, emphysema?
A. (Witness shakes head.)
Q. Any means to know?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know? I'm -- the specific question.
A. No.
Q. How about nicotine being addictive, any means to know whether the cigarette companies knew more in the 1950s than you
say the State of Florida knew?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know, right?
A. No.
Q. Correct?
A. Correct..
Q. The same series of questions for the 1960s. Is the answer any different? You have no means to know and you don't know
whether they knew more than the State of Florida is said to have known by you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
95State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. No.
Q. Correct?
A. Correct.
Q. The 1970s?
A. The research that I've done engages what the public arena was revealing about these matters.
Q. So you don't have any means to know whether the cigarette companies knew more than what you say that the State of
Florida knew?
A. No.
Q. That's correct, isn't it?
A. That's right.
Q. Do you say that the State of Florida was successful in efforts to prevent lung cancer from cigarette smoking?
MR. LOCKMAN: Object to the question as beyond his expertise.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. I'm asking do you say as part of your opinions that the State of Florida successfully made efforts to prevent lung cancer
from cigarette smoking?
A. No. I describe the process that develops as the state continues to concern itself with the increasing incidence of lung cancer
and to alert its citizens of the possible risks attendant to cigarette smoking.
Q. From your review of the documents are you able to say whether it is your view that the State of Florida was successful in
those prevention efforts?
A. No. I object to the word “successful” because it seems to me that that's a -- that's an argument -- that is a term that we would
need to define before we understood what successful means.
Q. You were of the view that the State of Florida undertook prevention efforts with regard to lung cancer from cigarette smoking;
that is your view?
A. Yes. And to inform its citizens of a the potential risks.
Q. And you are of that view, and from the review of the materials that you had and chose to review, did you make any conclusions
as to whether the State of Florida was successful in any degree in accomplishing that?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
96State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
THE WITNESS: Again, we would need to define the meaning of the word “success.” If we mean by success where --, we
would have to define the term.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Well, would success be getting people, helping to get people to stop smoking?
A. It could mean that. But again, the word success is not -- that's not -- that's not an adequate frame that historians would
employ here.
Q. So you haven't undertaken to determine at all whether the State of Florida was successful in any efforts it may have made
in attempting to prevent cigarette-related diseases?
A. What I would say would be instead is that in the process of -- in the process of informing its citizens of the risks, we can
disclose here, we can trace here a continuing concerted effort. But whether or not the effort is successful is really a conclusion
that is without -- without very clear limits as to what we mean by that term.
Q. Did you draw conclusions as to whether it was effective?
A. Again, we have the same problem with that word as we have with success.
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection to this question.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Sir?
A. That's okay.
Q. Do you have another word for me besides successful or effective that you are willing to answer?
A. No. What I would say is what we would look at rather that trying to measure whether these programs were effective or
successful in terms of statistical responses which don't exist as far as I can tell, although there are -- there are some indications,
there are some indications that as these -- as the attention of these concerns became widely debated, that a lot of people began
to reconsider the wisdom of their cigarette habit.
And we have numbers on the degree to which the popularity of smoking and the incidence of smoking in Florida declined.
Now, again the term “success” is a term that we would have to define in order to be able to answer that question -- or effective
in order to answer that question conclusively.
Q. How do you account for the fact that you say that the State of Florida knew in the 1960s that cigarettes cause lung cancer
and the cigarette industry defendants deny that?
MR. LOCKMAN: Objection to form of the question. It assumes facts not in evidence.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Have you read the answers of the defendants?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
97State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. No. I'm not following this question.
Q. How do you account for the fact that you draw the conclusion that the State of Florida knew in the 1960s that cigarettes
cause lung cancer and yet the cigarette company defendants deny that it causes lung cancer?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Go ahead.
A. I account for the fact that the state reached that conclusion because it states it. It states that conclusion repeatedly.
Q. How do you account for the fact that cigarette companies deny it?
MR. LOCKMAN: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I cannot account for that.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You cannot account for that, can you?
A. No.
Q. Does it surprise you that they deny it?
MR. LOCKMAN: Okay. Same objection as I stated a moment ago.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Does it surprise you?
A. As a person?
Q. I'm asking you as a person.
MR. LOCKMAN: I state the same objections.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Does it surprise you that cigarette companies now, 1997 to now, deny that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
A. As a personal opinion?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objection.
BY MR. HOGAN:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
98State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Yes, sir.
A. It's surprising.
Q. Does it surprise you that they deny here in 1997 that it's addictive?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objections.
THE WITNESS: Again I'm not -- this is beyond my range of expertise. If you want my personal opinion on this matter --
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. My question is whether it surprises you that they today deny it, 1997?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objections.
THE WITNESS: I don't know the answer. I guess it does surprise me.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You've indicated that the State of Florida -- from your review the State of Florida has made efforts to reduce, to attempt to
reduce cigarette smoking among its population. From reviewing the documents you've drawn that conclusion, have you?
A. I have.
Q. How do you account for the fact that people continue to smoke cigarettes, from your review of whatever materials you've
reviewed?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same set of objections.
THE WITNESS: This is beyond my range of expertise. I cannot tell you why people do what they do.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You cannot account for it?
A. No, I cannot. A historian cannot do that.
Q. Do you factor in in any way, shape or form the activities of the cigarette companies that produce and manufacture --
manufacture and produce and sell the cigarettes which are smoked?
MR. LOCKMAN: Same objections.
THE WITNESS: No, I can't do that either.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. You don't factor that in at all; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
99State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. That's correct. I think in...
Q. Who else has worked with you on this project for the cigarette industry defendants?
A. I've had a series of helpers, part-time helpers, people who do photocopying for me, people who have gone with me to do
research.
Q. People that you've engaged and then you bill their time to the cigarette industry defendants?
A. Yes.
Q. How many people over time, people that have rotated in and out of the project, so to speak?
A. Six or eight.
Q. And are all of their names included on the billing materials that you've provided to the cigarette industry defendants?
A. I'm not sure. I think so.
Q. Have you had any full professors work with you in this project?
A. No.
Q. Any associate professors work with you on this project?
A. No.
Q. Any assistant professors?
A. No.
Q. Graduate students?
A. Yes.
Q. How many?
A. Three.
Q. What are their names?
A. Andrew Frank.
Q. Andrew Frank?
A. Yes. Lisa Frank.
Q. Lisa Frank. Are they both in the history department?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
100State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Yes.
Q. And who else?
A. I think they are the only graduate students.
Q. Those two?
A. Yes.
Q. Are they still working on the project with you?
A. Yes.
Q. Undergraduates?
A. No.
Q. None?
A. None.
Q. So anybody that has worked with you on this project other than somebody that might have done copying for you were
graduate students?
A. Yes.
Q. Two people?
A. Yes.
Q. No others?
A. No.
Q. And are they still in the program there at the University of Florida?
A. Yes.
Q. Andrew Frank and Lisa Frank. Have they provided you with any memoranda --
A. No.
Q. -- of their reports?
Has everything that they have reported to you orally, verbally?
A. Yes, they -- that's correct. There's nothing written.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
101State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. They haven't typed anything?
A. No.
Q. There's nothing in any computers of memoranda that they have done?
A. No.
Q. Anything of that sort that has been produced has been produced by you through any secretarial assistance?
A. I haven't had any secretarial assistance produce any written stuff. I put it all in the computer myself.
Q. You type it in?
A. Yes.
Q. We received a bunch of boxes this past -- while I was up here they were arriving down there last Friday I suppose is when
that was occurring.
Did you yourself see those boxes before they were shipped to me and the content of those boxes?
A. I have seen those boxes. I have not been through them all because the mass of material -- some of -- the mass of material
is more than I have been able to go through at this point.
Q. Then do you want to ask me some questions?
Which boxes have you not seen? Which ones? Name them. They were labeled 1 through 21.
MR. LOCKMAN: You may have a misunderstanding and maybe we can clarify.
MS. KESSLER: The boxes that you received should be 21 boxes which were produced from my office which were all sent --
it was all the boxes that Gus sent, and I just sent them on to you.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think you are discussing the 21 boxes that you received last Friday with a cover letter from me
which would be the materials that you sent me.
THE WITNESS: I had no way to photocopy this volume of material.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. I'm trying to get an understanding whether I've seen what you've seen by way of these boxes?
A. You have everything.
Q. Whatever it is that you've seen -- I have everything, what does that mean?
A. Everything that I have generated, everything that I've seen.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
102State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. So whatever it is, it's in those boxes?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is there a -- counsel, is there a duplicate set of those boxes that you have retained?
MS. KESSLER: Yes.
MR. HOGAN: Is it with counsel or is it with the witness?
MS. KESSLER: He has his originals back.
MR. HOGAN: He has a set.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. What part of those boxes have you not seen?
MR. LOCKMAN: You are talking about the 21 boxes that were sent --
MR. HOGAN: Yes. The ones that he says are all that he has seen.
MR. MIKHAIL: He said there was a volume of material in those 21 boxes that he hasn't seen yet.
THE WITNESS: There are about ten boxes that I have not yet been through.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. Do you know which of the ten? Do you have any means or record here to tell me which of the ten you haven't seen?
A. No, I do not.
Q. Do you have any idea why they were sent to us if you haven't seen them and I'm here to take your deposition about what
it is that you have seen?
A. May I defer to counsel.
Q. I'm asking you here in this deposition?
A. Would you repeat it, please.
Q. Do you have any idea why those boxes -- why I was sent ten boxes of materials that you have not seen when I'm here taking
your deposition to try to find out what your opinions are and what they are based on?
A. They are discovery materials that you provided to us.
Q. What I'm trying to find out is I don't know which ten -- out of 21, you're telling me that there are ten that you haven't
reviewed. I don't know which ten.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
103State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. I'm sorry to tell you I don't know either.
MR. LOCKMAN: May I suggest something because I'm sure that you want a clear record. Do you mind if we talk for five
minutes and then we will make an explanation why you were given 21 boxes. I think I know the answer.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are going off the videotape record now at 3:26.
(A brief recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the videotape record at 3:30.
THE WITNESS: Permit me to apologize for the confusion.
I have seen all of the boxes that were sent to Ms. Kessler and sent to you. There are two or four remaining boxes. They are
boxes of newspapers in my home that I have not examined and I have not relied on them for this deposition.
And when we look at them we will send them to you, send your office copies of those boxes. I got confused and I apologize
for the confusion.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. So you believe now that the contents of the 21 boxes that were sent to my office are materials that you have reviewed?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And if there are any developments or changes in your opinion because you review these other materials or because you
expect to find some witnesses whose opinions you want to comment on or evidence that they relied on, I guess we will have
to take that up with the judge?
MR. LOCKMAN: As I think I've said in prior depositions, if there is some understanding between both sides because both
sides potentially have the issue and --
MR. HOGAN: When I say the judge, it will be however the judge addresses that point.
MR. LOCKMAN: Or the parties work out an agreement.
MR. HOGAN: Will we be notified? We now know that he -- for awhile he thought there was a larger amount of documents
that he had not reviewed. Now it is a smaller two to four boxes that he apparently intends to review.
At least with respect to those when he was offered up here for deposition, if there is any change based on his reviewing them,
I take it that we will be supplied with an updated disclosure statement at least as to those?
MR. LOCKMAN: Assuming that is what both sides are doing on a reciprocal basis, I --
MR. HOGAN: I'm just reacting to the fact that they do exist. It's a little different than something that might be out there in the
world that he didn't have there at home.
But we will work it out, I suppose.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
104State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
MR. LOCKMAN: We'll work it out.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. I've been supplied with a set of papers that are billings for expenses, airline, copying costs, a variety of things, including
hours that you and others had. As far as you know apart from this week when you've been up here working with counsel for
the cigarette industry defendants in this case, have I been supplied with an up-to-date list of all the hours that you have billed
for in billing the industry and the expenses that you have billed for over this period of time since -- when did you begin? When
did Mr. Kaczsynski arrive at your door?
A. March 1995.
Q. What does it add up to, do you know, in terms of compensation to you over this period of time?
A. $75,000, $80,000.
Q. What is your annual salary there at the university?
A. $52,000 a year.
Q. In the course of this period of time since you've been on this project, how many times have you met with lawyers for the
cigarette industry defendants?
A. We have met on a number of occasions. I don't know the specific number.
Q. Can you count it on both hands?
A. Ten times I would say. That's about right.
Q. Some of those meetings have been larger meetings where you made sort of a lecture presentation using materials such as
we discussed earlier?
A. One of those meetings was not a large meeting. It included the presence of about six, seven attorneys.
There was one session where 20 or 30 people were present.
Q. And did it take place in Florida?
A. No.
Q. Where did it take place?
A. In New York.
Q. At what location or what law offices?
A. At the law offices of Chadbourne & Parke.
Q. Were you the only one there to make a presentation that day?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
105State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. I'm not certain. I think there were others present.
Q. Other professionals?
A. Yes.
Q. Other expert-type witnesses?
A. I was -
Q. Were you in the room --
A. I was not in the room with anyone else.
Q. You made a presentation, this is what I found, this is what --
A. This is what I'm doing.
Q. You said that you have not reviewed the third amended complaint in this case?
A. No,
Q. Or any complaint that the State filed?
A. I read the first complaint.
Q. You did not review it after it was amended to include the racketeering counts?
A. No.
Q. Have you been asked to amend in any way the project that you're doing since the complaint was amended to add the
racketeering counts?
A. No.
Q. Have you reviewed any answers to interrogatories, written questions in this case?
A. No.
Q. No depositions that have -- any depositions that have been taken in this case, have you reviewed them at all?
A. In this case, no.
Q. In this case. I know that you said that you saw Skates and Sansing from Mississippi?
A. No, I have not.
Q. You are working at the same time on Louisiana?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
106State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
A. Not any more.
Q. You stopped doing that?
A. Long ago.
Q. How long were you working on the Louisiana case -- is that the class action that was pending there?
A. I don't know what the case was. But I worked on it for about four months.
Q. And then you stopped?
A. Yes.
Q. They told you don't do any more work on Louisiana?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know the name Castono?
A. It's vague whether I --
Q. Do you know if that's the project that you were working on for Louisiana?
A. I think it was.
Q. Do you know what, if any, particular allegations of the complaint your testimony is intended to answer or rebut?
A. No.
Q. No idea?
A. My understanding of what -- what I'm supposed to present myself as an expert to is the State of Florida's -- the State of
Florida's role in the tobacco culture of Florida.
When I use the term “tobacco culture,” I mean the state's role in assisting the people in the state of Florida who grow tobacco
to grow it successfully, to market it successfully and to the warehouse men in Florida who sell it to sell it successfully in an
orderly fashion.
To the people in the state who make cigars. To the people in the state who sell cigars and other tobacco products. To -- and to
have -- to be able to recount some knowledge of what the state has done with the money that it has collected from excise and
sales taxes on tobacco. To give some information about the size of that amount of money that has been collected in taxes over
the years, both in taxes that have been levied by the State of Florida and municipalities in Florida, and also as revenue that has
been sent to the Federal Government from Florida as a consequences of taxes on cigarettes.
In other words -- and then as well to trace the campaign in the state that was concerned with the harmful health effects of
cigarette and tobacco usage.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
107State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. And what it was that the cigarette industry defendants, manufacturers had to do with that topic, that latter topic, how they
contributed to the problem, what they did or did not do is something that you don't concern yourself with; is that correct?
A. Only to the extent that what we know is in the public record and what we will show -- I won't show it. What I see here is
a broad range of competing interests in the state on a number of different issues that are related to the broad range of tobacco
concerns in the State of Florida.
Q. And what you don't include in anything that you plan to comment on is the role of the cigarette industry in that; is that correct?
A. Well, in the sense that it would -- my focus is concerned with the public discussion that takes place and the manifestations
of that public discussion insofar as legislation is concerned and so forth.
Q. And disregards any specific or general role that the cigarette industry itself had on impacting that; correct?
A. Disregards is too strong a term, but if that -- those efforts are contained in the public record, then I will examine them.
Q. And if not, if they kept it to themselves over all those years, then you're not concerned with it?
A. That's right.
MR. HOGAN: Thanks. I have no other questions.
MR. LOCKMAN: Let me suggest that you give us about ten minutes just to talk among ourselves, and if we have a few questions
it certainly will not take long. And if we don't, we will just close up the deposition.
MR. HOGAN: How much do you have left?
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: I have seven minutes left on this tape.
Off the videotape record at 3:42.
(Pause in the proceedings.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the videotape record at 3:42.
BY MR. HOGAN:
Q. From any conversation or communication that you had with Mr. Kaczsynski or anyone else representing the cigarette industry
defendants, do you know why it was that you were selected to be contacted by them to do this review?
A. No.
Q. You've not had -- you didn't say to him why did you pick me?
A. Nope.
Q. It didn't even occur to you to ask?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
108State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. Do you know whether they approached any of your colleagues at the University of Florida or anywhere else in the state of
Florida, historians, and asked them to undertake a similar review or similar project?
A. Yes.
Q. Who?
A. To do exactly what I'm doing or --
Q. Well, that first.
A. Approximately that.
Q. Yes, to work on this case?
A. There is a professor at Florida Lange.
Q. Who is that?
A. Professor Sandy Norman.
Q. Do you know whether Professor Norman agreed to do it? ,
A. Yes, I believe she did agree.
Q. And is she doing that?
A. She is, but it is my understanding that she has not been designated as a witness.
Q. Does that relate to the Florida case?
A. Yes.
Q. And that work is underway?
A. Yes.
Q. Why do you understand that she was not designated?
A. I don't know.
Q. Have you been told why she wasn't?
A. No. And I haven't asked.
Q. Do you know of anyone else that was asked?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
109State of Florida, et al., Plaintiffs, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1997 WL 34665268...
Q. So you wouldn't know if there were others who were asked who declined?
A. No. I would not know.
Q. Are you relying on any work that Professor Norman did?
A. No.
Q. Have you seen any materials -- do you know that you saw any materials that she saw? Have you all talked about it?
A. We had one conversation.
Q. How recently?
A. Several months ago for about 15 minutes.
Q. Do you know whether she did a disclosure form such as you described?
A. No, I don't know.
MR. HOGAN: Thank you. I have no other questions.
MR. LOCKMAN: We will take that short break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are off the videotape record at 3:45.
(A brief recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the videotape record now at 3:58.
MR. LOCKMAN: The plaintiffs have closed their questioning of this witness and we have no questions of this witness at this
time.
MR. HOGAN: That concludes the deposition.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are off the record at the 3:58.
(Reading and signature not waived.)
(Time noted: 3:58 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
110
