Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Original Image of 2000 WL 35639702 (PDF)
2000 WL 35639702 (E.D.N.Y.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, E.D. New York.
Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and Christian E. Markey, Jr., As Trustees, Plaintiffs,
v.
THE AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY; RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company;
B.A.T. Industries, PLC; Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation; Philip
Morris Incorporated; Liggett, Inc.; and Lorillard Tobacco Company, Defendants;
The National Asbestos Workers Medical Fund, et al., Plaintiffs,
v.
Philip Morris, Inc., et al., Defendants.
Nos. 99 CV 7392 (JBW), 97 CV 7640 (JBW), 98 CV 1492 (JBW).
June 22, 2000.
Videotaped Deposition of James Kirby Martin, Ph.D.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: E.D.N.Y.
Name of Expert: James KiRby Martin, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances:
Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe, LLP,
Attorneys for Falise Plaintiffs
666 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York 10103-0001
By: Michael Stolper, Esq.
Chad Marlow, Esq.
Law Offices of Peter G. Angelos, P.C.
Attorneys for NAW Medical Fund Plaintiffs
One Charles Center
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
By: Craig Boas, Esq.
Riker Danzig Scherer Hyland & Perretti
Attorneys for RJ Reynolds (Falise case)
Headquarters Plaza
One Speedwell Avenue
Morristown, New Jersey 07962-1981
By: Alan E. Kraus, Esq.
Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Attorneys for RJ Reynolds (Falise case)
200 West Second Street
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27102
By: Gusti W. Frankel, Esq.
Jones Day Reavis & Pogue
Attorneys for RJ Reynolds (NAW case)
Northpoint 901 Lakeside Avenue
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
By: Paul D. Koethe, Esq.
Steven C. Bennett, Esq.
Also Present:
Ruben Martinez, Videographer.
New York, New York Thursday, June 22, 2000
Reported by:
ANDREA L. KINGSLEY, RPRCSR NO. 001055 JOB NO. 110032
June 22, 2000
9:15 a.m.
Videotaped deposition of JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, PH.D., held at the offices of Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe, LLP, 666
Fifth Avenue, New York, New York, pursuant to notice and agreement, before Andrea L. Kingsley, a Notary Public of the
State of New York.
October of 1999, marked for identification, as of this date.)
(Martin Exhibit 2, supplemental report dated May of 2000, marked for identification, as of this date.)
J A M E S K I R B Y MA R T I N, called as a witness, having been duly sworn by a Notary Public, was examined and testified
as follows:
MR. KRAUS: Before we begin, can we have an agreement that any objections that I raise will be joined in by Mr. Bennett in
the Falise case and vice versa so we can avoid having chorus objections?
MR. STOLPER: Certainly.
MR. BOAS: Fine as well from the NAW Workers.
EXAMINATION BY
MR. STOLPER:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Martin. My name is Michael Stolper. I represent the plaintiffs in the Falise matter. You have been
retained in the Falise matter?
A. Yes, I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Who retained you?
A. The law firm of Womble Carlyle.
Q. You issued reports in this case?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. You issued two reports?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. An initial one and a supplemental one?
A. That's correct.
Q. As I can understand it, your opinions distill into two -- the scope of your retention is -- can be captured in two basic points;
one is to examine the potential health risks associated with smoking. Is that one of the points?
A. That is one of the points, yes.
Q. And the second point is for you to consider the extent of public awareness of the addictive nature of cigarettes; is that right?
A. That's correct. That is in the first report.
Q. You conclude that there are very high levels of public awareness; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Your report suggests you may conduct additional research other than what's captured in your reports. Have you done any
additional research beyond what's contained in the supplemental report?
A. The supplemental report -- the first report is dated, I believe, October 28, 1999. The supplemental report is sometime in early
May 2000. So I am not quite sure how to answer the question.
Q. Have you done any additional research since May 2000?
A. Yes.
Q. What kind of research have you done?
A. A variety of documents have continued to come in through the discovery process so I certainly have been looking at that
material. Reviewing that material.
Q. Have your conclusions changed since your May report?
A. No, they have not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Have your opinions changed in any way since the submission of your May report?
A. No, they have not.
Q. Have you put into writing any additional thoughts or research that you may have done since submitting the supplemental
report?
A. Not in writing.
Q. So essentially the work you have done since the supplemental report is reviewing documents?
A. Right.
Q. Those documents are cumulative of the documents that you identified in your report?
A. Yes.
Q. I would like to put before you what has been marked as Exhibit 1 which I believe is your initial report that you referred to
in October of 1999. And Exhibit 2, which I believe is your supplemental report from May of 2000.
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recognize those documents?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Did I characterize them correctly, that they are your October and May expert reports?
A. Yes.
Q. When were you retained in this matter?
A. I can give you an estimate. Approximately September of 1999. I can't give you a date within the month. But that would
be my best recollection.
Q. Do you remember who at Womble Carlyle retained you?
A. My initial conversations were with a gentleman by the name of Tom Schroeder.
Q. What's the sum and substance of those initial conversations?
A. We spoke on the phone. He described the case and asked whether I would be willing to look into the historical issues that
we have just referenced.
Q. How did he describe the case?
Mr. KRAUS: Objection. That I think asks for the attorney's mental impressions conveyed to the witness. You are certainly
allowed to ask him any facts that Mr. Schroeder provided to him that he considered in arriving at his opinions but counsel's
mental impressions are protected by work product so I object and instruct him not to answer the question as phrased.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. These are conversations that you had with Mr. Schroeder; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. You are not an employee of any of the tobacco companies; are you?
A. No, I am not.
Q. You are serving as an expert in this case?
A. Yes.
Mr. STOLPER: You are asserting attorney client privilege?
MR. KRAUS: I am asserting work product.
MR. STOLPER: The conversation between the attorney and expert is privileged?
MR. KRAUS: You are not listening to me, Michael. I said I am asserting work product privilege, not attorney/client privilege.
There's plenty of law for the proposition when attorneys convey their mental impressions of the case that that is protected by
the work product immunity and not discoverable. Facts he considered in arriving at his opinion are not within that protection
and I am not asserting privilege for facts provided to him.
MR. STOLPER: But you are asserting a work product privilege. Are you instructing the witness not to answer as to what the
sum and substance of the conversation was?
MR. KRAUS: You asked him a very specific question. You asked him what did Mr. Schroeder tell him about the case and
that I instructed him not to answer.
MR. STOLPER: Our position is that it's clearly discoverable. If you are going to stand by your authority and position we will
mark the transcript and take it up with Judge Gold perhaps this afternoon if not tomorrow. We will move on. Then you are
standing by your objection?
MR. KRAUS: I have said it three times. I am not going to change my mind.
Q. Can you tell me what -- can you describe your conversation -- your initial conversation with Mr. Schroeder?
MR. KRAUS: He has already answered that question. Objection.
MR. STOLPER: Are you instructing him not to answer --
MR. KRAUS: No --
MR. STOLPER: Go ahead.
MR. KRAUS: You can describe it generally but not the specifics of what Mr. Schroeder told you about the case in terms of
the defendants' positions in the case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
THE WITNESS: In terms of the defendants' positions?
MR. KRAUS: Right.
A. Mr. Schroeder and I discussed the nature of the case and it was my impression that the case involved questions having to do
with the synergistic relationship between tobacco and asbestos and we discussed -- and it was, again, my impression I should
say that that was a matter that I should look into with respect to this case.
Q. You are saying you should --
MR. STOLPER: Can I have that answer read back please.
(Record read.)
Q. What matter are you referring to in that answer?
A. The matter with respect to the case, questions having to do with awareness, public awareness with respect to questions
relating to -- with respect to what individuals were aware of with respect to the dangers of smoking and with respect to the
addictive qualities of smoking as that might in turn relate to questions having to do with asbestos and tobacco.
Q. Were you familiar with the concept of synergy prior to your conversation with Mr. Schroeder?
A. Yes. Generally speaking, yes.
Q. What did you know about synergy?
A. Well, synergy, the term per se, means two products, items, elements, come together and it has an enhancing effect. So I was
certainly aware of that and I was aware that there are various kinds of, in a very general way, various kinds of chemicals that
can come together and enhance certain kinds of relationships.
Q. Were you aware of the synergistic relationship between cigarette smoke and asbestos exposure prior to your conversation
with Mr. Schroeder?
A. Yes, but not in the kinds of detail that I would be aware of today.
Q. Were you provided with detail during that conversation?
A. I had done a tremendous amount of research on that subject.
Q. I am referring to that initial conversation that you had.
A. No.
Q. What else did you learn of the case in your initial conversation with Mr. Schroeder?
MR. KRAUS: The same instruction applies to the extent that you discussed defendants' themes and strategies in the case, you
should not disclose them. To the extent you were provided with facts or given instructions as to what you were to do, you can
and should discuss those.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I would say that in regard to facts, Mr. Schroeder and I discussed the Trust, the time it came into being, the nature of the
Trust and what it does. Those kinds of things.
Q. What other facts did you learn in that conversation about the case?
A. Really at this point I don't recall.
Q. In that initial conversation did you have an understanding of what the allegations against the tobacco industry were?
A. I don't -- I would say that I did not have that clear of an understanding based on that initial conversation.
Q. You mentioned that he described the nature of the case, Mr. Schroeder did.
A. Yes.
Q. Did you have any understanding of what the plaintiffs' claims against the defendants were in this case?
A. Well, I would say that that is something that developed more clearly over a period of time.
Q. Through conversations with Mr. Schroeder?
A. And among the materials that I requested and I did receive was a copy of the complaint.
Q. Did you read the complaint?
A. I reviewed it I think would be a better term.
Q. Now you referenced a complaint. Do you recall seeing an amendment complaint?
A. At this point I really don't remember. I could give you an approximate date of the complaint. I don't know if that would help.
Q. Approximate date would help.
A. I think it was 1997.
Q. Okay. That helps.
Prior to being retained in this case had you worked with Mr. Schroeder in tobacco litigation?
A. Yes.
Q. Which other case?
A. One other case that was based in Florida and involved an individual who was suing on grounds that his claim was that he
had smoked a great number of cigarettes and that they had adversely affected his health.
Q. Do you recall the name of the case?
A. I think the name was Middleton, although I may be mixing it up.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. If I could draw your attention to the report in which in the back you identify the cases testified previously and perhaps that
could refresh your recollection.
A. No, it doesn't. The reference is here to two other cases.
Q. Other than the one you just mentioned?
A. Yes.
Q. So the list is incomplete in your report?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. You haven't established that he was deposed in this Middleton case. The
list only identifies cases where he testified at deposition or trial.
Q. Did you testify in the Middleton case?
A. The Middleton case was dismissed.
Q. So you were retained but did not testify in that case; is that right?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Are there any other cases that you were retained in but did not testify other than what's in your report?
A. With respect to Womble Carlyle --
Q. No, general.
A. Yes.
Q. Can you identify them for me?
A. Yes. There have been -- I cannot give you an exact number but I will say since 1994 approximately, this is an approximation,
15.
Q. Have you issued reports in all 15 cases?
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. You have testified in your report twice at deposition and once at trial other than today?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. So in the 17 or 18 approximate cases that you have been retained in, you have issued reports in all those cases? I didn't mean
to confuse you. You have issued reports in the cases that you have testified in?
A. I would say there were perhaps two or three or four cases, I am really guessing at this point, but that's a fairly safe number,
in which no report was issued, the case would basically be dismissed before it even got to the point of preparing a report.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Other than your report in this case in which you address the concept of synergy would you say your reports in all the other
cases were essentially the same?
A. Well, there were some variations based on the nature of the case.
Q. Can you describe some of the variations?
A. In this case my second report, which focuses more on questions related to synergy, I guess what I am trying to say that is
the first time that I have focused on those questions specifically. But the general thrust of my reports are based on years and
years of research and essentially they come to the same conclusion.
Q. In terms of the actual reports and the words you have written down for each of the reports, are they roughly identical? I am
talking about all the reports that you have issued in the cases you have identified other than the supplemental report.
A. Roughly identical? I would say the way I would answer that is no. In this sense, that in difference cases different types
of historical material would be more relevant so that I would try to provide examples that would be directly relevant to those
particular cases.
Q. Can you give examples of some of those distinguishing figures from your various reports?
A. Yes. If we take the category of education, for example, and the case is focusing on, let us say, Ohio, then the examples that
I would offer in regard to education and what people were learning in school would be based on what was happening in Ohio.
But if the case is not focused on Ohio, let us say the case is focused on New York, then the examples more appropriately would
come from what was being taught in schools in New York.
Q. So other than a geographical emphasis, are there any other types of distinguishing factors among the reports that you have
issued?
A. Well, there are -- if we break it up this way, there would be -- there's sort of what is going on nationally, what is going on
regionally, what is going on locally. So that if the case would focus on Ohio it would be appropriate to provide examples from
Ohio newspapers if information was available about the presumed dangers of using tobacco and/or smoking cigarettes. If the
case would have more of a national focus it might be more appropriate to draw upon the New York Times or the Los Angeles
Times or Washington Post so again that would vary again according to the nature of the case. So that I think in almost every
category where it would involve the kind of information that was being made available and that individuals were receiving, that
that would be a factor in the variation, where there individuals were actually located. So geography would be a factor but that
doesn't mean there isn't a national focus, there isn't a national comprehension. And so there are some sources, let's say, there
are some sources which would be available in almost every situation that I can possibly think of.
Q. I am trying to focus on the differences among your reports. So I understand that we are in agreement that geography can
play a difference in different reports depending on the jurisdiction of the case. I am trying to think are there any other types of
differences other than geography that you can describe for us among your reports?
A. Yes. Let's say a case would involve an individual such a Mr. Middleton, then questions let's say of involvement with a union
would not perhaps be that relevant. But in a case such as Falise, questions of union involvement would be very relevant in terms
of looking at historical materials. So it would not necessarily be necessary to talk about union awareness when an individual
was never involved with a union.
Q. Are there other types of variances like that among your reports?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Well, there are lots of different kind of variations. For instance, let's say with newspaper coverage, if, as an example, a case
is based in Ohio and the papers, the local papers carry columns like someone like Ann Landers who wrote over the years several
articles warning people about the dangers of smoking based on questions that were being sent in or would make suggestions
about how you might quit smoking or attend quit smoking clinics, that would be relevant perhaps to include those things
as examples. But if you are in the situation where the local papers weren't carrying someone like Ann Landers or there's a
Dr. Steincrohn who would be a national columnist but not carried in all the papers then it would be irrelevant because that
information wouldn't necessarily be available on a local level.
Q. Is there any variance among your reports in terms of the types of information or categories of information that you rely on
in formulating your opinion?
A. I would say that it is a matter of emphasis and that goes back to what we have just been discussing, what is most relevant
to the particular situation. But there's some types of materials you can't change. National public opinion polls don't change,
either the numbers are there or they aren't there.
Q. Are there any wholesale categories that you have included in some reports and not included in others?
A. I don't believe so. I don't believe so.
Q. So throughout all your reports would you reference, for example, popular music?
A. Yes.
Q. Television shows?
A. Yes.
Q. Movies?
A. Yes.
Q. Just take me back for a second to your initial conversation with Mr. Schroeder, I believe you mentioned you had worked
with Mr. Schroeder prior to the Falise matter? Is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. In that conversation when he was discussing with you the Falise matter, did he draw any contrast between this case and the
prior case you had worked with him on?
A. Not that I recall.
Q. Your initial conversation with Mr. Schroeder, did you come away with an understanding of what plaintiffs' damages theory
was?
A. No, I did not.
Q. As you sit here today, do you have an understanding of what plaintiffs' damages theory is?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Not fully.
Q. What understanding do you have?
A. In a very general way, that union members beyond the Asbestos Workers Union, and if it's okay I will be saying asbestos
union workers rather than the whole international --
Q. Now I have to remember the title. The Pipe Fitter and Asbestos Workers Union?
A. That's correct.
Q. So for purposes of today we will refer to it as the Asbestos Workers Union?
A. Yes.
Q. Fair enough.
A. That these individuals received more information about the synergistic relationship between tobacco and asbestos than did
other union members.
Q. You mean non --
A. Members of other unions. That doesn't mean those individuals weren't working with asbestos, but not members of that union,
and that therefore those individuals did not quit at the same rate as those individuals who received more information.
Q. Is your understanding that the plaintiffs intend to collect damages only resulting from harm caused to the Asbestos Workers
Union members?
A. I can't answer that question. I don't know.
Q. How did you arrive at your understanding of plaintiffs' damage theory as you just described?
A. I was sent reports -- I think that's the right term, or documents, by a person by the name of Jeffrey Harris and I did review
in the sense that I looked through those reports.
Q. Do you recall any other documents or evidence that helped you form your understanding of plaintiffs' damages theory?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Were you familiar with Dr. Harris prior to having received his report in this case?
A. No, I really wasn't.
Q. Were you familiar with the opinions contained in Dr. Harris's report prior to receiving that report?
A. No.
Q. How about the theories that underlie Dr. Harris's opinions?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I am not quite sure what you mean by theories. Could you give me an example?
Q. Let me state it differently. You are aware that Dr. Harris applies a particular methodology in calculating plaintiffs' damages
in this case?
A. Yes. But I am not sure what that methodology is.
Q. That may make the next question somewhat useless. In a general way, were you familiar with Dr. Harris's methodology
prior to having received his report?
A. Well, I have a little bit of working knowledge of basic statistics but this is somewhat beyond basic statistics.
Q. I will certainly concede that.
As you sit here today -- I had asked you some questions about allegations the plaintiffs made against the tobacco industry in
this case as of the time of your conversation with Mr. Schroeder and I would like to expand the time frame to now, as you sit
here today, what is your understanding of plaintiffs' claims against the tobacco industry? In this case?
A. I thought I had given you an indication of that based on the -- my attempted description of the Harris report.
Q. The question I posed to you with regard to Harris was plaintiffs' damages theory.
A. Okay.
Q. I am trying to draw a distinction between plaintiffs' allegations with regard to liability. The conduct that would lead Dr.
Harris to be able to calculate what damages are. Do you appreciate the distinction I am trying to draw?
A. I think I do. You are asking me just if you would repeat --
Q. Are you aware of allegations that plaintiffs have made against the tobacco industry in this case?
A. Yes, I have reviewed the complaint.
Q. Can you describe for me your understanding of the conduct of the tobacco industry that's at issue in this case?
A. We are talking about the allegations?
Q. In the complaint. You have told me you understand this case based on your review of the complaint.
A. Yes. But I want to make it clear we are talking about the allegations, we are not talking about my own research and my
own findings.
Q. That's right. I want to know what your understanding of what the claims are in this case.
A. My understanding in brief of the allegations would be that the tobacco industry should have been issuing warnings about
the synergistic relationship between tobacco and asbestos.
Q. Are you aware of any other allegations of misconduct by the tobacco industry in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I would say probably not. I would just summarize by saying not making information available.
Q. When you say not making information, you mean with regard to synergy?
A. Yes.
Q. What type of information -- what's your understanding of the allegation -- you referenced information wasn't provided or
made available. Who wasn't making it available?
A. I assume in the allegation that that reference would be to the tobacco industry.
Q. To whom was that information not made available?
A. Presumably, and, again, this is based on the allegations and a review of the report of Jeffrey Harris, to those individuals who
were not quitting at the alleged higher rate in comparison to the asbestos workers, referring to the Asbestos Workers Union.
Q. Is it your understanding of the allegations that that the tobacco industry withheld information that they uniquely had?
A. That they uniquely had --
Q. Or exclusively had?
A. I can't really answer the question. It's been a long time since I looked at the complaint.
Q. Is it your understanding of plaintiffs' allegations in this case that it's plaintiffs' position that no one knew about the health
risks associated with smoking?
A. That no one in -- you mean no one who has ever lived on the face of the earth or no one in the sense of the universe of
union members? I am not quite sure what you mean.
Q. As I understand it, your opinion in this case is that the public was very much aware of the health risks associated with
smoking; is that right?
A. That is correct.
Q. Is it your understanding that plaintiffs claim that the public was unaware of the health risks associated with smoking?
A. I'm not sure I can answer that question without reviewing the complaint.
Q. You are just not sure?
A. I am not sure.
Q. Let me pose the same question with regard to synergy. Your opinion is that information about the health risks associated
with this synergistic relationship between tobacco and asbestos exposure was widely known; is that right? Among those at
special risk?
A. Yes, that is correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Is it your understanding that plaintiffs claim that those at special risk were unaware of those risks?
A. Again, that's quite difficult for me to answer. So I would have to -- I would have to say I am just really not sure.
Q. Do you have an understanding of the purpose of your opinion in this case?
A. What I was asked to do in terms of the question having to do with synergy is to look at levels of, as best one can, levels of
awareness, the dissemination of information about the synergistic relationship as that relationship affected union members who
would be part of that special population having in some way at sometime worked with asbestos.
Q. What is your understanding of why that information would be relevant to this case?
A. I would assume that it is relevant to this case if we were to go back to the Harris statement, the attempt -- my attempted
review of the Harris report would be a better way to put that, because this information or at least the information that I have
gone out and that I have researched would indicate that there was a very widespread pattern of dissemination not just among
asbestos workers but to many, many, many different union workers that would have been affected by asbestos exposure of
various types and kinds over the years.
Q. You think that that conclusion is somehow contradictory with Dr. Harris? Or Dr. Harris's opinion?
A. I really can't say. I don't --
Q. So it wasn't your intent when you gave that answer to sort of draw a distinction between your conclusions and Dr. Harris's
conclusions; is that right?
A. Based on my reading and review of the Harris reports, the information that I have collected is definitely at odds with his
presentation.
Q. Can you describe how you think it's at odds?
A. Because what I have found is there has been a widespread or there was a widespread dissemination of information through
union ranks with respect to the enhanced dangers of developing lung cancer among those individuals at risk. That is individuals
who were using tobacco products and were exposed to asbestos.
Q. Okay. I understand that's your opinion. I am trying to figure out how you believe that's at odds with what Dr. Harris's report
says.
A. I believe that -- well, we can go back to what I tried to indicate earlier about Dr. Harris's report in which from my reading
of it or review of it it was my impression that he was stating that information was widespread among one particular group, that
is the asbestos workers, it wasn't necessarily there among others, other union members that were associated with other unions
of various types and kinds.
Q. Why in your estimation is that distinction significant?
A. I think it's very significant.
Q. Why?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Because my review of the material, my going to a variety of historical sources, indicate that this information was disseminated
very widely among a whole host of union groups.
MR. KRAUS: The record should reflect that Paul Koethe of Jones Day is joining us.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 10 a.m. We are going off the record.
(Recess taken.)
(Mr. Bennett left.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 10:17 a.m. We are back on the record.
MR. STOLPER: I would like to state before I continue with the examination that based on a conversation we had off record,
we have made some characterization as to terminology.
Q. And from this point going forward, Professor, I am going to refer to the insulator and asbestos worker unions that you
mentioned that are referenced in Dr. Harris's report, among other places, the insulators as opposed to the asbestos workers and
when we are referring today both in the questions and answers to asbestos workers, we will be referring to the larger universe
of unions whose membership were exposed to asbestos; is that a fair enough distinction and definition?
A. Yes.
Q. I believe your last answer -- I asked -- I was asking you a series of questions as to why you think that there's a distinction
between the conclusions you reach in this case versus Dr. Harris's opinion in this case. And I believe your last answer was that
you found that the information about the risks associated with synergy were widely disseminated. Is that right?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. My question to you is how is that at odds with Dr. Harris's report?
A. Well, I think I have already answered that question. But it goes back to my review of Dr. Harris's reports. And Dr. Harris
focuses on the insulators, members of the insulators union and alleges that they received a great deal more information than did
those working with asbestos in other unions which in turn would mean that somehow information was not getting through or
information was being held back for that larger universe of individuals working with asbestos. I did not find that to be the case.
Q. You had mentioned earlier, I believe, that Dr. Harris had found a higher quit rate among the insulators; is that right?
A. That is my understanding of his report.
Q. So your research and analysis with regard to synergy was to focus on the distinction between the insulators on the one hand
and the general population of asbestos workers?
A. No. It really wasn't to focus on that distinction. It was to investigate, to look into the dissemination of information as that
information became available.
Q. So you didn't focus on the distinction of knowledge between the insulators and the asbestos worker population in general?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Well, that wasn't necessarily a focus. What I was trying to do was understand the process of dissemination and when
individuals were -- when information was being made to individuals regardless of, let's say, what particular union they may
have belonged to.
MR. STOLPER: Can I have the last answer read back please?
(Record read.)
Q. Your research, based on your last answer, your research doesn't then contrast between the knowledge among the asbestos
worker population and the general population at large; is that right?
A. Let me try to say that what I did in my research was to look beyond the insulators union and to look at a much larger universe
of information that would have been or actually was available to union workers who may have been in contact with asbestos.
So I did not focus specifically on the insulators union.
Q. Okay. But in terms of the contrast between the -- I am trying to understand the distinctions that you are making in your mind.
So I understand the distinction between the insulators on the one hand and the asbestos population on the other, but your initial
report and some of the reports you have issued in other cases you also opine as to the knowledge of the general population
about the health risks associated with smoking; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. You have now issued an opinion in this case about what the asbestos worker population knew or was aware of with regard
to synergy; is that right?
A. Yes. A supplemental report, yes.
Q. The question I have for you is you didn't study the distinction between the awareness among the asbestos worker population
on the one hand and the general population on the other; isn't that right?
A. With respect to?
Q. The level of awareness of the health risks associated with smoking.
A. With respect to the level of general health risks associated with smoking?
Q. That's right.
A. I certainly looked at the general union population in terms of those general health risks as part of the larger whole of
what would have been known by the general population. After all, union members represented several million people in that
population.
Q. When you say union members, are you talking about asbestos workers?
A. Workers who were members of unions which would include individuals who at some point may have worked with asbestos.
Q. But we had talked about definitions before. I don't want to cause any confusion. We are talking about asbestos workers?
A. Right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You are aware that there are certain unions whose membership was exposed to asbestos in a greater degree than the general
population; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. So when we talk about that universe of union workers we are talking about asbestos workers, that's our definition; right?
A. Yes. Actually I don't mean make a point of it except I am saying workers who at some point were exposed to asbestos
because they might not be working directly with asbestos, let's say --
Q. Brake lining?
A. Exactly. Good example.
Q. But they would fit within our agreed upon definition of asbestos workers; right?
A. All right.
Q. Let me take you back to the question. I was trying to understand the focus of your report. You did not study the difference
in awareness or the level of awareness between the asbestos workers on the one hand and the general population on the other
with regard to the health risks of smoking?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. Assumes a fact not in evidence.
Q. You can answer.
A. I did look at a variety of union related materials which, if I could give you some examples, let's say The Carpenter Magazine,
the UA Journal, United Association Journal, The Elevator Constructor, The Iron Worker, other such publications named in
my report, and what I found was that those publications did address, depending on the publication, they did address somewhat
regularly questions having to do with smoking and did at various ways at various times issue warnings about dangers of smoking
cigarettes. So, yes, I looked at material that would have been union specific and would have related to asbestos workers.
Q. Okay. I understand. Let me try it a different way.
You examined the level of awareness among asbestos workers, the health risks associated with smoking; right?
A. Yes.
Q. You concluded there was a very high level of awareness of those health risks among that population; right?
A. Of the general health risks?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. You also concluded there were high levels of awareness of the risks associated with synergy among those populations; right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. There was widespread dissemination of that information, yes.
Q. So it's your opinion that this population was very aware that cigarettes were harmful to their health; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. The question that I am trying to pose to you now is you did not study or contrast the level of awareness among the asbestos
worker population to say the general population, non-asbestos exposed individuals?
A. Well, contrast, I am not sure what you mean. What I would -- I think the best response I can give is that in terms of our
asbestos worker population, besides the usual sources of information, whether it be newspaper stories, government reports,
items drawn from say magazines, whatever it might be, in addition, union members had additional information being made
available to them. To give you an example, in 1964 the AFL-CIO became involved in a major campaign to provide additional
information about dangers associated with cancer and methods to perhaps avoid contracting cancer. So part of that program, this
is in cooperation with the American Cancer Society, included a very specific series of sessions having to do with the dangers
of smoking. The point of which would be to encourage workers not to smoke.
Q. In the Florida case, you said you referenced the Florida case in which you gave an opinion that there was a high level of
awareness among the general population; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Was there a defined population? Was it the State of Florida? How did you define the population in that case?
A. The population would be defined -- this particular individual, as I recall, lived in -- I am trying to remember -- Arkansas,
Tennessee, Texas and Florida. So the population would have been defined not only in terms of those specific areas, in other
words, I reviewed newspapers, what kind of information was being made available at particular times when that individual
happened to be living in a particular location, that is doing local papers, but I also would review sort of the information that's
coming through national sources.
Q. So you would consider national sources, you would also consider regional sources based on the region in which this plaintiff
lived?
A. And when available, local sources.
Q. The plaintiff in that case was not an asbestos-exposed worker; is that right?
A. I don't remember whether that was -- I don't believe that was an issue in the case.
Q. It wasn't a factor that you considered as part of your analysis in that case?
A. Not that I recall.
Q. I believe -- would you agree that asbestos workers, asbestos-exposed workers are at special risk of contracting disease based
on the synergistic relationship between cigarette smoke and asbestos exposure?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. You are asking him to give you an opinion outside the boundaries of his
expertise and his reports.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Since I am not a medical doctor it's difficult for me to answer the question. I know a whole variety of diseases where --
because I read this over and over again, have been associated with asbestos, everything from asbestosis, I am not quite sure
how you say it, mesothelioma, to various forms of cancers.
Q. You have an understanding that I am exposed to asbestos and I smoke and you are just a smoker, I am at greater risk of
contracting lung cancer than you are; do you have an understanding of that?
MR. KRAUS: Same objection.
A. Do I personally have an understanding of that?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. I believe in your report you talk about the efforts of individuals like Dr. Selikoff in terms of educating individuals that were
exposed to asbestos and smoked; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Would you agree there's a different level of awareness between someone who is from the asbestos worker population who
is at that special risk and the recipient of Dr. Selikoff's information campaign that you reference in the report as distinct from
a smoker who wasn't in the special risk category?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. I don't know what you mean by level of awareness.
Q. You can answer. It's termed in your report.
A. Certainly I would agree that there -- based on all the information in the materials I have reviewed, there are very high levels
of awareness that smoking is not good for you. There are various ways smoking cannot be good for you so if that had been
relevant to that particular population, that information would have been made available to you. But there still is the fundamental
understanding umbrella that I try to describe in my report, the whole background information is there, smoking is not good for
you. To what degree I am not sure how to --
Q. All I am asking is you didn't study any difference in the degree to which asbestos-exposed workers were aware of the health
risks?
A. I didn't study that, is that the question?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, it certainly came up in the process of my research. I mean, that there was a greater risk that -- and that that statement
is repeated over and over and over again in various types of literature, it's repeated at conferences, Dr. Selikoff himself, I don't
know how many hundreds of thousands of times he may have repeated that statement, but often.
Q. Would you say that statement was repeated and stated to those at risk more often than somebody who is in the general
population and just exposed to the information in general?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Well, it's directed information. It's being directed toward a specific group. For instance, in 1978 the federal government
engages in a very extensive program to communicate the information related to asbestos and disease to a very wide cross-
section of the population, including, as I remember, depends on how one counts, 30 or 40 million Social Security recipients. In
that statement, because of the aging process, individuals who had worked in shipyards or with brake linings might have been,
in the particular statement that is sent out to these 30 to 40 million people depending on one's count, it contains a warning if
you have been exposed to asbestos, don't smoke and don't start. But it doesn't name a specific -- in other words, it doesn't name
Dr. Selikoff's specific figure.
Q. Sure enough. So the recipient of that type of information that you were just describing, would you agree that they were more
informed and more aware as a result of these efforts of the health risks associated with smoking than somebody who was not
the recipient of that type of information?
A. I'm not quite sure how -- you have received additional information which reinforces the information you already have,
that means you have received more information, so certainly by logic you have received yet further information. It's just an
additional source of information that might not have been available to the -- to other members of the general population because
it wasn't relevant.
Q. The only question I am asking through this series of questions, you have not analyzed the distinction or the -- any distinction
between the level of awareness of somebody who received the information you just described versus somebody who didn't
receive that information?
A. I have not -- I am not sure how to answer that because it's there, it's just further information which reinforces what is already
commonly known. I am not quite sure what the distinction is.
Q. You would agree with me there are different levels of awareness; wouldn't you?
A. I am not sure. I mean, if somebody is aware of something they are aware of something. I mean --
Q. Before we get into definitions, because I do have a series of questions that I would like to ask you about definitions, all I
really want to know is just this contrast between -- maybe we will go at it a different way a little bit later.
I am going to finish up some of the preliminary questions we asked. I know you prepared two reports in this case.
I believe you charge 120 dollars an hour for your time; is that right?
A. Yes. That's stated in the report.
Q. How much time have you put in on this matter?
A. I really haven't sat down and calculated it.
Q. Have you issued a bill?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know the amount of the bill?
A. No, I don't, because there are monthly statements.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You bill Womble Carlyle on a monthly basis?
A. Yes.
Q. How long have you been doing that?
A. Well, with respect to this case, I first -- as I explained before, I first had a conversation with Tom Schroeder last September.
Q. Is your bill specific to this case or do you have a bill where you contain information from other cases that you are currently
retained on?
MR. KOETHE: Excuse me, Doctor, before you answer that question, when you are referring to this case you are referring to
the Falise case?
MR. KRAUS: I am.
A. Could you repeat the question?
Q. You said you issued monthly bills to Womble Carlyle for your time. Is the monthly bill you send, is it exclusive to this
case, the Falise case?
A. Yes.
Q. It doesn't have information from other cases?
A. No.
Q. You are currently retained in other cases right now, is that right, for the tobacco industry?
A. Well, the NAW case, yes.
Q. Any other cases currently?
A. That would be active?
Q. Yes.
A. Active?
Q. Um-hmm.
A. No. Nothing is coming to mind.
Q. So you have got two active cases so you send separate bills?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you issued a monthly bill every month since October of ‘99?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I believe so.
Q. Can you give me a rough approximation of how much you have billed since October of ‘99?
MR. KOETHE: I object to the form of the question. I assume you are limiting it as to Falise?
MR. STOLPER: I am.
A. I haven't stopped to calculate it. So I can't give you a specific number. It would just have to be an approximation.
Q. That's all I asked, was a rough approximation.
A. Rough approximation -- hmm -- very rough, I would say maybe 175 to 200 hours.
Q. How does that time spread out since October of ‘99?
A. There are -- I guess there would be times when I would have time available and would go do research, so at that particular
point in time the bill would be a little bit higher and there would be times when I didn't have much time available, obviously,
to work on this particular case and there would be points such as in the last, let's say, two or three weeks as we moved toward
the deposition and it's been delayed and moved back and so on and so forth where I have spent more time trying to review the
host of documents that, let's say, have come in through the discovery process.
Q. Over the last -- other than the last two to three weeks where you obviously had some preparation for the deposition,
the approximation of a couple hundred hours that you put in, did you ever -- since October of ‘99, have you had any other
concentrated periods of time where you have done a lot of work on this case other than in the last few weeks?
A. I have made -- I am going to try to give you an estimate, at least four research related trips. One to New York City to work in
the New York Public Library with respect to various union magazines that were available there in concentration, unlike many
other archives. Also worked on regional newspapers. So that would be a time when there would be more concentrated activity
because basically I was on the road doing research.
I have made, that I can recall off the top of my head, three different trips to the University of Texas at Arlington, again, doing
research, the UT at Arlington, collections are particularly rich in union documents, union related magazines, material that I
frankly can't get in Houston. So, again, there would have been those trips. So those would have been periods of concentration.
Q. I understand that you have described the types of things you were doing that would cause you to bill lots of hours. You did
research and some of the research you had to travel to.
A. Yes.
Q. I want to start my question with the timing. When did you do this? You were obtained in October of ‘99, when did you do
the bulkof your research that's Falise specific?
MS. FRANKEL: Objection.
A. I started with materials that I could get my hands on in Houston that I could find and then I moved outward, so the bulk of the
work I would say would have been after the 1st of the year. My trip to New York was in February. Various trips to Arlington.
One was in ‘99 and two were in March as I recall. In fact, there may have been three. There may have been one in ‘99 and then
three in March -- I'm sorry, February and March 2000.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Are you the only person who has done the research that you rely upon in formulating the opinions in your reports?
A. No.
Q. You have had assistance?
A. Yes.
Q. Who has assisted you?
A. I have a research assistant.
Q. One?
A. One.
Q. Anybody else?
A. A number -- a lot of the material came in through the discovery process. The only other source that is coming to mind is
research being carried out by an old friend of mine whose name is Shelly Bookspan.
Q. Anyone else?
A. No, no one else is coming to mind. I hope I am not misleading you.
Q. Did you bill the time that Shelly Bookspan spent on assisting you?
A. No.
Q. Did you bill the time that the research assistant spent in assisting you?
A. Well, it's a separate bill.
Q. But it's included in the 200 roughly hours?
A. No, that wouldn't be included in my time. I gave you my time.
Q. So you issued a separate bill for your research assistant?
A. Yes.
Q. That's what you ordinarily do?
A. Yes.
Q. How many hours did you bill for your research assistant?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. It would be the same or possibly a little bit more because I would give the research assistant an assignment and say go try
to research this, this, this and that and so that person spent a lot more time than I did but I don't recall what the hours are.
Q. So when you reference trips to New York or University of Texas, are those trips made by your research assistant or --
A. Yes or no depending on the trip.
Q. So you have made some trips yourself?
A. Yes.
Q. So you have done some of your own research?
A. Yes.
Q. What percentage of the research --
A. Let me rephrase. My research assistant will carry out assignments I ask her to do. If I could give you a for instance. When
we got to New York we found out that the union magazines, such as The Iron Worker and I believe The Elevator Constructor
and The Carpenter were actually at an annex, not at the main library on 42nd Street. So we divided up and she at my instruction
went to look through that material. So that's the best way for me to describe it. But she does research at my instruction.
Q. Okay. But all your time, your time and your research assistant time was billed to the tobacco industry?
A. It was billed to Womble Carlyle.
Q. And the expenses for your trip were billed to Womble Carlyle as well?
A. Yes.
Q. Your understanding is that Womble Carlyle is a law firm that represents a tobacco company?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know which tobacco company Womble Carlyle represents?
A. Yes.
Q. Which one?
A. It's my understanding that they represent RJ Reynolds.
Q. So it's your understanding that RJ Reynolds is paying for your time and research?
A. I would suppose there must be some chain there.
Q. Any part of your research in this case that wasn't billed to Womble Carlyle?
A. Any part of my research? Not that I recall.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. When you gave a rough approximation of a couple hundred hours for you, is that up until today?
A. Yes.
Q. Professor Martin, I would like to ask you a series of questions now about your qualifications.
I have read your CV which was attached to, I believe, Exhibit 1, your initial report in this case. Is that the most current CV?
A. Yes. There may have been one or two more book reviews but that's pretty up to date.
Q. Your CV indicates that the majority of your research publications relate to the Revolutionary War era; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you consider yourself a Revolutionary War historian?
A. No.
Q. Why not?
A. Because I received a Ph.D. in United States history and that is my field.
Q. You don't have a specialty?
A. I have three or four different specialties. They are listed. One of which would be early American history, one of which would
be American social issues, some of those with respect to health related issues.
Q. What are the other -- you said there were four?
A. I said two or three. So normally what I would do would be listing -- in any brief listing I would list American social history,
American military history, early American history. Those would be sort of the fields that I would currently be identified with.
That does not necessarily reflect my graduate education however.
Q. You have published on military history, American military history; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you published on American Revolutionary history?
A. Yes.
Q. You also identified social history?
A. Yes.
Q. How would you define social history?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Social history looks at the experiences of ordinary persons leading everyday lives, the kinds of experiences that they have
had in those lives. It can look into everything diverse as to, let's say, the social composition of the military units as a reflection
of society to the way that individuals dealt with questions having to do with drinking and smoking.
Q. The only publication that relates to social history as you just defined it is your piece on drinking; is that right?
A. Yes. Published.
Q. Yes. The distinction you are making for published is you currently are working on a document now?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have a working title?
A. Yes.
Q. What is it?
A. Well, the general title is Smoking in America.
Q. When do you intend -- do you intend to have it published?
A. I would hope so.
Q. What's your rough time frame?
A. Two, three, four years. It's hard for me to say.
Q. The thesis of that publication is equivalent to the two points you make in your expert report?
A. Certainly some of that material I would think would be contained therein.
Q. Are there any other general theses to your publication that are not contained in your expert reports in this case?
A. Well, there are -- let me give you at least two others. One of which is that I am very interested in the very early formation of
attitudes about the health risks associated with smoking going back into the 17th century and I don't have very -- very little of
that appears in my report. There's -- as I learned in the days when I worked on questions having to do with alcohol back in the
‘70s when I was affiliated with the Rutgers Center for Alcohol Studies which is a major research center on that particular subject,
there's a parallel history with respect to smoking and the two are tied together. So I am very interested in those questions, the
way the anti-drinking and the anti-smoking movement developed in parallel fashion. Sometimes working together, sometimes
shall we say, for lack of a better way, using a cliche, knocking heads with one another. That is a subject that I am very interested
in so I have reviewed an extensive amount of 19th century materials where there is a major story about popular awareness with
respect to the dangers associated with tobacco products. So that is one area that I am interested in.
Q. Will this drinking component in contrast to smoking be contained in this publication?
A. Some of that may well spill over into that, yes, because there is an anti-smoking movement, as I said, that in the 19th century
which parallels and is related to the anti-drinking movement. I may have said that backwards but I meant the two, anti-smoking
and anti-drinking working together.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You mentioned your drinking publication out of your work at Rutgers. We had requested a copy of the doc -- there was a
documentary made of that book; right?
A. Yes.
Q. You were the principal author of the book?
A. One of two principal authors.
Q. Did the documentary -- was the documentary consistent with the book?
A. I would say probably not in this sense: That the individuals who were involved in producing the documentary were very
heavily involved in Alcoholics Anonymous and as this documentary developed the idea was to kind of have a general overview
of our problems with alcohol and have panel discussions with PBS stations across the United States, but, to use the cliche, the
train sort of got jumped off the track and they got carried away with promotion for Alcoholics Anonymous and they sort of,
from my point of view, ruined the discussion because it killed the discussion before having a discussion by saying there's one
basic method, the basic method for dealing with your alcohol problem. That would be at great variance with the book. We do
not at any time preach or -- preach about or support any particular kind of program designed to help people stop drinking.
Q. How big is the book? How many pages?
A. I don't remember. 230, 40, 50. Something like that.
Q. I was told you had a copy of the video but it was in Beta format?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you have an extra copy of the book?
A. Not with me but, yes, I do have an extra copy.
Q. So it wouldn't be too much of a burden if I requested a copy of the book?
A. No. I would be glad to send it to you.
MR. KRAUS: Can we expect a check in the mail?
MR. STOLPER: I was going to offer, whatever the fee is.
MR. BOAS: If I could make a similar request on behalf the National Asbestos Workers.
THE WITNESS: So would you like a copy -- each of you?
MR. BOAS: Um-hmm.
MR. KRAUS: Do you need an autographed or just a regular copy?
MR. STOLPER: I would appreciate an autograph.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Before we sidetracked on that particular publication, you don't have any publications now on health related issues other than
the drinking piece? Would you consider the drinking piece would fall within health related issues?
A. Yes.
Q. So other than the drinking piece, you don't have any publications in the health related field?
A. No.
Q. How many publications are you responsible for roughly?
A. I don't know. Nine, 10, 11. Talking about books, articles --
Q. Books, articles, journals.
A. 30, 40.
Q. Of the 30 or 40 publications, books or journals, how many of them relate to 20th century history?
A. As I am going through them, at least two.
Q. Would it help for you to reference your CV?
A. No, let's say two or three.
Q. Can you identify the two or three?
A. Yes. Drinking in America and a textbook called America and It's People, third edition, fourth edition is in process right now.
Q. Is that it?
A. In terms of publications, yes.
Q. What's America and Its People?
A. It's a general survey textbook of United States history.
Q. Is it for teaching purposes?
A. Well, it's used in college courses.
Q. Do you know which colleges use it?
A. There's a long list of them. At this point I have sort of lost interest in that. I mean, that's a project I did back in the ‘80s and
doing revisions of these books are just part of -- keeping things -- trying to keep things current.
Q. It's a general American history book?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Yes.
Q. 20th century?
A. Well, it covers the history of the United States from shall we say 20 or 30,000 years ago to the present.
Q. Other than that, you don't have any other publications that relate to American history in the 20th century?
A. No.
Q. You don't have any psychology degrees; is that right?
A. No. I have a master's and Ph.D. in United States history.
Q. Do you have any training in behavioral sciences?
A. Only in the sense that back in the 1960s when I was in graduate school I did a minor program and I took courses in social
stratification and also courses in political behavior. But that is so long ago that I wouldn't call that -- it's a minor program in
the context of a Ph.D. program.
Q. Quantifying a minor program, that's two classes?
A. Yes. Each one of those would have been -- I took a course in social stratification, course in political behavior.
Q. I meant in total there were two classes when you were getting your Ph.D.; is that right?
A. I wish there were only two -- I mean of the number of courses --
Q. That relate to those two topics you gave.
A. Yes, one course each.
Q. You have testified before that you are not a consumption expert. I believe you testified to that at the trial in the Ohio
Ironworkers case. Do you recall that testimony?
A. Yes.
Q. What do you mean when you said you are not a consumption expert?
A. I don't know what the context of the -- what that comment -- what the context of it was and without that I can't answer
the question.
Q. You are not familiar with the term consumption expert?
A. I am familiar with the term consumption, that is consuming something but I don't know what was -- what I am saying is
I don't know what the context was of the --
Q. Are you an expert in consumption of cigarettes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. No.
Q. You are aware there are individuals who are expert in consumption of cigarettes; right?
A. Yes. I am also aware of what the patterns have been with respect to consumption but that's just part of learning information
on the subject.
Q. Understanding or knowing -- being aware of the patterns doesn't qualify you as being an expert in your own estimation;
is that right?
A. As a consumption expert?
Q. Yes. In cigarettes. You asked me to specify and I am saying in cigarettes.
A. Yes.
Q. You don't have any background or training in marketing research; is that right?
A. No, I don't.
Q. You don't have any training in marketing per se?
A. No, I don't. Took a liberal arts undergraduate degree.
Q. So did I. Utterly useless; right?
MR. KRAUS: You don't have to answer that considering you are a Professor.
MR. STOLPER: Of American history.
Q. You have no training or background in advertising?
A. No.
Q. Are you aware of the area of expertise known as social psychology?
A. Only in a very fuzzy way.
Q. How about behavioral psychology? Less fuzzy?
A. Well, the kind of -- let me give you this as an example. The kind of behavioral studies that historians have become involved
in are why did such and such and so and so become a rebel or why did such and such and so and so panic at the beginning of
the battle and run to the -- run back somewhere in the -- behind the action. That sort of thing. So those questions do relate to
behavior so I don't have any formal training in psychological behavior.
Q. Are you saying that you have analyzed why individuals react in a certain way in historical context?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You don't have any training in polling?
A. Only in the sense that this political course that I mentioned, we did look at a lot of polling information.
Q. Are you talking about the stratification class in your Ph.D.?
A. The political course on political voting and political behavior. That was one of the two.
Q. But during your Ph.D. in the ‘60s?
A. Yes.
Q. Other than that, you don't have any training or background in polling?
A. No formal training.
Q. That would be the same for surveys, if there is a distinction made between polling and surveys?
A. If there is a distinction to be made.
Q. You don't have any expertise in the area of corporate ethics; do you?
A. I have had no formal training in that area.
Q. Have you ever studied the ethical behavior of corporations?
A. No.
Q. Why do you believe you are qualified to opine on smoker awareness?
A. Well, first of all, I am trained in United States history. I have a Ph.D. in United States history. And I have looked at questions
having to do with awareness in United States history. In graduate school I had various fields which included the 20th century.
I have taught courses that deal with the 20th century. I have taught everything from U.S. survey history to a course I am
introducing into our curriculum, an undergraduate seminar this coming fall which deals with addiction and disease in the
American experience. So my own university thinks I am qualified to teach these courses. And then I had an immense of amount
of reading in these areas and I have developed over the period of years my interest shift changed and they began to shift and
change into issues having to do with social issues related to health as reflected in the book on drinking in the 1970s and I have
tried to continue to maintain and expand those interests. So I was trained in how to do history and that's what I try to do.
Q. The course you are going to teach in addiction this fall, is that the first course you will be teaching that relates to smoking?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. I think you have testified previously that you began your research or work relating to cigarettes in 1994?
A. No. Actually, I ran across a great deal of material from the 19th century when I was working on drinking back in the 1970s
because, as I indicated earlier, there is a parallel history.
Q. But that wasn't the focus of your research at time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. No, but that's how a lot of projects will develop, because you find something that's interesting that is there and you say,
well, I have to perhaps get to that someday.
Q. When did that project develop, the smoking project?
A. The smoking project? In relation to -- you mean -- tell me what you mean by the smoking project.
Q. When did you -- aside -- you say you ran across smoking related research in the context of doing Drinking in America;
is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. At what point in time did you focus your interest on the smoking component?
A. I made the transition in the 1990s.
Q. 1994?
A. I don't want to say there was any -- I had an interest that was there and I began to focus more on that interest in the 1990s.
Q. When were you first contacted by the -- how did you make your first contact with the tobacco industry?
A. I was first contacted, as I recall, in 1986.
Q. By whom?
A. That's a good question. I believe the person's name, guessing at this, it has been a long time, 14 years, Barbara Kacir.
Q. She was an attorney for the tobacco industry?
A. She was an attorney with Jones Day Reavis & Pogue.
Q. What was the nature of your contact with this Jones Day lawyer?
A. Of course it has been several years ago, but we had a conversation about would I perhaps be interested in doing some research
and at that particular point in time because I was so heavily involved in two or three other projects I didn't really have time in
my schedule to pursue or follow-up on anything. So I respectfully declined.
Q. Do you have an understanding of why you were asked to do tobacco related research?
A. I really can't give you a specific reason.
Q. You hadn't published anything as of that time that related to tobacco; right?
A. No, but I published a book on drinking and I said there's a parallel history.
Q. So you think you were contacted because you had written a book on drinking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I can't tell you why but that may well have had something to do with it, yes.
Q. Were you surprised -- do you remember at the time being surprised when you were contacted by a tobacco industry attorney?
A. Not really. I mean, I receive a lot of contacts from various individuals. I have been contacted about drinking cases.
Q. When was the next time you were contacted by somebody on behalf of the tobacco industry?
A. I am going to guess but I think it was in 1994.
Q. What was the nature of that contact or communication?
A. I had a conversation with Paul Koethe who is here in the room today and with a gentleman by the name of Steve Kacyznski.
I would attempt to spell Kacyznski but I am not sure -- that was --
Q. So you were contacted by these gentlemen. What was the nature of that contact?
A. It was very similar to the contact with Barbara Kacir several years before.
Q. Were they looking for your help in litigation?
A. Yes, I think they were.
Q. At the time, 1994 when you were contacted by these Jones Day lawyers, you had not yet begun your focused research on
the awareness of health risks associated with smoking; is that right?
A. That's right.
Q. What happened subsequent to your meeting with or contact with these Jones Day lawyers?
A. We had a very general conversation. There was no specific case at that point that I recall. And I asked to review certain
kinds of materials that might be available and I said that I would begin the process of trying to look at materials that had to
do with questions relating to public awareness.
Q. You asked the attorneys for that information?
A. Not specifically. There are -- I don't remember -- we may have looked at some documents or something like that, I don't recall
at this point. But nothing -- I wasn't presented anything on public awareness per se, I was asked to go and research that issue.
Q. I am just following up with what you --
A. Perhaps I wasn't clear enough. Again, I am trying to recall conversations long since taken place.
Q. Do you recall when you were first retained for a particular case?
A. For a particular case, I would say yes, my recollection would have been -- let's say -- if my meeting was in -- this initial
meeting I described was in April or May, I was contacted about working on a specific case in either August or September of
1994. Four months later, something like that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Subsequent to that point in 1994 you were retained in the 15 or so cases you testified about earlier?
A. Yes.
Q. Would you say your retention on behalf of the tobacco industry and tobacco litigation has been constant since August or
September of 1994?
A. Two points. No, it has not been. And I am here representing the historical record.
Q. When you say no, you haven't been retained regularly since 1994, were there down periods, down time that you weren't
active?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you identify those periods?
A. Well, there's -- the first case that I was actively involved in was the Burton case which is listed in my statement. And then
there was a down period, if that's the term I am supposed to use, for a year or so after the spring of 1996 when that deposition
was taken, it was taken in February of 1996, then there were cases largely with the Florida base, I worked on those for a while
but those cases were rather quickly all dismissed. So that there would have been another down period let's say in -- I am really
guessing here, 1997, 1998, and then I was contacted about working on the Ohio Ironworkers case and that was in the summer
of 1998. Tried in March of ‘99. And then there was a down period after that for about whatever that is, four or five months
before I was contacted about the two cases that are on our agenda today.
Q. I appreciate that overlay. There were other cases since 1994 that you were retained in that you just didn't testify to?
A. Yes.
Q. In those cases you did, in some instances you prepared reports and did other types of research; right?
A. Yes.
Q. When was the first time that you actually issued a written report in tobacco litigation? Was that in the 1996 time frame?
A. No, it would have been a little bit before then. I think it would be in the David Burton case. Which is referenced here. And
I am going to guess at this in terms of issuing a report would have been about two months before -- two or three months. So
it was sometime in late 1995.
Q. Is that the first time that you put in writing your views or conclusions with regard to your tobacco research?
A. Yes.
Q. Other than in expert reports that you have issued in tobacco litigation, have you put in writing your views about tobacco,
and I am carving out the publication -- the document you say that is going into publication shortly?
A. I am not sure --
Q. I will restate that. You have testified that you have got a work in progress with regard to your awareness about health effects
of smoking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Yes.
Q. When did you begin that -- it's a book?
A. Yes.
Q. When did you begin that book?
A. I started to conceptualize that book in 1970s which is characteristic of my projects, I work on them in my mind actually years
before I get to them because of the different projects I am trying to do at any given time and I began -- I had some research
that I was involved in in the 1970s, basically it went away --
Q. The research you are referring to in the ‘70s is drinking --
A. Was related to the research on drinking.
Q. It wasn't smoking specific research?
A. No, it was not smoking specific. Except in the sense that I began to learn there was this whole other movement out there that
I had heretofore been unaware of, probably like 99 percent of all other historians.
Q. What's the movement that you are referring to?
A. The anti-smoking movement during the 19th century into the 20th century.
Q. I didn't mean to cut you off. You took me into the ‘80s.
A. In the ‘80s because I was working on a variety of other projects and so I cranked back up with a lot more focus in the 1990s.
Q. When did you actually put pen to paper for the work that's about to be published?
A. There's very little of this book that's actually written. In other words, what I have, I have some pages, I have not looked
at them for a while and I am still --
Q. Are you still in the process?
A. Still in the process.
Q. When did the process begin of putting pen to paper for this book?
A. I probably started to jot things down in terms of thoughts, ideas, concepts in ‘97. 1997.
Q. The bulk of your research relating to awareness of the health effects of cigarettes has come in the 1990s?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You have already testified about your policy of billing for your time, billing the law firm that retains you in these litigations
for your time. Is it accurate to say all of the time you have spent on research into tobacco in the 1990s has been billed to law
firms that have retained you in tobacco litigation?
A. No, it has not.
Q. Can you give me an instance?
A. This is not a subject with, let's say, an extensive background of books being available but anything that I would read in terms
of background material I don't bill. Any research that I do that is specific to the particular project I will not bill.
Q. Can you give me an example of that?
A. Yes. I have been doing a lot of reading in a subject area I may well develop a seminar on, the history of conspiracies in
the American experience, and I have not billed any of that time in terms of background because one of the things I do as a
historian is that I spend a lot of time working with graduate students in trying to show them the varieties of interpretations that
are out there on any given subject and so that's one of the areas that I happen to be very interested in and, again, as an example,
and I haven't billed for any of that.
Q. Other than background research, all of your research that you have done related to tobacco in the 1990s has been billed to
law firms that have retained you in tobacco litigation?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. Mischaracterizes testimony.
A. What I am trying to say is if the research is specific to the questions that I have been asked to review which are stated here
in my reports, that has been billed to the respective law firm. But that if it is research that relates to the book project per se,
I haven't billed that.
Q. There are separate subjects that relate to the book?
A. That's what I was trying to indicate to you.
Q. I didn't appreciate that. Perhaps you could describe it a little more fully, the types of research --
A. I just gave you an example. I have done a lot of background reading in, for lack of a better term, incredibly arcane literature
that might well relate to the book let's say in pamphlets dealing with the 1870s -- what was being presented about the subject
in the 1870s, 1880s and 1890s and I haven't tried to bill that time. I am trying to give you more specific in the second example,
I have done a lot of reading in the subject of the history of conspiracies and as a mental process in the American experience --
Q. I may have to cut you off right there because we have to change the tapes.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 11:28 a.m. This completes tape number 1 of the videotaped deposition of Mr. James
Kirby Martin.
(Recess taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 11:54 a.m. This begins tape number 2 of the videotaped deposition of Mr. James Kirby
Martin.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
BY MR. STOLPER:
Q. Professor Martin, I wanted to follow-up with a couple of questions based on the last answer you gave before we broke. You
mentioned that you had done some work on the history of conspiracies.
A. Yes.
Q. Can you explain what you mean by the history of conspiracies?
A. In the history of the United States, a very common form of explaining events is that some sort of a conspiracy has taken
place or some sort of conspiracy has occurred. Obvious would be the conspiracy to shoot JFK or assassinate JFK or Abraham
Lincoln. Less well-known or obvious examples would be such as poisoning presidents in the 19th century and seeing those
presidents die or be in train wrecks or that sort of thing because they favored the abolition of slavery. So one of the things that
historians do is what we do and we teach historiography which deals with the process and art of interpretation and there are
various types of interpretations. One category of which would be conspiracies.
Q. So what's your experience been in studying the history of conspiracies? Which conspiracy have you studied?
A. I have looked at a number, read a number of books on the subject.
Q. The subject of conspiracies generally?
A. Yes, conspiracies generally. Everything from -- I mean, some of this -- what you are trying to do here is get at the way people
perceive and understand reality. That is the idea. In other words, there are many people perhaps in the United States today who
believe that little green people did involve Roswell, New Mexico in the 1940s.
Q. There weren't?
A. We don't have proof one way or the other but all of this information is being suppressed for some reason. A very recent
example that comes to mind, I haven't read anything particularly about it but it was all over the news was the conspiracy on
the part of the British royalty to kill Princess Diana because she was dating an individual of a Muslim background. So they are
all over the place, these kind of interpretations, and so what we are trying to do, what I am trying to do is get at a process of
thinking, process of understanding how people interpret the events around them.
Q. The examples that you gave of conspiracies suggests that at least the conspiracies that you have studied are those that -- in
the conspiracies that you have studied are you trying to disprove the conspiracy theory?
A. Not necessarily. I am not trying to prove or disapprove. I am trying to get at the way people perceive and understand reality
and how that might relate to issues like smoking and drinking, yes.
Q. Let me put it a different way. The conspiracies that are of interest to you are those that are subject to question?
A. I think all conspiracy theories are basically subject to question. I mean, I will --
Q. Maybe I can cut to the chase on this. Your study of conspiracy is limited to conspiracy theories, not actual conspiracies
that have been borne out in history?
A. That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Do the conspiracies that you have studied, are they limited to instances where individuals are killed, like presidents or people
of royalty?
A. Oh, no.
Q. Have you studied examples of experiences involving industry?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you give an example?
A. Well, I certainly -- I am really not sure whether I can give an example at this particular point in time.
Q. You said yes pretty affirmatively though.
A. I know I did but I am sort of going through in my mind what I might pick out that -- I guess I will have to change my yes
to a no at this point.
Q. Is there something that came to mind that you have changed your mind on?
A. Well, if we talk about presidential assassination sometimes industry will be implicated in presidential assassination such as
in the presidency of John F Kennedy. At various times various businesses have been associated with that assassination, various
unions and union groups, as has the Cuban government and on and on. So no one particular one stands out.
Q. Focusing on the research that you have done relating to the tobacco industry and cigarettes, you mentioned that you had
a research assistant that has helped you out. You also mentioned that you were assisted by a friend by the name of Shelly
Bookspan; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Who is Shelly Bookspan?
A. Shelly Bookspan has a small public history firm devoted to do research and the name of the firm is PHR Associates.
Q. What's the principal work of PHR Associates?
A. They do contract research.
Q. An example?
A. They -- I think the best example I can give you would be related to this particular case, they have done some research in
various union publications.
Q. Did you sign a contract with PHR?
A. No, I did not.
Q. You mention they do contract work. Is that how you would characterize the work they have done for you here?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. They have sent me material but it hasn't been because of a contract. I don't have a contractual relationship with them.
Q. Have you paid them for the work they did?
A. I have not.
Q. Has anyone paid them for the work they did?
A. I suppose, yes, but I can't tell you who.
Q. Why do you suppose, what's your supposition?
A. My supposition is they don't work for free.
Q. Did you put them in contact with the tobacco industry or Womble Carlyle?
A. No. I have known of Shelly Bookspan and I have been in contact with her for several years. She is very highly regarded among
public historians for the work she does in terms of doing contract historical research but I didn't put her in contact with anybody.
Q. But you called her up and asked her for help?
A. I called her up to ask her for materials she might have available to her.
Q. Did she have them available?
A. In some instances she was involved in doing research that had to do with union publications and I asked her to send me copies.
Q. Were there other instances when she didn't have the materials?
A. With respect to this particular case, that was the only request that I made.
Q. Has she helped you out with other cases?
A. Years ago when I worked on the David Burton case and did not really have anyone who could help me get research done
at a fairly rapid rate, she did help out with respect to helping me locate local newspaper articles that I would have had a very
hard time getting at myself.
Q. So in this particular case, the Falise matter, Shelly Bookspan has -- her research consisted of locating and providing you
with copies of union newspapers and journals; is that right?
A. Yes. With some.
Q. When you say some, not all of the ones that you have found you have gotten from Shelly Bookspan?
A. That's correct.
Q. You didn't pay Shelly Bookspan for her time or effort to get you those documents?
A. No, I didn't. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Do you have any idea as to whether or not she has been compensated for providing you with those materials?
A. I presume she has, yes.
Q. What's the presumption, who would have paid her?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. You are asking him to speculate. He already told you he doesn't know.
Q. You can answer.
A. I presume a law firm.
Q. Which one?
A. I don't know.
Q. Did you talk to her about how she could get paid for her work?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you talk to her at all about -- what was your understanding with her -- did she think she was going to get paid from
you for this work?
A. No.
Q. You asked her for it, it was in the context of a favor to you?
A. No.
Q. Did she tell you I will provide you this but I have to get paid from somebody?
A. We never discussed payment.
Q. Was it understood that she would be paid?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. You can only ask him whether he understood it. You can't ask him what she understood.
A. I would have assumed that, yes, that she was being paid.
Q. Why would you have assumed that?
A. Because she has a business and she has to make a living.
Q. Does her business have any affiliation with the tobacco industry?
A. Not so far as I know.
Q. How about the lawyers representing the tobacco industry?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Affiliation is a term I am not sure --
Q. Has she been retained, has she done any business with the tobacco industry or lawyers for the tobacco industry?
A. Yes. With respect to the Burton case, that is where we first made contact. I believe the contact was Jones Day.
Q. Do you believe that relationship continues until today?
A. Whether it is continuous or not I really don't know.
Q. Do you have an understanding whether or not the work that she did for you she provided to anyone else?
A. I am not sure I can answer that question. I really don't know.
Q. You can't answer because you don't know?
A. I really -- I really don't know -- I asked for specific kind of areas. Whether she was doing research in these areas and she
said yes and I said here are some things I would be interested in that would help with my own research and that's basically
what we discussed.
Q. Right. So what I am confused is the research you asked her to do was specific to your interest; is that right?
A. Yes. Because it involved union publications.
Q. What basis do you have to think she would be getting paid for research that she did for you that was specific to your interest
if you are not the one paying her?
A. I don't know. I can't answer the question. I don't know how to answer the question.
Q. Do you have a professional or -- how would you characterize your relationship with Shelly Bookspan; professional, personal?
A. We have talked on the phone several times. Initially when -- this would be back in the mid ‘90s, when her name came up as
a possible researcher, I contacted a close friend of mine who was one of the leading public historians in the United States and
asked him about her qualifications and credentials and he gave her the very highest ratings and that meant a great deal to me.
Q. That describes your initial contact with her. I am trying to get at how you would describe your relationship today. Is it a
purely professional one?
A. Yes, it is a purely professional one.
Q. How much time did she put in in doing the research for you in this case?
A. I really don't know.
Q. You have used the term public historian. Can you define or explain that term?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Yes. A public historian does not do traditional academic history in the sense that public historians do not normally hold
academic positions, teach, research, write monographs, that sort of thing, rather they make their living through various public
venues. Everything from, say, working for a corporation, helping them organize their archives to doing contract research.
Q. What were the instructions you gave to Shelly Bookspan for the research you asked her to do in this case?
A. I said that I would appreciate receiving copies of any materials that she had or that she was in the process of researching
which had to do with union publications.
Q. Did you define union publications for her?
A. Well, union publications in the sense of the magazines that we have talked about that the various unions put out on a weekly,
biweekly, monthly basis.
Q. I guess I am trying to clarify. You have used the term today, you have referenced unions. I know we talked before about
insulators or asbestos workers, insulators being a subset of asbestos workers. You interjected the term union. Are you talking
about a larger universe of all union workers in the United States or are you talking about union workers who were exposed
to asbestos?
A. I didn't in any way try to put any specifics on because when we use our term asbestos workers, that falls across so many
different unions and so many different occupations that's it very difficult to say just do this or that or this or that.
Q. So your research -- so your guidance to Shelly Bookspan was not limited in any way to asbestos specific unions, but was
more broadly defined to include all unions?
A. Yes.
Q. Would the same be true for your own research?
A. Well, I have looked at -- I am trying to think if there are any union publications that I have gone through and taken notes
from -- I don't really take notes, I make copies of the documents, that's what I mean by that, that would go beyond our universe
of asbestos workers. There may be a few but I am not sure what they would be because in so many of these unions individuals
were in touch with asbestos in one way or another.
Q. So as I understand it, you had asked Shelly Bookspan to provide you with copies of union journals or magazines?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Was there a time frame provided?
A. Well, it would probably be the time frame would be as soon as possible.
Q. I mean the dates of the union journals.
A. I'm sorry. The dates of the union journals would certainly be on the whole from let's say the -- early to mid 1950s to the 1990s.
Q. Did you give her any other guidance in terms of what materials you were looking for other than to say you wanted union
journals or the magazines from the 1950s onwards?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. We talked about material she had already done research on and it was already available or we talked about filling out some
of the material that I had initiated and I just didn't have time to get to or in some cases I would say, well, I have already had a
time to do, let me give you an example of fairly thorough run of the Carpenter magazine, so there would be no reason to redo
the Carpenter magazine in terms of going through it.
Q. So the only other piece of information you provided her with or discussed with her was individual unions whose materials
you didn't need because you had already got?
A. Yes. That would be one of the categories, yes.
Q. Was there any other types of guidance or information you provided her in terms of the scope of research you needed her to do?
A. Well, it was to work within a reasonable number and reasonable group. I don't -- I don't remember that I talked about don't
do this or don't do that.
Q. What does that mean when you say work within a reasonable number?
A. Well, what I think is one of the -- from my point of view as an historian is one of the amazing things that I certainly have
found is that there are an incredible number of union publications and these publications are national, they are by union, local, in
some cases you have local unions with their own publications with their own magazines and you have independent newspapers.
So the list is really quite long. It's very extensive.
Q. So did you ask for everything on the list?
A. No, I didn't. I didn't talk in terms of that. We talked in terms of unions that may well have been involved in the cases that
we're dealing with.
Q. Meaning you identified for her unions that would potentially have asbestos workers in it?
A. Yes. And let me give you -- I believe I have listed many of them in the second report. I can read that if you would like. That
would relate to our -- to the specific journals that we discussed.
MR. KRAUS: Can we go off the record?
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 12:16 p.m. We are going off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 12:17 p.m. We are back on the record.
BY MR. STOLPER:
Q. Professor, you were referencing union journals or publications that are listed in your expert report; right?
A. Yes.
Q. The unions that you reference in your report, did you make any effort to identify unions whose membership consisted of
workers exposed to asbestos?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I don't really know how to answer that question because, as I have been learning, so many unions have workers, many more
than I would have originally thought, who were involved in occupations that might have brought them into contact with asbestos.
Q. So --
A. Can I give you an example?
Q. Yes.
A. United Auto Workers, I would not have thought initially but some members of that union if we get into the brake lining
aspect would have had contact with asbestos.
Q. I understand that your initial perceptions have changed as you did the research. Are you unable to delineate among the
population or number of unions out there which contained a significant amount of members that were exposed to asbestos
versus those that didn't?
A. As we have gone along and you get involved in a host of occupations, I wouldn't have necessarily thought -- let me give you
an example. Carpenters initially and then it starts to become obvious, carpenters who would have been involved in building
homes -- it starts to become obvious that carpenters who would have been involved in building homes would have been in
contact with asbestos because of insulation materials being put into homes, so they would have been breathing asbestos fibers.
That wasn't something initially that I would have been thinking about. I would have been thinking much more about individuals
who were involved in actually handling asbestos directly.
Q. Again, I realize your answer -- you are putting it into a time frame that there's a distinction between your initial perception
and you know your understanding today. But as you sit here, can you delineate among the unions that exist in the United States
today between those whose membership consist of asbestos-exposed workers versus those that do not?
A. Can I make the distinction on the two categories? The best answer I can give you is what I have learned is that it's very hard
to make that delineation because so many workers were exposed to asbestos in a variety of ways. The numbers tend to run in
the 10 to 15 million area and when you are talking about numbers like that, that would involve a great deal of union members
especially at a point in time, when, well, at any point in time -- I'm not sure whether the American labor movement ever had
more than 15 million workers in unions. So you are talking about a large portion of population.
Q. I understand that you said it's very hard to delineate, that the volume of workers that qualifies is large. Notwithstanding the
fact it's very hard, is it your opinion that it's impossible to delineate between those unions?
A. No.
Q. So have you?
A. Have I tried to make that delineation?
Q. Yes?
A. No, I don't -- I don't think I have tried to make that kind of a delineation. My point is, again, what I have been learning is
how wide asbestos exposure really was.
Q. So when you are giving opinions about the awareness of those that were exposed to asbestos, how do you give an opinion
-- if you can't delineate between those that were exposed and those that weren't, how can you opine between the --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Let me give you an example. The International Machinist Union, I did a very complete run of their publication called
Machinist. This is a union which claims a membership of 3 million.
Q. This is The machinists you are talking about?
A. Yes. Machinist. Initially I was not aware that there were units of the machinist union, that is locals where individuals would
have been handling asbestos in some way and I learned that there were and I also saw then in the machinist's union publications
there were extensive warnings about smoking and some warnings about asbestos exposure.
Q. Who saw that?
A. I did.
Q. I thought you referred to someone in the third person.
A. No, I did.
Q. So that's consistent with what you were saying before, is that initially you wouldn't have thought the machinist would have
fallen in this category but through your research you identified they did?
A. Yes.
Q. I understand that. What I am talking about today is here today based on everything you know, based on all the reading you
have done, is it possible to draw lines between unions that have asbestos-exposed workers and those that do not?
A. What I can tell you is go back over the numbers again, the estimates are 11 million or more union members have had
exposure to asbestos. At no time, to the best of my knowledge, so least as far as I know, did union membership go beyond
the 15 to 20 million level.
Q. You are talking about union membership nationwide?
A. Yes.
Q. You say 11 million of the 15 million union workers of the United States were exposed to asbestos?
A. Yes. That is not my number, that's a government number.
Q. You are aware that the degree of exposure varies by trade and by circumstance; right?
A. Yes.
Q. You are aware that the risk of getting disease from asbestos exposure is dose response related; correct?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. Calls for an opinion outside the expertise for which he has been proffered.
Q. You can answer if you have an understanding.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. My understanding is that some individuals would argue there is a threshold, if you can get the dust in the area below that
threshold, asbestos will not develop. And there are many other individuals, among them Dr. Selikoff, who would have stated
that's not true, you have to get asbestos completely out of the air, you are at risk when you are in contact with even a very
little asbestos fibers or dust.
Q. So this morning when we were talking about definitions and we were talking about insulators versus other asbestos workers
in the universe of workers exposure to asbestos, that universe as you would see is, on the outside, 11 million strong?
A. That's a government figure. That's not --
Q. But is that your understanding?
A. That's my understanding based on a government figure I have seen.
Q. So the definition we are talking about in your mind of asbestos-exposed workers was around 11 million?
A. I am basing that on the number that was prevalent in the 1970s.
Q. So the opinion that you are giving in this case about the awareness of those exposed to the asbestos with the risks of smoking,
the population that you are opining about is the 11 million workers?
A. Well, to the best of my knowledge, these kinds of publications that we have been discussing would have been reaching
virtually everyone in that category. It wasn't just publications. There are a lot of other ways to get information out there.
Q. I realize your opinion and how you arrive at awareness is based upon different types of information. I am trying to
definitionally understand how you arrived at the population that you are interested in. As I can tell, the population that you are
talking about is 11 million strong; is that right?
A. That's a figure that was given out by United States government in the 1970s.
Q. I understand where the number comes from, I am trying to understand that your definition that we were talking about this
morning is the 11 million number?
A. I can't -- I don't know where that number came from. We know numbers can come from all sorts of different places. But
that's somebody's estimate so I am just offering that here as an estimate.
Q. Okay. Can you just state for clarity sake what is that 11 million figure an estimate of?
A. It's an estimate of the number of workers who up to the 1970s when asbestos was still being used in some 3,000 products
or whatever the number, another estimate that was being given out, that is the number of individuals who may, in some way
may have had some exposure to asbestos and may have been subject to disease.
Q. Thank you for clearing that up for me.
Do you have an understanding of how many insulators there were at the time that Dr. Selikoff was studying the insulators?
A. Yes.
Q. What is that number?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. That number -- he originally studied two unions, New York 12, New York 32. I can't give you the exact number but it was
say some 650 individuals approximately.
Q. Those are two locals of an international insulator union; right?
A. That's correct. And then beginning in 1967 or ‘68, approximately, he decided to do the whole union membership, the number
that was given out in his publications was approximately 17,800.
Q. And the number of the two locals combined is around 6 to 700?
A. That's my recollection. It's in that area.
Q. I am taking you back to your understanding of Dr. Harris. You had testified earlier that it was your understanding that Dr.
Harris was drawing a distinction between the knowledge of the insulators as opposed to the complete universe of asbestos-
exposed workers; is that right?
A. Only with this qualification: There was more than one Harris report and it wasn't entirely clear to me when he was talking
about the general population and when he was talking about individuals who may have been exposed to asbestos or our asbestos
worker group.
Q. Dr. Harris only issued one report with regard to what asbestos workers knew about the risks associated with smoking and
asbestos exposure; right?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. I think that assumes a fact contrary to what the evidence is.
A. I thought there were three or four.
Q. I will represent to you that Dr. Harris has issued six reports in this case but each of those reports relates to different topics
and that some of those reports relate to the damages calculation that he does.
A. I have not seen all six.
Q. You have seen a few of the reports?
A. I think three.
Q. Perhaps for clarity sake I will bring you a copy after our lunch break and we can make sure that there's no ambiguity there.
I don't think we need to hold up the line of questioning anyway.
Your understanding was that he was drawing a distinction between the insulators and the asbestos worker population in general;
right?
A. Yes.
Q. What is the number of insulators -- you have identified two universes or populations of insulators. There's the international
number which is 17,800 for Dr. Selikoff then there's the locals number of 6 to 700. What's your understanding of the universe
that Dr. Harris was analyzing?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. My understanding is that it was the larger of two numbers.
Q. The 17,800?
A. Yes.
Q. So it's your understanding that Dr. Harris was contrasting the knowledge or the awareness of the 17,800 insulators to the
11 million asbestos workers?
A. I would really have to go back and relook at the reports before I can answer that question.
Q. Okay. We will table that question until after the lunch break.
Maybe now would be a good time to take a lunch break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 12:31 p.m. We are going off the record.
(Time noted: 12:31 p.m.)
AFTERNOON SESSION
(Time noted: 2:29 p.m.)
JAMES KIRBY MARTIN, resumed and testified as follows: EXAMINATION (Cont'd.)
BY MR. STOLPER:
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 2:29 p.m. We are back on the record.
Q. Good afternoon, Professor Martin. We will mark as Exhibit 3 Dr. Harris's reports in this matter as we discussed before our
lunch break.
(Martin Exhibit 3, Dr. Harris's reports, marked for identification, as of this date.)
Q. If you can take a minute to look at what's been marked as Exhibit 3.
MR. KRAUS: Michael, it's a very long series of the reports. Is there a particular report you want to draw his particular attention
to?
MR. STOLPER: Yes.
Q. I would like to draw your attention to what I believe has been denoted there by tab 1 of Dr. Harris's report which is entitled
Accurate and Timely Anti-smoking Health Information Would Have Had a Significant Deterrent on Cigarette Smoking by
Those Asbestos-Exposed Individuals Who Are Likely to File Claims Against the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.
Is that what you have there denoted as number 1?
A. Yes.
Q. If you could take a moment to look at that report of Dr. Harris's.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. You mean report number 1?
Q. Report number 1.
A. Okay.
Q. Have you had a chance to look at Dr. Harris's report?
A. Yes, I have looked at it.
Q. Is this one of the reports that you reviewed prior to your deposition?
A. I believe so. But I can't say for sure.
Q. When you testified just a few -- right before the break that you needed to take a look at Dr. Harris's report or reports in
this case to refresh your recollection as to your understanding of his opinion, is the report that I have put in front of you that
report to which you were referring?
A. Well, I can't say for sure because I think that I have looked at a total of three reports and there are actually, I guess there
are five here --
Q. Six with the one attached.
A. Six. Some of this seems slightly familiar.
Q. When did you look at Dr. Harris's report prior to today?
A. I would say within three or four months ago. This report I saw is dated January 20th, so perhaps sometime in February
or March.
Q. Having had a chance to look at this report that we put in front of you, report 1 of Dr. Harris, I will repeat the question that
I posed to you right before lunch. That is is it your understanding that Dr. Harris was comparing the level of awareness of risk
of the 17,800 insulators in contrast to the asbestos worker population in general which you identified as roughly 11 million?
A. Well, this isn't the clearest report I have ever read so it's somewhat hard to figure out. As I pass through it I saw some
numbers -- I will go back and find them. Just give me a second. Here is a number on page 11, I will read the sentence, it's the
second paragraph, “By way of sensitivity analysis, ran the same statistical test on the larger cohort of 2,907 insulators which
included 664 men who were not invited to be examined during 1981/1983. In this group there were a total of 2,321 men who
ever smoked.” There's a number. I don't know what that number refers to.
I will continue on and see if I see somewhere where he talks about -- okay, here on page 13, under conclusions, “In particular,”
this is the first full paragraph, seconds sentence, “In particular, during the period from 1962 onward the insulators quit rates
were to 50 percent greater than those of the general population or of insulators before 1962.” Now that would imply to me that
he has some sampling from the general population and that he has some group of insulators before 1962.
Q. I see what you are referring to on page 13. Is that something -- are you surprised to see that in this report?
A. I don't know whether I am surprised to see it or not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Is that different from your understanding of Dr. Harris's report that you testified to this morning?
A. I don't know what he means by the general population or of insulators before 1962.
Q. You don't know what he means as you read it today?
A. As I read these words on this particular page, I do not know what he means. In leafing through the report I didn't pick it
up at the outset. Here on page 2, “Support my conclusion,” this is the first paragraph -- first full paragraph, “To support my
conclusion, I present the reports of my analysis of smoking cessation rates during 1950-1982 in a nationwide cohort of over
2,200 insulation workers who from the early to mid 1960s onward had received repeated messages from Dr. Irving Selikoff
and colleagues at the Mt. Sinai School of Medicine that smoking and asbestos were a particularly deleterious mix.” And then
he proceeds on to say, he makes the statement about the 40 to 50 percent greater quit rate than those of an age match control
group drawn randomly from the population.
Q. Does that refresh your recollection as to what Dr. Harris's -- to what population Dr. Harris is contrasting in his report?
A. In this report, yes.
Q. When you say this report, are you saying he does a different contrast in another report?
A. I am under the impression based on reviewing this material at some point there is some sort of an additional group that bears
a comparison or there is a different group with which there is a comparison.
Q. A different group than what's compared here?
A. Yes. Part of the problem is I don't know what he means by an age matched control group drawn randomly from the general
population. I don't know where that comes from.
Q. If I could draw your attention to page 6 of that report you have in front of you under the heading Data of Men Matched by
Year of Birth. If you could just read the first sentence that appears under that heading.
A. Right here at the bottom? “I constructed matched comparison groups of men that had ever smoked cigarettes from data on
the respondents to the cancer, epidemiology in cancer control supplements to 1987 National Health interview surveys.”
Q. That's fine. Do you see that sentence?
A. NHIS. Yes.
Q. Does that refresh your recollection of where he gets the information from the general population?
A. I guess -- yes, it does.
Q. Having read those specific provisions of Dr. Harris's report, do you have a revised reflection or understanding of the
populations that Dr. Harris is comparing?
A. Yes. This is now my understanding that what he has done is he has compared some sort of a portion of the 17,800 insulators
that Dr. Selikoff worked with beginning in 1969/68 with some sort of random sample drawn from a 1987 population group.
General population group.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. That's different from your understanding that you testified to this morning?
A. Well, it's been a while since this morning and I think I said this morning that I thought he was doing a comparison with
other asbestos workers.
Q. Comparison between the insulators and other asbestos workers; right?
A. And other asbestos workers and I can't recall whether I said the possibility of the general population. This goes to my
impression that at some point, because we have only looked at the first report, that there is some adjustment to this general
population group. Now maybe there are additional comparisons that occur as we go along and I simply brought those together
in my mind, I can't say for sure, but as of the report number
1. It's a general population comparison with a very specific subgroup of Selikoff, Dr. Selikoff's 17,800 insulators.
Q. You have not offered an opinion in this case that compares the level of awareness of the 17,800 insulators to the general
population; right?
A. Actually, I think I have done that.
Q. Where would you have done that?
A. Throughout both of my reports.
Q. Can you point me to someplace in your report where you draw that contrast between the insulators and the general population
in terms of the level of awareness?
A. As these reports are constructed they are written in two parts. The first part focuses on general awareness in the population
including union members and a subset of that group would be the insulators. In the second report I focus on union members
and the matter of information about synergy. I do not necessarily select out a particular group because I know that knowledge
does not stay contained in our kind of society within the confines of a particular group. It just doesn't work that way.
Q. But your two reports identify two groups of individuals who are at risk due to their smoking. Your first report you said talks
about the general population; right?
A. To come back to my understanding, I have identified a group that is the general population of smokers who would be --
have some health risks because they are smokers and I have also dealt with a subgroup within that general population, a group
that was in contact with asbestos, therefore, they may have had -- they also had a problem but it wasn't the same and that is
that smoking was the potential source of disease for them.
Q. So the second group which would be identified in your supplemental report is a subset of the general population that's
identified in your first report; right?
A. Yes.
Q. But nowhere in your reports have you opined on any differences between the subgroup that's identified in your supplemental
report to the general population at large that you have identified in your first report; isn't that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. What I have done in the second, I had said that the dissemination of information from Dr. Selikoff and others reached
into all sorts of different union quarters and all sorts of different union groups that that information was not confined to one
particular group.
Q. But that's not the answer to my question. The question is did you offer an opinion comparing or analyzing the difference
between the two groups and the answer is no; isn't that right?
A. I'm not sure how to answer that question because what I did offer was an opinion that this information was out there and
it was distributed among union members.
Q. Which is your subset, what you refer to as your subset?
A. Right.
Q. So you said --
A. I can even go further. I did not pick up in the process that our specific group of insulators were getting far more information
than other individuals. I just did not pick that up.
Q. One way or the other?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. You are mischaracterizing what he just said.
Q. It's a question. You can answer.
A. What I said was that, and I think this comes out clearly in the report, that this information was disseminated broadly and
widely among union members whether they be of the asbestos worker group or our particular subset, the insulators among the
asbestos worker group. In other words, this information is disseminated broadly and widely.
Q. So your opinion is you saw no distinction between the insulator group and the larger population of union workers; is that right?
A. I would say that that is generally correct.
Q. Okay. So you were able to opine you saw no distinction there between those two identifiable groups. What I am asking you
is whether or not you were able to draw the same distinction between the subset of union workers and the general population
at large that you identified in report number 1?
MR. KRAUS: Which type of information are we talking about? Because the two reports talk about different kinds of information.
General awareness and awareness of the alleged synergy. Which type of information are you asking about in your question?
Q. You can go ahead and answer.
MR. KRAUS: I don't think he can answer without your clarifying what your question means. I object to the form of the question.
MR. STOLPER: He could answer and he could also pick up your speaking objection. He could do a lot of different things.
His testimony is his testimony.
A. We talked about what they knew in the reports.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. I am asking did you draw a distinction between the health risks, awareness of the health risks of smoking?
A. I think you are asking me to come up with some sort of artificial distinction. I don't quite know where, how I can do that
because information about the dangers associated with smoking becomes pervasive in the American society if it wasn't there
already before. And then we talk about a subset that has been exposed to asbestos or may have been exposed, it's not always
clear those individuals were exposed and there were a variety of diseases which could result from that exposure, one of which
could be lung cancer. So I don't know what the distinction is.
Q. Let's go at it a different way. In your report, Exhibit 1, your first report in this case, on the first page, second full paragraph,
I will quote you, you state, “I was asked to examine the extent of public awareness in the United States in regard to the
potential health risks associated with tobacco use and smoking cigarettes during but not limited to the 19th and 20th centuries.”
Throughout your report you use the term awareness; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you define awareness?
A. Yes. You are aware of something. You have -- I'll give you an example. Have you seen or heard information recently that
smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung, that's a 1954 awareness question in the Gallup poll, and percent of the respondents
said yes. So they were obviously aware of that notion.
Q. There are varying degrees of awareness?
A. Are there?
Q. That's the question.
A. Are there?
Q. Yes.
A. You would have to -- I don't know how to answer that question.
Q. In your report you refer to the term knowledge. Can you define that?
A. The term knowledge?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. That you are aware that these ideas, these notions, these concepts are out there to the point that a very high percentage
of the population is aware of them and it becomes a basis of common knowledge.
Q. So are you using the terms awareness and knowledge synonymously?
A. No, I am not.
Q. I asked you what knowledge was and you said it's an awareness.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Well, it's a some total of vast amount of information being made available and that becomes part of a common knowledge
but it's not just one -- I gave you an example of a particular polling question. It's not just that particular polling question, that
particular study, but it's like if we -- if I could take another example, like the term coffin nail which has been pervasive going
back to the 1880s if not before, that conveys a certain notion of what a cigarette is and that becomes knowledge because it's
out there and it's available.
Q. What's the difference between knowledge and awareness?
A. I didn't say there was a difference.
Q. I asked if they were synonymous and you said they weren't, so what's the difference?
A. I just explained it to you.
Q. You didn't explain the difference.
A. I didn't explain it to you but I explained it.
Q. What's the difference between awareness and knowledge?
A. What I just said. We can reread the question.
Q. Are you refusing to answer the question?
MR. KRAUS: He said he can't answer it any differently.
A. I don't know how I can give a different answer to what I just answered.
Q. I asked you to define knowledge. You did. Now I am asking -- you had previously defined awareness. I am asking you now
what's the difference between awareness and knowledge. You said there isn't any?
A. I will go back over it again. That is if you have information that is so pervasive in society that it's there in all sorts of
different ways, whether it be coming at you from movies, whether it be coming at you from language, whether it being coming
at you from television programs, whether it be coming at you from books you read, news programs, on and on and on, that
eventually becomes common knowledge of society that smoking may be, to use our specific case here, that smoking may be
indeed hazardous to one's health.
Q. That's your definition of knowledge; right?
A. That's what I just said.
Q. So I asked you previously how do you define awareness, you said if you hear of something or you are aware of something
that's what awareness means. Do you recall that statement?
A. Yes, and I gave a very specific example.
Q. Your definition of awareness is different from what you just said of knowledge. I am asking you to draw a distinction in
your mind between the term awareness and common knowledge.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. What I said was that you have information that is coming from several different sources all pointing to the same conclusion.
And that it is the bulk of that information, the fact that there is so much information there that makes that common knowledge
in the society about something.
Q. When something is so pervasive does that mean that everyone is aware of it?
A. Certainly by virtue by let's say the definitions of polls that I have read. When it gets up to the 80, 90 percent level that means
it's probably pretty common knowledge out there on the point.
Q. So what you are saying now it's a function of degree, it's how much one knows something?
MR. KRAUS: What is how much someone knows something?
Q. The difference between awareness and knowledge is a function of degree?
A. They are party of the same part. You are asking me to divide something that is a part of a continuum, if I could put it that
way. That's what I have tried to explain. That is that you have an awareness of a particular example, let's say there's a 1954
report by E. Cuyler Hammond and Daniel Horn sponsored by the American Cancer Society and then the question is asked are
you aware of this and 90 percent of those who were polled said yes, they are aware of it. But as that information increases,
as that information builds, as that information piles up on the desk, it becomes a matter of common knowledge because it is
coming at you, as I am trying to indicate, from several different sources.
Q. Using your example that you just gave, you are aware of a Hammond piece from 1954, you are aware of its existence; is
that right?
A. That's right.
Q. But if that same piece under your definition becomes part of the common knowledge, would that mean that the information
contained in that study has become so pervasive and widespread that everyone knows about what's in that piece? Is that consistent
with your definition of common knowledge?
A. What I said was that the survey results indicated that 90 percent said they were aware that there was a study which said there
was a relationship between smoking and lung cancer, statistical association.
Q. Can you define the term belief?
A. Yes. In order to believe something you have to be aware of something. In other words, you have to have information available
to you.
Q. So sticking with your continuum, awareness is sort of the first step, knowledge would be the second step and believing it
would be the third step; would that be consistent with your idea of a continuum?
A. I am not sure I would arrange them in any particular order but what I said was that you can't really have a belief if you don't
have some awareness about something. You can't form an opinion yea or nay on something if you don't have a fundamental
awareness.
Q. But if you are aware of something that doesn't necessarily mean you believe it; is that right?
A. You don't have to believe it, you don't have to act on it, you can be very aware of it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Can you define the term acceptance in this context?
A. The term acceptance?
MR. KOETHE: I object to that question. The form of the question. It's vague and ambiguous. Acceptance as to what?
Q. You can answer.
A. I would guess that acceptance would be interrelation to acting on the belief that you have about something. So you can accept
or you can reject that particular belief. You don't have to act on it. So acceptance would, from what we are indicating here, what
we are talking about, would seem to indicate that you accepted the belief and you acted on it.
Q. So acceptance is different from awareness?
A. Yes.
Q. Are there different -- there are different degrees of acceptance; isn't that right?
A. Well, I don't quite know what you mean. I guess we need to put an example on the table here so that I can have an idea
of what we are talking about.
Q. Let's take smoking as an example. I could be aware that smoking is bad for my health; right? At one level.
A. Yes.
Q. I could be aware that you tell me that smoking is bad for my health on one level. I could also know that smoking is bad for
my health and that's different from just being aware of it being bad for my health; isn't that right?
A. I thought we were talking about acceptance.
Q. We are going to go through all these definitions. I am starting with acceptance and knowledge. There's acceptance, knowledge
-- awareness, knowledge, belief, acceptance and the degrees of acceptance and I want to get clear with you some of these terms
that are in your report. So --
A. Let's take our example of you are aware there's a report, smoking may be a cause of lung cancer.
Q. That's the first level of awareness.
A. You then have to do I want to believe that or not. And you have several choices. You can say yes or no or I don't even want
to think about it. There are all those possibilities there. If you take that information and you accept it, it then matters whether
you are a smoker or non-smoker because a non-smoker can accept the information. They don't smoke.
Q. Let's stick to the hypothetical of a smoker.
A. They decide to accept that information and it's part of their knowledge and they then can make a decision whether they want
to keep smoking or they don't want to keep smoking, in other words, there's a matter of individual choice here to be made.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. But you are aware of the concept in the literature that one can accept a fact generally but not personalize that information?
Are you familiar with that concept?
A. I am familiar with the concept that one can accept risk and not personalize the risk and still keep participating in some sort
of risky behavior.
Q. If they accept the risk as a personal level they would take action to eliminate the risk or decide to reject the risk; isn't that right?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question.
A. An individual at some point will make a personal choice, our example, the smoker, whether they want to accept that
information or whether they want to continue as a matter of personal choice to keep smoking and that's what I can tell you
about that.
Q. I understand. So now based on that hypothetical, would you agree with me there are different degrees to which people are
aware and actually believe information that's presented to them?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question. It's compound. You are mixing different concepts.
A. What I would say in response is there are different levels of details. But if you have general awareness you still have general
awareness and you can say smoking is not good for you because of lung disease or you can say, well, smoking is not good for
you because of possibly contracting some other disease or some other disease, so there is a detail factor that comes into play
but that doesn't affect the general awareness that an individual has.
Q. So your report and your opinion is just based on general awareness; isn't that right?
A. To the point the awareness became common knowledge and pervasive in our society, that's what my report says.
Q. Your report doesn't attempt to determine whether smokers who received the information that you contained in your reports
actually accepted that information either on a generalized level or personal level; isn't that right?
A. Well, I have looked at a number of public opinion poles and there are very high levels of awareness going back into the
1950s when public polling was really not available to us before the late 40s, early 1950s, so in terms of awareness, certainly
that is there and there's other studies and other goals have been done in terms of risk analysis or asking a question like Gallup
polls would be about the potential harmfulness of cigarettes, you would again find very high levels in terms of individuals who
say yes, I am aware of that, that it can be very harmful. And that would reflect the common knowledge in society that smoking
is probably not good for one's health.
Q. I think what you just stated is your explanation of how something becomes common knowledge and how this information
becomes common knowledge and my question is much simpler than that. Your report and opinions focus on awareness to
the extent awareness becomes common knowledge but it does not address or even contemplate whether the recipient of this
smoking and health related information actually accepts that information; isn't that right?
A. I don't know whether I want to say yes because part of this growing awareness to the point of common knowledge, to
use the common place statistic that I certainly have become aware of is that since the 1964 Surgeon General's report over 50
million Americans have stopped smoking. So that would suggest to me yet further information, whether we call that belief or
acceptance, that there is common knowledge out there and that some individuals have decided to act on that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. There's no debate whether or not people have acted on it. I am just trying to understand the scope of your report and whether
or not you have done any research or analysis into the acceptance of the information. We talked about definitions. You said,
your quote before was took action in response -- people have choices about whether or not to take action.
The question to you is your report does not attempt to analyze whether anybody who is a recipient of the information that you
reference in your reports took any action in response to that information; isn't that right?
A. No.
Q. Why is it wrong?
A. Because imbedded in this report is the notion that people, some people decided to take action. That is simply a working
assumption that is in this report.
Q. By the fact that people are aware of it one should infer from your report that people quit smoking as a result of that
information?
A. People did quit smoking as a result of that information.
Q. But you don't talk about quit rates in your report; right?
A. Specific quit rates?
Q. Right.
A. I am not quite sure how to answer that question because that can also mean a very technical term. It can be a very technical
term of a statistical nature and I think in a very general way I do assume that large numbers of Americans have received
information -- let's go back -- are aware of this information, have received this information, that some portion of that population
has acted on this information 50 million strong.
Q. You don't state anywhere in your report what action people took in response to the awareness; right?
A. It's assumed. It's part of the working assumption of preparing the report.
Q. Let's assume for the moment that that information is assumed in your report. Do you attempt to quantify or measure in any
way people's response to the information that's presented in your reports?
A. I do attempt to quantify anyway -- I have just given you a number. That to me is a -- that is a number has something to do
with quantity so I am not really sure how to answer the question.
Q. You've given two reports about discrete populations that are referenced in your reports; right?
A. Well, actually one report deals with the American population so that is not a discrete population.
Q. Let's focus on the supplemental report then. You have given opinions about the people being aware of the health risk
associated with asbestos exposure and cigarette smoking; right?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You have not attempted to quantify or measure in any way whether the people who have received that information acted
upon that information in any way?
A. What I have attempted to do is look at a process of dissemination of information that went on. So this information was made
available to asbestos workers through a whole network of unions, union related activities, government publications, on and on
and on, activities of American Cancer Society, American Lung Association and what I have concluded is that that information
was disseminated very broadly and widely among that relevant population.
Q. Assume for argument sake we are not debating the information was distributed, disseminated, widespread, everybody got
a piece of paper on a regular basis for 10 years and everybody had that information presented to them and your opinion is not
in dispute, people were aware of it. The question to you is you don't attempt in your report to analyze whether or not anyone
acted upon the information that was given to them; isn't that right?
A. I would assume that of the 50 million, because that figure is in the back of my mind, that's an American Cancer Society
figure, that some number of those individuals would have been union members and they would have acted on the information
that was being made available to them.
Q. You have thrown out the number 50 million. Do you know over how many years that number --
A. Yes. I said that's a number that's given by the American Cancer Society based on their estimates of the numbers of individuals
who have stopped smoking since the Surgeon General's report in 1964. When I stopped smoking in 1996 the number was 49
point some million and I would assume that that number has increased since that time.
Q. At the same time do you have any numbers to reflect how many smokers there have been since 1964?
A. According to the American Cancer Society, more people have quit smoking since 1964 than currently smoke in the United
States.
Q. That's a different answer. I appreciate that helpful information but the question is do you know of the -- you have given us
a number of 50 million people have quit since 1964. Do you know what the number is of the universe from which they came?
The total number of smokers there have been since 1964 until today?
A. Well, today the number is, if I am not mistaken, is in the 20 to 25 percent range. Something like that. In terms of the number
of individuals who smoke in our society.
Q. 20 to 25 percent of our population smoke?
A. Yes. So let's say 20 percent. Let's say the population is 250 million. So that would mean 50 million still smoke so I don't think
that's an accurate number because what I can tell you is the American has more people have stopped smoking than currently
smoke.
Q. That means they smoke today. But since 1964 we have had billions of smokers; isn't that right?
A. I can't possibly give you a number.
Q. Do you know what the percentage of people that try to quit smoking each year is?
A. Not off the top of my head.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. It's extremely low though; isn't it?
A. I can't answer the question because I don't know.
Q. Do you have a rough idea?
A. No, I don't.
Q. If I told you the number was 2.7 percent of smokers try to quit smoking each year, do you have a basis for agreeing or
disagreeing?
A. I would have to see the number.
Q. Would you agree that some people are aware of the health risk of smoking but may not accept it on a personal level?
A. I suppose in terms of all the continuation -- continuum of possibilities, that is possible.
MR. STOLPER: I am going to mark as an exhibit --
Q. While we are looking for the document I will ask a different series of questions.
Would you agree that smokers react to information presented to them about the health risks of smoking as a general proposition?
A. As a general proposition?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, I would agree.
Q. What types of general information influence smoker behavior?
A. What kinds of information influence smoker behavior?
Q. Um-hmm.
A. Well, what I can do is speak to that issue by historical example. Let's take our 1954 -- let's go to 1957 when Hammond and
Horn put out the more complete numbers of their epidemiological study. The Gallup organization asked whether the sampling of
the population had seen or heard anything recently with respect to an ACS report on health problems associated with smoking.
In turn, the numbers, as I recall, were 77 percent of the population said yes, the awareness number. And in that sample 82
percent of the smokers said yes, they were aware of the report. So we have a slightly higher number of individuals who were
smokers who paid attention to the report. So I would assume by that example that individuals who are smokers are going to be
more aware -- they are going to be more interested in that information than individuals who are not smokers.
Q. So you say -- you're testifying about a distinction between smokers and non-smokers in terms of reacting to the information
about the risks associated with smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. You say that smokers will be more interested in information about the health risks of smoking than non-smokers?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Generally speaking, yes.
Q. Why do you think that's the case?
A. I just gave you an example.
Q. I just want to know why you think that more smokers care about the health risk of smoking than non-smokers?
A. I realize that we can complicate the issue by getting into all sorts of matters of secondhand smoke which would mean that
non-smokers would be as interested in the issue as smokers, but I am trying to deal with a population that is in the process of
gaining information coming at them from different directions about the health consequences of smoking. So I would assume
in that context that individuals who are smokers would be most interested in that information. After all, if one didn't smoke in
1957 he didn't know this was a major issue. That doesn't mean that maybe a loved one didn't smoke or something like that but
a non-smoker might have been encouraging a smoker to take this information seriously.
Q. I understand there are possibilities that a non-smoker would have an interest. I am trying to understand the information you
are presenting here. That is there's a survey result and from that survey result you draw the conclusion that smokers are more
interested in information about smoking than non-smokers; right?
A. Based on that example, yes.
Q. Do you find that to be consistently true, that smokers are more interested than the non-smokers in that type of information?
A. In terms of awareness, yes.
Q. Could it be in any other terms?
A. Well, it could certainly be in terms of the acceptance of that information or the action in relation to that information and
my sense would be that individuals who had that information and are, let's say, smokers then they have certain choices they
have to make. They can accept or they can say I don't choose to accept that information. Or they can say I enjoy what I am
doing and this is a matter of personal pleasure for me and so I am really not interested in this information. There are lots of
different things people could say in that situation.
Q. In your research of poll results and data, et cetera, have you found that smokers accept the information about the health risk
of smoking at a greater level than non-smokers?
A. If we go to a second set of examples, the Gallup organization in the 1980s would ask questions like how harmful are cigarettes,
do you think smoking is harmful. When you ask that question you would get a slightly higher number of non-smokers who
would say yes, I agree with that than smokers. You were still talking about in the 1980s a population when Gallup would ask
this, if I am not confusing the numbers, Gallup would be in the 90 percent plus range in terms of individuals who would say
yes, we agree that smoking is harmful, smoker or non-smoker.
Q. So there is a difference then between awareness and acceptance?
A. I thought we agreed that if you are aware of something you have choices. I thought we talked about that.
Q. We did but in terms of the survey results, you are quantifying the --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I was giving a second example of questions, do you think that smoking is harmful. In those cases would have a slightly
higher percentage of individuals who are non-smokers that would say yes in that situation.
Q. I had asked you before in terms of awareness why do you think smokers are more interested than non-smokers in smoking
and health related information?
A. Because going back to my example from the 1950s, it would affect them more directly.
Q. They are at greater risk?
A. That they are at greater risk? Presumably if they are smokers they are.
Q. So in your research have you found the following proposition to be true: That those at greater risk will have a greater interest
in the health related information that's presented to them than those that are at less risk?
A. It all depends on how you define risk. And there are lots of different ways to define risk. You can define risk in terms of
a general awareness or you can define risk in terms of general awareness with additional detail. So that that means that you
might have an understanding that, let's say, generally that smoking may cause cancer or that you may have a more detailed
understanding or awareness, to use I think a better term, than that that smoking may cause cancer, it may cause various other
types of lung disease or it may cause heart disease or so on and so forth. So that's the distinction I would make.
Q. But you are aware that one can objectively classify smokers into categories of risk for certain diseases; right?
A. I just gave some examples, yes.
Q. I am trying to get you to agree to the proposition as opposed to jumping to an example. You agree with the proposition that
you can classify smokers in different degrees of risk -- in different categories of risk of getting disease; right?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question.
MR. STOLPER: He needs to put the speaking objection on the record so you can answer the question incorrectly.
MR. KRAUS: Can we stop your speeches? When you say classify smokers, are you talking about an individual? One individual
has more risk than another for a particular disease or when you say you classify smokers that you are going to rank the risks?
I don't understand the question. I think it's fatally ambiguous.
MR. STOLPER: Can you read the question?
(Record read.)
A. I think my response to that was I gave examples of different kinds of diseases that are associated with smoking.
Q. But that wouldn't be an answer to the question.
A. Well, could you repeat the --
Q. I will rephrase it for you. There are some smokers that are low risk, that have low risk of getting lung cancer for example;
isn't that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. I am not sure that I would agree with that.
Q. Do you agree that some smokers have a greater risk of getting lung cancer than others?
A. Well, in the original epidemiological studies of the 1950s and 1960s, Graham and Wynder, Hammond and Horn and others
invariably concluded that individuals who were heavy smokers, by that I mean more than a pack or two packs a day, were at
greater risk of developing lung cancer over individuals who were light smokers, or individuals who would just smoke a few,
four or five cigarettes a day. That sort of thing.
Q. Okay. Fair enough.
Have you attempted to analyze in any way the different reactions to health -- to smoking and health information between a
heavy smoker and a smoker of filtered cigarettes under a pack a day as you just described?
A. Have I?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, I am not a medical doctor, an epidemiologist, so it would be hard for me to do. No, I haven't.
Q. We are talking about the -- you had testified previously that you had survey data that smokers are more interested in smoking
and health related information than non-smokers?
A. Yes.
Q. I believe you previously testified that those that are at greater risk tend to be more interested about the risk that they have
than somebody who is not in as much risk?
A. A greater risk of smoking in relation to smoking?
Q. Yes.
A. But I am talking -- I believe I was talking about a general risk in a certain kind of a context and that is that individuals who
are smokers have a keener sense that they may be at risk than individuals who, let's say, have stopped smoking for several years
or haven't ever smoked in their lifetime.
Q. Those two types of people would react to varying degrees of information about risks associated with smoking; isn't that right?
A. Yes. And I have even read that at depositions various times.
Q. Would you agree that asbestos workers face more risk between the synergistic effects of asbestos exposure and smoking
than an individual smoker who is not exposed to asbestos?
A. Based on the research that I have read in reference to asbestos workers as the group as we discussed today, that they have a
greater risk of developing a series of diseases, we have talked about those diseases, everything from asbestosis to lung cancer,
the answer is yes, they are, according to the information I have reviewed, at a greater risk.
Q. Your opinion is that that population was given a lot of information about that risk; isn't that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Yes.
Q. So would you agree with me then that population would have a grater interest in the information that was presented to them
than those that weren't exposed to asbestos, those smokers that weren't exposed to asbestos?
A. That doesn't logically follow because individuals in this society were being made aware in a whole variety of different ways
that smoking may be dangerous and to say any one individual went through a certain kind of classification process I can't
necessarily -- I am not sure that that conclusion follows.
Q. The information that you cite in your report about the information that was being distributed or disseminated by Dr. Selikoff
told asbestos workers they were anywhere from 50 -- they have 50 to 92 times greater chance of getting lung cancer than
somebody who didn't smoke; right?
A. Yes.
Q. Comparable information wasn't being disseminated to smokers who weren't exposed to asbestos; isn't that right?
A. Well, I don't know -- we are talking about a degree of detail here so it's comparable information, that comparable information
had been distributed repeatedly in American society from the beginning -- the major epidemiological studies that smoking was
the source of lung cancer whether ten times, 50 times, 100 times, I can't presume by that a correlation that somebody is going
to automatically quit when a certain number is reached, if I can put it that way.
Q. So are you saying there's no way of knowing whether a population that's at greater risk than another would actually react?
A. I am saying that one's decision to smoke or not to smoke. In the end it is a decision that an individual is going to make
based on personal choice.
Q. But people make decisions based on the information that's presented to them; right?
A. I don't think that would always hold true.
Q. If it didn't always hold true what's the relevance of people being aware of the information?
A. Well, individuals receive information, let's say the farther, we have lots of evidence that there's a high correlation as
Hammond and Horn found in their study of 187,000 Americans that statistically there's a high correlation between smoking
and lung cancer. So you have those two variables in play. So you then continue on and you say, well, someone else will come
along and say there's even a higher statistical association. If you didn't react with the first which was not good news I am not
sure an individual wouldn't make a personal choice not to react to the second or the third bit of news. So it's not necessarily a
matter of degree or matter of depth of knowledge that will cause a person to continue or not to continue.
Q. Let's try it a different way. Maybe the confusion here is when we bring it to an individual level. Let's not. Let's keep it on
the group level.
You say that the asbestos workers identified in your supplemental report were provided with vast amount of information about
synergy; right?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. As a distinct population, that group of asbestos workers will react, will have a greater interest in that information that's being
presented to them about the health risks associated with smoking than the population at large; do you agree with that?
A. Yes, but I have to put a qualifier in that it depends -- we have been talking about ten times, 50 times, 90 times and I already
said earlier today that when the information is presented it isn't necessarily presented in those terms. It may be in the terms you
know you may have a greater risk, if you are a smoker you should stop smoking, we will try to help you quit smoking, so on
and so forth, but it's not in a very specific quantitative sense as this information is presented. The one number I do see over --
I have seen many times is the Selikoff 92 times greater than non-smokers who have not worked with asbestos. Two variables.
But that doesn't mean that is necessarily the message that is being conveyed or the perceived message that, say, Dr. Selikoff
went to a particular convention and made a presentation, that isn't necessarily the message. The message is smoking is not good
for you. It's really not good for you. That's what I am trying to suggest.
Q. How do you know what the message is that's being conveyed?
A. I don't.
Q. So you are speculating what the message could be?
A. You are assuming the message is a specific number, there's a specific risk and I am not going to make that assumption
because I have no basis to make that assumption.
Q. So you are saying you have no idea what the message is from what's being presented?
A. No, that isn't what I just said to you. What I said is you have presented this in the matter of degree, that is if someone says
it's 50 times, 75 times or 90 times, they are going to react differently than if they are told smoking is not good for you. I can't
make that assumption.
Q. I understand you won't make that assumption but do you have any understanding of whether or not asbestos workers quit
smoking at a greater rate than smokers who were not exposed to asbestos?
A. Do I have any understanding --
Q. Whether or not asbestos workers quit at a greater rate than smokers who were not exposed to asbestos?
A. When we say asbestos workers we are talking about the whole universe?
Q. Yes.
A. Whether they quit at a greater rate?
Q. Um-hmm.
A. I assume that asbestos workers because many of them were former smokers, and that does come out in the data, quit in the
1960s, quit in the 1970s and quit in the 1980s. I have no evidence they quit at a more rapid rate at any particular point in time.
Q. Is that because you didn't study that?
A. The issue I have presented here has to do with awareness, common knowledge that's presented in the context as we have
talked about before, that there has been over a 50 year period -- 40 year period since the Surgeon General report, actually 36
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
years, a kind of common knowledge as we talked about, understanding, and that because of that millions of Americans have
chosen to stop smoking.
MR. KRAUS: We've been going for about an hour and a half. Is this a good time for a break?
MR. STOLPER: Sure.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 3:44 p.m. This completes tape number 2 of the videotaped deposition of Mr. James Kirby
Martin.
(Recess taken.)
(Martin Exhibit 4, Fishbein report, marked for identification, as of this date.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 4:01 p.m. and this begins tape number 3 of the videotaped deposition of Mr. James Kirby
Martin.
BY MR. STOLPER:
Q. Professor Martin, we put before you what has been marked as Exhibit 4 which is a thick document report entitled Consumers
Beliefs and Behavior With Respect to Cigarette Smoking, a Critical Analysis of the Public Literature by Martin Fishbein Ph.D.,
a report prepared for the staff of the federal trade commission dated May 1997, TIMM 0072 through 194. Have you had a
chance to look at this document?
A. Not in the last few minutes I haven't. Could you tell me what TIMM stands for?
Q. TIMM is a Bates number that's been identified and I believe it's a document produced by the Tobacco Institute. That's their
own numbering system.
The first question is prior to today have you seen this document?
A. I don't believe I have, but at the same time the author's name has a familiar ring.
Q. Martin Fishbein?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know who he is other than a Ph.D. at the University of Illinois.
A. I can't say for sure whether I have or haven't.
Q. Are you aware that in the late 1970s the Federal Trade Commission had commissioned studies or at least one study to
analyze smoker behavior?
A. I wasn't aware that that particular year they were doing it, no.
Q. Were you aware of -- perhaps take the year out of the equation. Were you aware the FTC was looking into smoker behavior
and perception in the late ‘70s?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Well, what I -- I am just not sure how to answer the question because I am aware of some FTC activities but that doesn't
necessarily stand out.
Q. What activities are you aware of?
A. The Federal Trade Commission in the 1960s was involved in devising a method with respect to measuring nicotine and tar
content. We still, so far as I know, use that today, so-called FTC method. And the Federal Trade Commission was involved in
recommending various warning labels in the mid 1960s. That sort of thing.
Q. As part of your research materials you identified government documents; didn't you?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you discover FTC documents?
A. I've looked at FTC documents that relate to the so-called FTC method and I believe the publication of that document was
sometime during the late 1960s. I can't put a specific date on it. So that certainly would be one example. But beyond that I am
not recalling anything at this specific moment.
Q. You were studying the government documents to analyze the public awareness of the health risks associated with smoking;
correct?
A. Certainly one of many different kinds of documents that I tried to review, yes.
Q. Just by looking at the title of the document, Consumer Beliefs and Behavior With Respect to Cigarette Smoking, this is the
type of document that would have been responsive to your research inquiries into government type documents; wouldn't it?
A. I haven't looked at the document beyond just flipping a couple of pages so I am really not sure what kind of a document
we are talking about.
Q. My question was I realize in front of me you have not read cover to cover this document which is over 100 pages long but
just based on the title and it's a submission to the FTC, does that strike you it would be a document that would have been of
interest to you in reaching your conclusions about the public awareness?
A. There are many such documents like this out there in the pool of government materials and various kinds of research
documents. There are literally thousands and thousands and thousands of items that have had to do with smoking, smoking
behavior, there are any number of articles that have appeared in academic journals in the 1980s, 1990s back into the ‘70s and
‘60s, so this is yet another document of that particular type of genre. That I will agree to based on the title.
Q. If I could draw your attention to the first page of the report to the fourth full paragraph down which begins, “The report
provides a method for analyzing the decision to smoke and actions to influence it whether by government, publication, education
groups or cigarette advertisers.” Do you see where it says that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you agree that the decision to smoke may be influenced by information provided by the government?
A. The decision to smoke or not to smoke or just the decision to smoke?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Both. It could be the decision to smoke or not to smoke is influenced by information provided by public education groups.
Do you agree?
A. It can be, yes.
Q. The decision to smoke or not to smoke can be influenced by information provided by cigarette advertisers; do you agree?
A. I would -- it's a very difficult question for me to respond to because I am not an advertising expert.
Q. So you think you need to be an advertising expert to be able to determine whether cigarette advertisers influence the decision
whether or not to smoke?
A. It certainly would help.
Q. But do you consider it a requirement?
A. If you want to talk about the details of advertising, the purposes of advertising, I would think it would be best to talk to
an expert about advertising.
Q. Which you are not; right?
A. I am not presenting myself as an expert about advertising.
Q. If I could draw your attention to the bottom of page 1 and then carrying on to page 2. Do you see where the author denotes
three different types of levels?
A. Yes. I see Level 1 is at the bottom of page i, little Roman numeral i.
Q. Level 1 is defined as awareness at the bottom of page 1. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you see Level 2 is defined as general acceptance?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you see level 3, personalized acceptance?
A. Yes.
Q. I know we've discussed this rather loosely but if you have a chance to take a look at the definition of awareness, Level 1,
where it reads, “A person may believe that the Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to health.”
A. I would completely disagree with that.
Q. That is not your definition of awareness?
A. I did not present that definition, no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. How is your definition different than the author's?
A. I believe when I defined awareness I said some would have information available to them and that's entirely different from
the word belief which is actually the objective verb in this particular situation. So this a case where at Level 1 Professor Fishbein
has lumped together awareness and belief.
Q. So would you think belief is to strong a term as he has applied it here?
A. Too strong a term -- what he is saying is you can't be aware unless you believe, that's how I am reading this. I think that's
really what he is saying.
Q. And believe something having -- on your continuum as you described earlier, believing something is much greater along
on your continuum than just being aware of something?
A. I don't know whether I would use the term much greater because we are talking about degrees, but in terms of being aware
and believing something, you can, as I tried to indicate, you may believe it, you may not believe it, you may be considering
it. Those are all phases or possibilities which would be there.
Q. You have a greater chance of acting upon the information if you believe it as opposed to just merely being aware of it;
would you agree with that?
A. I would say probably yes.
Q. Is there a reason why you are hesitating in agreeing outright?
A. Well, I guess I would have to go to a specific kind of example or specific kind of situation in order to make whether it's
an abstract concept into something that is hard and fast in human reality. So that's one reason why I put a qualifier in there.
I would have to think about it.
Q. Level 2, general acceptance, a person may believe that cigarette smoking is dangerous to health. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you agree with that definition of general acceptance?
A. I would say that predicated on my response to Level 1 where I believe the author has put awareness and belief together as one
concept, that in Level 2 when you get into general acceptance he says a person may believe that cigarette smoking is dangerous
to health and it's not quite clear to me what the difference is between Level 1 and Level 2 because this says a person may believe
the Surgeon General has determined and Level 2 says a person may believe that cigarette smoking is dangerous to health.
Q. You don't see the distinction between the two?
A. The reason I don't is we have eliminated the Surgeon General which is apparently a authority figure. I would take it -- if I
have looked at this document, it's like many things, I don't remember in detail, but we have an authority figure at Level 1, we
have a non-authority figure at Level 2 and perhaps that has some significance to this particular individual's conceptualization
of these differences but I -- if a person accepts something, if you talk about accepting, I think that we would say a person would
have to believe that. In other words, if you are still thinking about it you don't really have necessarily a belief in place and if
you have rejected it then you wouldn't be accepting it. That's nonacceptance.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. Well, none of these definitions suggest they are thinking about it; right? They are beliefs, all three of these definitions refer
to beliefs; right?
A. I can't say. I haven't even read point 1 which begins providing a person with a given piece of information may inform so
on and so forth in at least three different ways. So I don't know really how to respond to that. I haven't had time to consider
that possibility.
Q. We talked about general acceptance before. Would you agree with -- putting aside your distinction of Level 1, would you
agree with the definition for general acceptance that a person believes that smoking is -- that cigarette smoking is dangerous
to health? Do you agree with that?
A. Well, if you accept it presumably you believe it.
Q. So you would agree?
A. I guess that's an agreement.
Q. “Level 3, personalized acceptance, a person may believe that my cigarette smoking is dangerous to my health.” Do you
see that?
A. That would seem to personalize it.
Q. So that would be consistent with the definition of personalizing acceptance that we talked about before; correct?
A. Right. A person believes my cigarette smoking is dangerous to my health, I would say that would mean they have personalized
it. So I don't think there's anything particularly newsworthy in that.
Q. Drawing your attention to paragraph number 2, “At the present time we know relatively little about the American public's
Level 1 or Level 3 beliefs about smoking or not smoking. With respect to Level 2, however, there is sufficient evidence to
conclude that the American public is not well-informed at the present time.”
A. What historical research did they do to come to that conclusion?
Q. I get to ask the questions.
A. I know. I am just trying to find out more about this particular document.
Q. Is your understanding consistent with the statement that there's sufficient evidence to conclude that the American public is
not well-informed at the present time?
A. At what present time?
Q. 1977.
A. I think my conclusion off the top of my head would be that Professor Fishbein did not do a lot of historical research and look
at historical documents before he reached that conclusion. He was presenting a theoretical approach to an issue.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. If I can draw your attention to page 3, on page 3 if I could draw your attention to paragraph A. Do you see where it reads,
“Any given smoking decision is ultimately determined by the information the person has concerning each of the behavioral
alternatives among which he or she must choose.” Do you see that statement?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you agree with that statement?
A. Well, I don't agree with what follows, I am reading it as quickly as I can so I am not sure I would agree with that statement.
I think it's perfectly possible that a person decided they don't like the taste of cigarettes so they could stop smoking and I am
not sure they would stop smoking and I am not sure that's covered in point A, as to give you an example.
Q. How is the point there -- what is your issue with the sentence that follows?
A. Well, it says it is based on A, I am reading from the document, is based on A, the information or Level 3 beliefs one
holds concerning the positive or negative consequences that would follow from one's own performance of each of the available
alternatives, e.g., trying a cigarette and not trying a cigarette -- I may be skipping lines because my bifocals aren't cooperating
with me -- continuing to smoke and stopping smoking and/or parenthetical B, the beliefs one holds about the views of various
individuals, groups or institutions concerning one's performance of each alternative.
Q. Right. My question to you is what do you find problematic with that definition? It strikes me as --
A. Well, we go back and initially at the outset the author has made an assumption that awareness and belief are the same thing
and I simply --
Q. Where do you see that?
A. We went back on page little Roman numeral i, Level 1 awareness, a person may believe the Surgeon General has determined.
Q. He may believe that someone else thinks that it's true. They don't believe it but someone else like the Surgeon General believes
it to be true, that's the distinction. Isn't that consistent with your definition this morning of being aware of some information?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. Argumentative.
A. I think what I was trying to point out with respect to awareness was that an individual has received certain kinds of
information.
Q. Isn't that essentially what he is saying here in Level 1 awareness?
A. He is saying the word belief appears, a person may believe -- why don't we try it this way. A person may be aware that the
Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to health. Then I think we are dealing with awareness.
Q. Taking you back to paragraph A on page 3, I had asked you from the outset did you agree with the general proposition that
what influences a smoking decision -- here he says, “Any given smoking decision is ultimately determined by the information
the person has concerning each of the behavioral alternatives among which he or she must choose. “ Do you agree or disagree
with that statement?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. Asked and answered.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. You can answer.
A. I think there are lots of different reasons why people may start or stop smoking and it doesn't have to be part of a behavioral
sequence that Professor Fishbein has offered in this report.
Q. The language that I asked do you agree or disagree with says behavioral alternatives. You have options what to do once
you get information; right?
A. Let me give you perhaps an example that would perhaps suggest what I am talking about. And that is that Professor Daniel
Horn in the late 1950s did extensive studies of trying to understand why high school students start smoking in Portland, Oregon.
These are quite well-known studies. And Professor Horn concluded the primary reason was parental smoking patterns. That
the student who smoked was much more likely to come from parents who smoked and students who didn't smoke were much
more likely to come from families of parents who did not smoke. So if that's the case I am not sure that some sort of -- I am
not sure how that would relate to point A that we are talking about here.
Q. It relates -- what you are saying doesn't -- the answer you just gave doesn't conflict with the proposition that I am asking
you whether or not you agree or disagree with.
MR. KRAUS: Objection. What you are doing now, you are arguing with him. He told you he thinks it does.
MR. STOLPER: Well, we are going to get to the bottom of it.
Q. I believe you testified earlier today that people act upon the information they receive regarding the dangers of smoking;
isn't that right?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. Mischaracterizes his testimony.
You can answer the question.
A. Would you please repeat the question?
(Record read.)
A. I think we went through a sort of a very complex process of awareness, belief, acceptance, so on and so forth, and I think
that's what we were talking about and I am not sure that's quite the same context of what we are talking about right here.
Q. I am just distilling it down to a simple point. Smokers receive information about smoking and they have to make a decision
what to do with that information; right?
A. Smokers receive information about, let's say like the various health consequences or dangers of smoking and they can choose
to ignore it or they can cogitate about it, do nothing about it, accept it. But that doesn't mean that they necessarily act on it
and I think that's what this is about. This is about action as opposed to acceptance. This is about why people smoke or don't
smoke, as I am reading it.
Q. Would you agree with me your opinion is not about why people smoke or don't smoke; is that right?
A. The opinion that I have been presenting?
Q. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. What I have been presenting has to do with public awareness and the history of public awareness and when individuals were
aware of to the point of common knowledge over a -- actually a several hundred year period.
Q. I realize your answer is in the affirmative of what you are testifying about or opining on. My question was in the negative.
You gave a description to this. You said this analysis is about whether or not people smoke or not smoke. Whether they act
upon smoking or do not act upon smoking. Is that what you said?
A. I said that this is -- this is written in such a way any given smoking decision is ultimately determined. That means there's some
magic key ultimately determined by the information the person has concerning each of the behavioral alternatives among which
he or she must choose. I can't agree with that statement. I have already indicated what I think. And I tried to give you an example.
Q. Right. But you characterize this as being about whether or not somebody actually chooses to smoke or not smoke and what
I asked you before was not in the affirmative, not what is your opinion about, what your opinion is not about, and do you agree
that your opinion is not about the decisions of whether or not people choose to smoke or not to smoke based on the information
presented to them about the health risks of smoking?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form of the question.
A. If it's not. I guess it becomes unclear to me why we are discussing this. That's the only kind of response that I can give.
Q. I asked you whether or not your report isn't about something and your answer back to me is that you are not sure why we
are talking about this.
The question I am asking is really yes or no, do you agree or disagree your report is not about decisions of smokers to smoke
or not to smoke?
MR. KOETHE: Same objection.
A. I have read historical studies of people making decisions to smoke or not to smoke. I gave an example from Dr. Horn's work,
I read other kinds of studies like that. I have talked earlier about 50 million plus individuals stopping smoking. I can't say any
of those 50 million would be subsumed in this kind of a particular -- in other words, I don't think this is a universal definition,
I think this is a manufactured definition based on a set of propositions that I already told you I don't agree with. So it's very
difficult for me to agree with something that there's a conclusion when I haven't agreed with initially the Level 1 issue here.
Q. I understand your position with regard to Dr. Fishbein's study but my question was separate and apart from the document
that's in front of you. That is what your report is not about and what your opinion in this case is not about. Do you need me
to restate the question?
A. Yes.
Q. We were talking in the context of whether or not a smoker accepts, cogitates or rejects the information that's presented to
them and I believe your characterization of that type of analysis was that's about whether or not somebody chooses to smoke
or not smoke. And my question to you is your report is not about the decision of an individual to smoke or not to smoke?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form.
A. My report is about public awareness. Insofar as decisions are being made, that may well be a part of my report.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. I don't want to belabor the point. We have been here all day. We have another day to go, but I have asked you a yes or
no, do you agree or disagree and I have already told you that I am not looking for an affirmative statement about what your
report is about but in response to the question I got yet again, “My report is about public awareness.” You could either agree
with me or disagree with me on the proposition about what your report isn't about. That's all I am looking for. An agreement or
disagreement. I am not trying to trick you into an answer that you are going to somehow regret later on.
MR. KRAUS: Michael, I think you are arguing at this point. I don't think you listened to the second half of the answer. You
only focused on the first half.
Could you read back the last answer the Professor gave.
(Record read.)
MR. KRAUS: I think he answered your question directly.
MR. STOLPER: Would you read that again?
(Record read.)
Q. If I could draw your attention to page 4 of this report, second paragraph which is identified as paragraph 6 which states,
“Given the fact that the American public is presently uninformed by almost any definition of informed, there is unquestionably
a great deal more that can be done to insure the public will make more informed smoking decisions.” Do you see where I am
reading from?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Do you understand what Dr. Fishbein is trying to say?
A. He has just stated a fact according to Dr. Fishbein.
Q. Do you disagree with that fact?
A. Yes, I completely disagree with that fact.
Q. You didn't consider this report when formulating your opinion; right?
A. I have gone through literally thousands of documents which would -- and have led me to conclude that there is widespread
awareness about the health consequences of smoking and there is widespread awareness about the difficulties of quitting
smoking if you are currently smoking. This says that that is not true. My response to that is Dr. Fishbein is presenting a theory
which has no basis whatsoever in historical reality.
Q. I don't mean to cut you off, you said he was making a factual statement and now you say he is presenting a theory?
A. It's a bad sentence and if my graduate students use a sentence “given the fact that” which is really a colloquialism, then I
will circle that every time on their papers and say you shouldn't deal in fact when you are dealing in speculation, in a theory,
and this is total speculation on the part of this individual.
Q. How do you know that Dr. Fishbein is speculating in 180 pages?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. There are thousands and thousands and thousands of documents that Dr. Fishbein has obviously not looked at which
demonstrate there are very high levels of public awareness with respect to the dangers and health problems associated with
smoking. He has just said that no one knows about that.
Q. Are you aware whether the FTC agreed with Dr. Fishbein's conclusions in 1977?
A. If they did they made a terrible mistake.
Q. So as an historian you are unwilling to accept there may be an alternative view to historical facts?
A. As an historian I believe in historical reality and I believe before they come in and say that's a fact, that something is this
way, they should do research. That's what I went to graduate school for, that's what I learned to do and that's what I have done
and that is not what Dr. Fishbein who is a theorist has done.
Q. How do you know Dr. Fishbein is a theorist?
A. Because of the presentation. It begins with a theory about Level 1 awareness. I mean in the -- we have talked about this
before. In the very first statement he can't tell the difference between awareness and belief. He refused -- if you don't make
that distinction then you do lead to the conclusion if you say people -- he in essence says awareness does not exist therefore
given that fact nobody knows anything. That is what he has said. As a taxpayer I am sorry that we spent our money on these
kinds of reports.
Q. So you haven't read his report; correct?
A. I said -- I have looked at a number of things that have to do with smoking behavior. I have tried to look at them in terms of
my understanding of historical reality and that has to do with what individuals know at particular points in time.
To give you an example, from the year 1977 to 1978, at the very time that this is being written, Dr. Fishbein seemed to be -- I
guess this is May of 1977, I doubt if he had looked at any public opinion polls which would show very high levels of awareness
to the point of common knowledge about the issue that people were aware of the dangers of smoking.
Q. If I can draw your attention to page 103 to 113 of the report which is a 10-page bibliography of authorities from --
A. I'm sorry, begins on --
Q. 103 to 113.
A. Thank you.
Q. Did you see the 10-page bibliography that Dr. Fishbein attaches?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. You don't recall having read this report other than the few select portions I have shown you today; is that right?
A. That is correct.
Q. So you have 10 pages of bibliographic reference here to things -- to journal articles, monographs, articles, whole host of
different references.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
A. Yes.
Q. Without having read the entire report and studying his 10 pages of bibliographic reference, you jumped to the conclusion
he didn't do any research to support his conclusion?
MR. KRAUS: Objection to the form of the question.
A. I never said that.
Q. You said he should do his research.
A. I said he should do historical research. He did -- to the best of my knowledge, after all, there are 90 pages in here, but I can
tell you by a quick review of this bibliography, I have only had a chance to turn to three or four of the pages, Mr. Fishbein
seems to be echoing himself. I found on the first three pages bear the name Fishbein.
Q. You take issue with Dr. Fishbein citing himself?
A. If he wants to cite himself it is obvious he is drawing upon himself.
Q. Do you cite to yourself in your American Revolutionary papers?
A. I try to cite to a wide variety of sources.
Q. But do you cite to yourself --
A. I probably have. I haven't found myself eight times in the first three pages of a bibliography and let me also add, and I am
on page 107 going down to 108, I see no references to any newspaper articles, I see no references to any television programs,
I see no references to any newscasts, I see no references to statements by various Surgeon Generals. And I am going to have
to back that up now because I don't know how he would have listed, for instance, let me give you an example, it may be here,
the Surgeon General's report in 1964 which certainly generated thousands of stories nationwide, I don't see a reference to that.
Now it could be here under smoking and health. It's usually listed under U.S. public health service.
Q. As you are looking through the bibliography you have no way of knowing the authorities that are cited --
A. I have recognized some of the names. I recognize the name of Eva Salber. I recognize her essays and articles and she did
a number of studies of smoking behavior among school children in Newton, Massachusetts. And one of the conclusions that
emanates from her work, and it's slightly different than Daniel Horn's, is that students are very influenced through perhaps the
most important influence, start and stop, the question that has to do with peer pressure and that's different that Horn where he
talks about parental influence and these, again, are behavioral studies.
Q. So isn't that an explanation why the bibliography might be different from the types of sources you rely on from your
perspective, this a behavioral list as opposed to public historical list? I am drawing a distinction between historical and behavioral
studies which you agreed you were not an expert on and your report wasn't on versus the types of authorities that you have
relied on.
A. I think before a person makes a fact that a statement in 1977 that no one knew, one would be obligated to look at some of the
historical record and I have read many a good behavioral study where individuals who begin with some sense of the historical
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
record, what has come before. If that doesn't occur then quite often these things are written in a vacuum and I would say this
report was probably written in some sort of historical vacuum.
Q. Have you heard of the organization Consumers Union?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know what it is?
A. Yes.
Q. What is it?
A. They publish Consumer Reports and I see an article here by someone, 1976.
Q. Why kind of reports does Consumers Union issue?
A. They evaluate various kinds of products. My wife is a good member of that organization. I don't tend to pay much attention
to their work. I am talking about the monthly issues we get at home.
Q. You are talking about Consumer Reports that do analysis of products?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you aware of any other market research that's done by the Consumers Union work?
A. I am aware in the early 1950s Consumer Reports did a study of cigarettes with respect to whether filters had any protective
value and that, generally speaking, they concluded they did not and latent and if not blatant throughout this material was the
notion that smoking was not good for you. So it became yet another kind of a source that was letting the American people know
smoking might well have dangers, health dangers associated with it.
And when I saw the reference to -- I have to find it. I don't know which page it's on. There is one here. Was it under Consumers
Union? There is one referenced in here. Consumer Reports, May 1976, I'm surprised, as an historian I would be required to
trace that story. He has assumed that the story perhaps started and ended in 1976 and it didn't.
Q. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: In 1977 a significant portion of the U.S. population did not fully
accept that smoking cigarettes was dangerous to health?
A. Do I agree or disagree? How do we define significant proportion? Is that over 50 percent?
Q. Sure.
A. I completely disagree. And I should add that's based on my study of the historical record.
Q. Your study of the historical record is based on awareness; isn't that right?
A. Well, then let me have you rephrase the question again.
MR. STOLPER: Could we restate it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
I didn't use the word awareness, I used the word acceptance. I will restate it.
Q. Do you agree or disagree with the following proposition: A significant portion meaning greater than 50 percent of the U.S.
population in 1977 did not fully accept that smoking cigarettes was dangerous to health?
A. I completely disagree with that statement.
Q. So it's your position that as of 1977 that a majority of the U.S. population greater than 50 percent accepted the fact that
smoking was dangerous to their health?
A. Based on the public polling information I have seen, yes. It's just one source that comes to mind I should add.
Q. Same question but I am going to modify it to say accept and personalize as we talked about that term. So do you agree or
disagree that in 1977 a significant portion of the U.S. population did not fully accept and personalize that smoking cigarettes
was dangerous to health?
MR. KOETHE: Object to the form of the question.
A. Well, I guess since we are talking about a total population, I am not trying to be difficult, in 1977, perhaps 35 percent of
that population would have been smoking so I assume we are talking about that group and that's certainly not 50 percent of
the population. So if you have 60 to 65 who don't smoke, a matter of personalizing is probably pretty irrelevant. In the context
of 1977.
Q. On what basis are you reaching the conclusion that a majority of the population in 1977 accepted that smoking was bad
for their health?
MR. KRAUS: Objection. Asked and answered.
A. Public opinion polls. Various types and kinds I have gone through.
Q. You cite to polls that deal with acceptance as distinct from awareness?
A. Let's take a Gallup question, and I can't be sure whether this is the ‘70s or ‘80s because I don't have all the information
in front of me, the question is is smoking harmful and that would be asked. In very high proportions, in the high 80s and 90
percent by let's say roughly 1980 or on that date we are talking about are saying yes, we accept that smoking is harmful. And
without the questions and the data in front of me, I am not trying to mischaracterize it, I am trying to give my understanding
of it as I have reviewed it.
Q. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: In 1977 many smokers and beginning smokers failed to accept the
link between smoking and specific health consequences such as lung cancer?
A. Yes, I disagree with that statement.
Q. That's because you think most smokers and new smokers accepted the link between smoking and -- I will go all the way
back to Level 1 here. I am going to have to take this out of Dr. Fishbein's context. And that is you are saying they accepted that
notion that there may be a link between smoking and lung cancer? Is that -- by that do you mean they believe that?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
Q. And we are talking about smokers or new smokers, the general population?
A. We are talking about smokers and --
Q. The only distinction I drew was smokers and new smokers.
A. I can't tell you what year, it goes over 50 percent which is the number we have been using, but in terms of believing that,
I believe by the 1970s that's an actual belief, questions were asked by the Gallup organization and that I believe the number
was approaching 70 to 75 percent of the population at that point. This is, as I said before, this is recollection. I don't have the
material in front of me. It's based on my recollection.
Q. You mentioned a Surgeon General report at various times throughout your deposition and I believe you mentioned the
information contained in various Surgeon Generals' reports have been disseminated, I think you said they have been widely
disseminated to the public. Are you aware that cigarette consumption decreased after the issuance of the 1964 Surgeon General's
report?
MR. KRAUS: Could you put a time period on that? How soon after?
A. That consumption declined --
Q. After the issuance of the 1964 Surgeon General's report.
A. That's somewhat at conflict with the numbers that I recall.
Q. So you think after the issuance of the 1964 Surgeon General's report cigarette consumption increased?
A. I am really not sure.
Q. So you don't know which way the consumption went after the issuance of the 1964 Surgeon General's report?
A. I am really not sure. I have looked at numbers and at this point, this late in the day, I am really not sure.
Q. Are you aware of any changes in cigarette consumption after the issuance of any of the Surgeon General's reports on smoking
and health?
A. What I can tell you is there's a general pattern in respect to what we are talking about of decline over a 25, 30 period, if
not longer. That would go back to a number that I have mentioned more than once today of the 50 million plus individuals
who have quit smoking since 1964.
Q. What's your opinion as to why there's been a decline over the last number of years?
A. 30 or 40 years?
Q. Yes.
A. I think there are a whole variety of reasons. Without trying to give a comprehensive answer, we have to go back to everything
we have talked about today. Tremendous amount of awareness with respect to the dangers associated with smoking, there's a
legal structure which -- there are a whole series of laws that come into place that begin in the ‘70s in a limited way and become
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
far more pervasive in the 1980s which banned smoking in a whole variety of locations and I am sure that did affect the decision
of some individuals to stop smoking. After all, I imagine 20 years ago in this building people would have been smoking in this
room and we wouldn't have thought a great deal about it, today no one is smoking. Certainly that's true in airline travel. It's true
on every college campus in the United States and on and on and on, that that is a factor.
I think there's a factor of price, the price of cigarettes has gone up very, very dramatically in the last 20 years and certainly
to make an analogy to drinking, the price of alcohol has a direct relationship to the decision of people to perhaps not drink as
much or stop drinking and I assume that's probably true when it comes to the matter of stopping smoking.
And I think that we have gone through -- in our culture we have gone through a point in time in which it has become increasingly
socially unacceptable to smoke in which individuals are not only repeatedly warned but perhaps ridiculed or perhaps they are
told by the Surgeon General as they were in 1988 that they were drug addicts. And I think all of those factors have come into
play that could affect decisions to discontinue smoking. There may be more. This is pretty much off the top of my head.
Q. Just picking up on the last part of your answer when you said 1988 smokers were told they were drug addicts, are you
referring to the Surgeon General's report?
A. I think I am referring to the words of C. Everett Koop. And I did want to say so far as today I only mentioned one Surgeon
General's report and that is the 1964 report. But the 1988 report does equate smoking to an addiction, it says that individuals
who are smokers rank up there with cocaine addicts and heroin users and it is probably more difficult to stop smoking than it
is to get off heroin or cocaine. Those are some of the conclusions that are in the report and that was reported very widely in
the American press. So that the notion that smoking is a definable addiction, a certain kind of definition comes into place and
that's all part of the process and I do know individuals personally who stopped smoking because they didn't want to be labeled
a drug addict. So that's what made me think about that particular example.
Q. You said the word drug addict. Do you take issue with the terminology used in the 1988 Surgeon General's general report?
A. Do I take issue with the terminology?
Q. Right.
A. I think the terminology is a little bit strong. But when I use the term -- didn't -- Dr. Koop when he made his presentation
didn't say everyone that's a smoker is a drug addict, but the headlines in the newspapers implied that and that is the message that
is being received by individuals and the emphasis was on the -- in the 1988 report which is a very highly technical document
and I can't pretend to tell you that I have tried to read through the technical aspect of it, but in terms of the general impression
that most individuals would get, most individuals would get the impression that individuals who were smokers had somehow
now been defined as not individuals with a habit but individuals who were addicts. And that has a certain negative connotation
in our society. That particular term.
Q. When you say it was a bit strong, can you explain what you mean by that?
A. I think the point was being over emphasized -- the term addiction relative to smoking has been around since the mid 19th
century, if not before. I have a quote in my report from an 1884 textbook warning the dangers of smoking in which -- this is
a primary school textbook in which the word addiction is used. This is not a new concept. What I believe was new there was
the concept linking smoking to the use of hard drugs.
MR. KRAUS: I think we can probably call it quits for the day.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Robert A. FALISE; Louis Klein, Jr.; Frank Macciarola; and..., 2000 WL 35639702...
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 5:01 p.m. and this videotaped deposition of Mr. James Kirby Martin will be adjourned
until June 23rd, 2000 at 8:30 a.m. on these premises and this completes tape number 3.
(Time noted: 5:01 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81
