Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Original Image of 1998 WL 35271772 (PDF)
1998 WL 35271772 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
11th Judicial Circuit, General Jurisdiction Division.
Dade County
Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff,
v.
R. J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY, et al, Defendant.
No. 94-08273 CA (20).
June 9, 1998.
Deposition Upon Oral Examination of Kenneth Ludmerer, M.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Dade County, Florida
Name of Expert: Kenneth Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances:
Stanley M. Rosenblatt, P.A.
By: John Hoag, Esquire
Concord Building, 12th Floor
66 West Flagler Street
Miami, FL 33130
Attorneys for the Plaintiff.
Dechert Price & Rhoads
By: William K. Dodds, Esquire
30 Rockefeller Plaza
New York, NY 10112
Attorneys for Philip Morris Companies.
King & Spalding
By: Stephen Devereaux, Esquire
191 Peachtree Street
Atlanta, GA 30303
Attorneys for Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corp.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Shook, Hardy & Bacon
By: James T. Newsom, Esquire
1200 Main Street
Kansas City, MO 64105
Attorneys for Lorilland.
FBN: 0004291
TRANSCRIPT OF DEPOSITION, taken by and before MAUREEN WALKER, Professional Court Reporter and Notary Public,
at the offices of DECHERT, PRICE & PHOADS, 1717 Arch Street, Suite 4000, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on Tuesday, June
9, 1998, commencing at 1:46 p.m.
REPORTING SERVICE ASSOCIATES, INC. (RSA)
22nd Floor - Lewis Tower Building
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102
(215) 735-2332
INDEX
WITNESS ... PAGE
KENNETH LUDMERER, M.D.
By: Mr. Hoag ... 4, 60
By: Mr. Dodds ... 59
EXHIBITS
TABLE
KENNETH LUDMERER, M.D. Sworn.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Would you state your name for the record?
A. Kenneth M. Ludmerer.
Q. You're a medical doctor, correct?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Have you ever been deposed before?
A. Yes.
Q. How many times about?
A. Three.
Q. And what was involved with those three times?
A. Could you please clarify that question?
Q. Yes. Of the three times when you were deposed, were they all on legal cases, some kind of litigation?
A. Yes, they were.
Q. I guess they had to be. What were the cases?
A. The first case was for the retrial of the Cipollone case. The second case was for the State of Florida Attorney General case.
I don't remember if it was the State of Florida or the state of Mississippi, one of the two. The third time was for the State of
Washington Attorney General case in tobacco.
Now that we speak, I do remember a fourth time I was deposed in relation to another case.
Q. What case was that?
A. I could not tell you the name of it. It was not related to tobacco. The university of California San Francisco was a defendant
in a malpractice case. I was an expert witness for the defense in this medical malpractice case. I could not tell you the name
of the case offhand.
Q. Now, the first tobacco-related case you mentioned was the Cipollone case. When were you deposed in that case?
A. To the best of my recollection, late March 1990.
Q. And the Florida Attorney General case?
A. To the best of my recollection, early April 1997.
Q. And the State of Washington Attorney General case?
A. June 3, 1998.
Q. Who took the deposition on June 3?
A. For the plaintiff?
Q. Yes.
A. I don't remember the man's name.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. How long did that deposition take?
A. Approximately three and one-half hours.
Q. Who took the deposition in the Florida Attorney General case, if you remember?
A. I do not remember the man's name.
Q. And the Cipollone you don't remember the name either?
A. I do remember the name from Cipollone.
Q. What was that person's name?
A. Mark Edell.
Q. Did you know Mr. Edell before the deposition?
A. No I did not.
Q. Why does that one stand out in you mind as opposed to the other two?
A. Longer deposition.
Q. How long was that one?
A. Two days verses the three-and-a-half hours for Washington or the one-and-a-half hours for the state of Florida.
Q. You testified about a wider variety of things in the Cipollone case, or was it similar?
A. Same area. May I make a statement?
Q. Sure.
A. For the record, please have it understood that I did not testify in the Cipollone case. I gave a deposition for the pretrial of
the Cipollone case, which as I understand it, was dropped or whatever. It never occurred.
But I did not testify in the case. It was a deposition for the retrial of the Cipollone case.
Q. And that was in March of 1990?
A. To the best of my recollection.
Q. Okay. I've read the Disclosure Statement related to your testimony. You read your Disclosure Statement, right, the expert
witness disclosure?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. On the third paragraph it says Dr. Ludmerer -- how do you pronounce your last name?
A. Ludmerer.
Q. It says, “Dr. Ludmerer is expected to testify about the state of medical knowledge of smoking cigarettes, disease and a
possible relationship between cigarette smoke and disease in the united States from the early 1900s to 1954.”
It says that, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And do you agree that's what you're going to testify about?
A. In general, yes, though I do think it would the more accurate to say that my testimony begins in 1930.
Q. But the cut off here of 1964, your testimony basically stops in 1964? You don't go any further than that; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Why is it that is stops in 1964?
A. My work in this project goes through the Surgeon general's report, which, as you know, was January of 1964. That was a
stopping point because the Surgeon General's report led directly to the Congressional legislation requiring warnings on cigarette
packages.
So, it seemed an appropriate landmark, if you will, an appropriate stopping point, I might also point out that in the Cipollone
case, the plaintiff had an expert witness dealing with state-of-the-art who also elected to use January 1964 as a stopping point.
Q. So, as you sit here today in 1998, does cigarette smoking -- in your opinion as a medical doctor, does cigarette smoking
cause lung cancer?
MR. DODDS: I'll object only because that is completely outside the scope of his expected or disclosed testimony. We won't be
asking him about issues of causation from a medical or scientific viewpoint. He's being offered as a medical historian.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Sir, you can answer.
A. I do not have an expert opinion on causation. That is not my area of expertise.
Q. Do you have an opinion on whether or not it's been established that there's a link between cigarette smoking and disease?
MR. DODDS: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Could you please repeat that question?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not there's a link between cigarette smoking and disease?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. I do not have an expert opinion on that issue.
Q. Does that mean you don't know?
A. As an expert in causation?
Q. As a medical doctor, does that mean you don't know whether or not there is a link between cigarette smoking and disease?
MR. DODDS: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, certainly as a medical doctor, I am fully aware of the claims regarding cigarette smoking and its health
hazards. I myself accept epidemiological evidence as useful in joint relationships of a causal nature. I personally am willing
to accept that cigarette smoking is a major health hazard.
I would reiterate I'm not an expert in this I'm not a laboratory scientist or epidemiologist. I have not investigated these issues
in a firsthand sort of way.
BY MR. HOAG.
Q. You believe it's necessary to have firsthand know ledge to have an expert opinion?
A. Could you please rephrase that question? I don't understand the question that you just asked me.
Q. When you said you don't have firsthand knowledge what do you mean by that, firsthand knowledge?
A. I'm not a -- regarding causation?
Q. Yes.
A. I'm not a laboratory scientist not am I an epidemiologist. I have not been conducting original investigations into any aspect
of lung cancer, particularly causation, or any aspect of lung cancer.
I've not reviewed current literature to be familiar with the current thinking about causation in the same way I do my own
research areas.
I'm not an expert. I'm a physician. I know what common teachings are. I'm not one of those who has produced the teachings. I
have not reviewed original evidence on that subject, and, hence, do not have an expert opinion on that particular issue.
Q. Did you review the original evidence on all those things prior to 1964?
A. I reviewed the world's published literature on that subject.
Q. Prior to 1964?
A. Yes, beginning in 1930 through January 1964.
Q. But after 1964, you haven't done that at all; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. That is correct.
Q. As a medical doctor in 1998, you don't believe that you have enough personal knowledge to render an opinion as to whether
or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
MR. DODDS: Let me reiterate my objection to this entire line of questioning in the sense and because he's not being offered as an
expert in this field and the examination of him on that subject is really entirely outside anything that would be appropriate at trial.
So such that, I think we're kind of beating a dead horse here. But it's your examination and you have the time available, but I'd
appreciate it if you'd ask him questions in the area of expertise he's been designated in.
MR. HOAG: I'll ask him whatever I think is appropriate. It's going to be a waste of time to have you repeat it again, because
it's not going to change what I ask. You can object.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. If you could please answer the question.
A. Your question misstates my position and viewpoint. As I said before, as a practicing physician, I accept the common medical
teachings. I teach this to my own students. I advise my patients, friends and family not to smoke.
I accept the common teachings as a practicing physician. That is an opinion as a medical physician and as a medical educator.
It is not an expert opinion on the issue of causality from one whose research and investigative career is devoted to investigating
causes of lung cancer or any other form of cancer.
Q. Talking about the warning label on cigarettes, it has changed over time. Are you aware of how it's changed over time, the
warning label?
A. I do know that there have been certain changes over time with changes becoming more specific, more strongly worded, but
that is the extent of my knowledge.
Q. Now, one of the current warning label says, “Warning: Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema.”
As a practicing physician, do you agree with the current warning label, or do you accept that as being accurate?
MR. DODDS: Same objection as before. Plus it's been asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. You can answer.
A. As I have already said, I do accept the common medical teachings. I do accept that point of view in my own medical practice
and in my own medical teachings and in the advice that I give patients, friends and family, as a practicing physician, not as an
investigator or expert in the field of cancer or lung cancer.
Q. Did you accept that point of view beginning in 1964 after the Surgeon General's report was published?
A. Did I personally accept that in 1964?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Yes. After the Surgeon General's report was published.
A. Quite frankly, I don't think I gave much attention to it in 1964. I was pretty young at that time.
Q. Well, based on your research, you will agree, won't you, that by 1964 there was a consensus that cigarette smoking caused
lung cancer?
A. I would not agree with the statement as you formulated it.
Q. At what point do you believe that there was a consensus that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
A. We're having a little -- at least I'm having a little trouble with the audio. Could you please ask that question again? I would
like to make certain I heard the question correctly.
Q. At what point or what year do you believe that there was a consensus in the medical community that cigarette smoking
causes lung cancer?
A. It's my understanding that indeed, following the surgeon General's report of 1964, a large majority consensus, if you will,
of the scientific community did accept the validity of epidemiological evidence and, hence, the relationship between smoking
and lung cancer particularly in males.
But it's also an important part of my testimony that even at the time, there were responsible scientists who disagreed with the
conclusions of the Surgeon General's report. If they disagreed in 1963 or 1964, they're not going to be persuaded by yet another
report and there was room for responsible, respectable scientists to disagree, even though, clearly, the public controversy died
down.
Q. In your opinion, was there any point from 1964 to the present were there was no longer a legitimate controversy as to whether
or not cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
MR. DODD: Objection to the form.
THE WITNESS: Well, as you know, I have not studied the controversy forward, so I am unable to speak in a specific or
particular way to the controversy post-1964, because I have not done the detailed, systematic article by article analysis that I
did for the period 1930 to 1964.
So, my testimony is really not hoping on 1964. On the other hand, I can also point out that those who would disagree with
conclusions from the 1964 report might continue to disagree with it going forward, that the world view changed, but individuals
who did not accept the new world view may not have accepted the conclusions of the Surgeon General's report.
So, there was room for responsible scientists to disagree if you're looking for experimental evidence of causality.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. In your opinion, has the tobacco industry ever agreed with the world's view on causation as to cigarette smoking?
MR. DODDS: Again, I will object. Outside the scope of his expertise and assignment and Disclosure Statement.
THE WITNESS: I really have no knowledge of the tobacco industry position on different issues over time. I'm just not able
to comment on that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you have any knowledge as to scientific research the tobacco industry did between the years 1930 to 1964?
A. What type of research?
Q. Scientific research the tobacco industry did or funded itself internally from 1930 to 1964 related to the issue of smoking
and health.
MR. DODDS: Are we speaking strictly of internal research, John?
MR. HOAG: Right now I am.
MR. DODDS: Okay.
THE WITNESS: I do not have knowledge of internal company research.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Have you ever asked anyone to provide that research to you so that you could review it?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Do you know whether or not there is any such internal company research?
A. I don't have information to that point.
Q. Do you know whether or not the internal company research would have added to the scientific knowledge that existed
between 1930 and 1960 concerning the link between cigarette smoking and disease?
MR. DODDS: I'll object. you can answer. It's a hypothetical without foundation, but if you can answer it, go ahead.
THE WITNESS: As I said before, I do not have specific information at all regarding what research, if any, tobacco companies
were conducting internally on this issue.
I can also say in this hypothetical, knowing that the world's greatest medical establishment; the United States, was making this,
particularly after 1950, such an important cause in its activities, that the intellectual powers of the National Institute of Health,
the medical institutes, the pharmaceutical companies, et cetera, were being brought to bear on this issue.
I'd find it highly unlikely to imagine that tobacco company internal research would have advanced the state of knowledge
beyond what the biomedical establishment was doing in its own vigorous efforts.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you know how many scientists the tobacco industry had working on this issue between 1930 and 1964?
A. No, I do not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Do you know how much money the tobacco industry spent researching the issue between 1930 and 1964?
A. No.
Q. Do you know how much money the tobacco companies make in profit each year?
A. No
Q. Do you know whether or not the issue of whether or not tobacco smoking causes a health problem is an important issue
to the tobacco industry?
A. At what point in time?
Q. Between 1930 and 1964, at any time in those decades.
MR. DODDS: I'll object. No foundation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. You can answer.
A. I'm aware after 1950 that the tobacco industry was concerned with the issue of smoking and its medical effects. To my
knowledge, I'm unaware of any activity of the tobacco industry before 1950, before that point.
On the other hand, there were very few medical scientists anywhere that were concerned about that issue during the period that
I've examined the interest of the tobacco industry, and the issues parallel that of the biomedical investigators.
Q. Let me make sure I understand. You have not reviewed even one single piece of internal research the tobacco industry did
at any time; is that correct?
A. That is correct. As I mentioned before, my research has been in the published scientific literature in the biological and
medical journals.
Q. It's your opinion that no matter how much money was spent or no matter how many scientists the tobacco industry had that
was doing research related to the health effects of tobacco smoke you do not believe it's even possible that even one of those
scientists could have come up with any information that would have been even slightly likely to advance medical science on
that issue; is that correct?
MR. DODDS: I'll object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Your statement, as you phrased it, does not accurately represent my views on that.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. So, then you do believe that it's possible that scientists who were funded by the tobacco industry who did internal research
could have done research that would have been valuable had it been disclosed to the medical community and public, correct?
MR. DODDS: Objection to the form. It calls for speculation, no foundation, not relevant.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Is that correct?
A. Could you please repeat that question?
MR. HOAG: Could the court reporter read it back, please?
(The record was read by the reporter as requested.)
THE WITNESS: Anything is possible. Number one, as I said before, I have not investigated internal research of any sort done
by the tobacco companies. And I made additional point that the powerful medical establishment of the western world was
working on this issue, and this was an establishment that was focused on biomedical research in a way that no one else could do.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you have any intention of reviewing the internal research of the tobacco industry during the period of time from 1930
to 1964?
A. At this moment in time, I do not.
Q. Had you ever read the Cigarette Papers?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the Brown and Williamson documents, which are available on the Internet?
A. No.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the documents from the Minnesota Attorney General case on the Internet?
A. No
Q. Have you reviewed any of the documents available on the Internet from Philip Morris that's in place there as a result of
the Minnesota litigation?
A. No
Q. Did you know there were tens of thousands of documents placed by each major tobacco company on the Internet within the
past few months as a result of an agreement reached in the Minnesota Attorney General litigation?
A. I'm aware that there in a large number of documents on the Internet. I do not know precisely the sequence of events that
led to their being on the Internet.
Q. And you have no interest whatsoever in reviewing any of the scientific studies that are available to you that were done
by the tobacco industry during the time that you are listed as an expert about the research that's been done on smoking and
health; is that correct?
MR. DODDS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
THE WITNESS: Could you re-ask the question, again?
MR. HOAG: Could you read it back for me?
(The record was read by the reporter as requested.)
MR. DODDS: Also I object to lack of foundation.
THE WITNESS: In response to your question, I would say that, as I said before, at this time I have no intention of reviewing
internal company documents. My assignment was a different assignment, to examine the state of medical knowledge through
the published biomedical literature.
That is the assignment that I did. It was not necessary or pertinent to review internal company documents at that time, and at
this time I have no intention of reviewing company documents in the future.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Are you aware that in the 1950s the tobacco industry hired researchers and paid them to do research that was published
which questioned the link between cigarette smoking and health?
MR. DODDS: Objection. Lack of foundation.
THE WITNESS: I am aware in the 1950s that the tobacco industry began funding research relating to the health effects of
cigarettes. That is why I answered earlier that after 1950 the tobacco industry was clearly showing an interest in this issue.
To my knowledge, the tobacco industry supported the research itself. These were highly ethical and professional investigators
whose research was sometimes funded by tobacco funds. But it was the researchers themselves and the studies and their work
that was being funded.
I'm unaware of any evidence that the tobacco industry in any way influenced their opinions.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Well, the reason you're unaware of that is because you haven't made any systematic review of the documents that are in
existence; isn't that correct?
A. That is incorrect.
Q. Well, you have not made any systematic review of the internal tobacco documents that are in existence; is that correct?
A. As I said before, I have not reviewed systematically. In fact, I have not reviewed at all internal company documents. On the
other hand, I have reviewed the scientific literature on this subject, and I do know that many of the studies that were funded by
tobacco money came up with conclusions that were injurious to the tobacco industry.
In addition, I know that many of the investigators who received tobacco money were also funded for the same studies by
other agencies such as the National Institutes of Health or American Cancer Society, and these were very ethical, prominent,
respectable individuals.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
So, I am unaware of any evidence that anyone's views on either side of the controversy were influenced by tobacco money.
Q. Do you know whether or not the researchers who were funded by the tobacco industry in the 1950s were required to place
some kind of a disclaimer on their public research saying they were funded at least in part by the tobacco industry?
A. I am not certain I understand that question. Could you please ask again?
MR. HOAG: Could the court reporter read back the question, please?
(The record was read by the reporter as requested.)
MR. DODDS: I'll object to the form of that question.
THE WITNESS: I do know that there were many published papers from this era, and I'm defining this era of 1950s and early
1960s that acknowledged funding in part from the tobacco industry in the paper itself.
I also am aware that this was common practice in the scientific community for an investigator to acknowledge funding support
from any agency. I also am aware that many individual papers that acknowledged support from the tobacco industry received
support from the National Institutes of Health or American Heart Association or the American Cancer Society or other similar
groups for the same project.
I do not know specifically what terms, if any, there were for investigators receiving tobacco industry funds for their research
in terms of disclaimers.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. You don't know whether or not there have ever been occasions where individuals who were funded by the tobacco industry
did not disclose in the published research that they received funds from the tobacco industry, correct?
A. Did not disclose?
Q. Did not disclose.
A. That's correct. I don't have information either way on that. I do know that a number of studies at this time that came up with
conclusions that were contrary to the tobacco hypothesis were funded in part by tobacco company money.
I also know a number of studies came out with conclusions that supported the cigarette hypothesis were funded at least in part
by tobacco company research funds because this was stated on the papers.
I have no information at all at this time that would be pertinent to the issue of whether an investigator did not reveal funding
sources from the tobacco industry or from any other funding organization for that matter.
Q. That would require you to review tobacco industry internal documents, and you haven't done that, right?
A. To answer that question --
Q. Pardon me?
A. To answer that question, you mean it would be required to review?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Right. In order to know how often that was done, that they did not disclose, you'd have to review internal company documents,
and you haven't done that, right?
A. Reviewing internal company documents may provide information like that. It may not. Sometimes results in historical
research, like any other research, that's not the only way to get to that question.
If a historian wanted information on that point, another way to go about seeking that information might be to review the papers
of the scientists themselves, and I'm speaking in a hypothetical, but it is possible that information on that point might be in the
papers or correspondence or records of individual scientists rather than in the company records.
In either case, I have not reviewed these types of personal records, either of the scientists themselves or of the company.
Q. Are you aware of whether or not the tobacco industry in the 1950s funded contract research that was under the control of
the tobacco industry attorneys?
A. I have no information on that point.
Q. Do you know whether or not the tobacco industry ever funded contracts and research approved by attorneys that was
published in the public domain?
A. As I've said a number of times already in this deposition, I've not reviewed internal company documents. I don't have any
information on the operations of the company and how projects were selected and who did the selection and what requirements
they were and what papers were signed and what is were dotted and t's were crossed.
I don't have any information on this point, and it was not pertinent to the project that I did investigate; that is, the published
scientific literature and state of knowledge.
Q. You will admit, at least since 1964, the tobacco industry has funded research and had a public relations effort to create a
false impression that there actually is a controversy as to whether or not cigarette smoking causes any disease correct?
MR. DODDS: Objection to form. Outside the scope of his testimony and expertise.
THE WITNESS: That is incorrect. I have no information at all on that. I haven't investigated it. I am unable to answer that
question on the basis of just not having looked into it and just not knowing.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Have you ever read the Frank Statement of the tobacco industry?
A. Yes.
If I may also interject, we've been sitting here for a little over an hour. I wouldn't mind taking a quick stretch. Perhaps after this
question we could do so, but I would appreciate the opportunity to stretch for a couple of minutes.
Q. Right now is fine.
A. Let's do it now.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
(A short recess was taken.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. My last question was as to the Frank Statement and you said you were familiar with it. When did you become aware of it?
A. I don't remember precisely. It would have been sometime when I began this project.
Q. What project are you referring to?
A. My systematic study of the state of the scientific understanding of the causes of lung cancer and the health hazards of
cigarettes from 1930 to 1964.
Q. Approximately when did you begin that project?
A. September 1988.
Q. And how did you come to begin that project?
A. I was contacted by attorneys from Arnold and Porter, if I recall.
Q. Did they represent any tobacco company or companies?
A. They did. I cannot --
Q. What company or companies did they represent?
A. I couldn't tell you for sure. I believe it was Philip Morris, but I'm not positive.
Q. Who contacted you, if you can recall?
A. Murray Garnick.
Q. Murray Garnick?
A. Correct.
Q. Is that an attorney?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Did you know that person prior to the time he contacted you?
A. No.
Q. Have you come to find out at any point how it is you came to be contacted by Murray Garnick?
A. I can relate to you what he told me. I have no firsthand knowledge. I do know and remember what he told me.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. What did he tell you?
MR. DODDS: I'll object.
THE WITNESS: Concerning how he contacted me?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Yes.
A. He called me in August 1988 to tell me that this firm represented one or several or all of the tobacco companies. I quite
honestly could not tell you who Arnold and Porter was representing at that time.
He said that they were interested in having as a consultant an individual with impeccable credentials both in the history of
medicine and in medicine to conduct a study for them dealing with the knowledge of cigarette smoking and its health hazards
and the causes of lung cancer.
He informed me that he called the secretary-treasurer of the American Association for the History of Medicine to seek
recommendations of an individual with both the historical and medical credentials that they were seeking, and that this officer
of the Association gave him my name, and that's how he came to call me.
Q. Do you know whether he gave him other names or just yours?
A. I have no information on that.
Q. After you were approached about doing this, what did you say?
A. I'm sorry. What did?
Q. What did you say and/or do?
A. What did I say?
Q. Yes.
A. Well, first I wanted to know a bit about the nature of the project that he had in mind, and I asked him about that.
Q. Was the nature of project explained to you?
A. Yes, it was.
Q. And you were satisfied?
A. I'm not sure I understand you regarding satisfied.
Q. Was there anything about the nature of the project that troubled you in any way?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Did he or any other attorney provide you with access to all of the tobacco industry internal documents at any point?
A. If we could backtrack, the nature of the project was to investigate the state of knowledge through the published medical and
scientific literature. Internal company documents had no bearing on that question.
He did not offer internal company documents. I did not ask and I did not see the need for internal company documents. What
I did ask for, or perhaps what I did say, stipulate, as a requirement was that in conducting this research, that I would approach
it with the same thoroughness, comprehensiveness, integrity, et cetera, that I do in all my scholarly work, and this was to be
an independent project, that I would determine how the study should be conducted that I would assume complete and total
responsibility for the study, for the results.
He said that that was not only agreeable to him, but precisely what he wanted. And then I said, “Fine. I would be happy to
undertake this for you.”
Q. Now, do you think you'd, be sitting here today doing this deposition if your conclusion would have been that the consensus
was established in 1963 that cigarette smoking caused disease?
MR. DODDS: I'll object. Calls for speculation, irrelevant, argumentative, a waste of time.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. I'm asking if that was your conclusion what do you think?
A. I have no idea.
Q. How much are you paid per hour to do this research?
MR. DODDS: I'm going to permit him to testify about his compensation in connection with this case and object under Florida
rules as to compensation in connection with other cases.
You can ask him about the total number of hours he spent over the years, the proportion of work he's done for plaintiffs versus
defendants, but not compensation related to all work at all times.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. How much did you charge per hour to do this research?
MR. DODDS: Same objection. You're asking him a question not permitted under Florida rules.
MR. HOAG: Are you instructing him not to answer?
MR. DODDS: I'm not going to instruct him not to answer, but if I have to make a motion and argue this to the Judge at a later
time to strike his testimony, I will seek costs.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. How much did you make per hour to do this research?
A. Are you referring to the project that resulted from my conversation with Murray Garnick that led to my current views?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Yes.
A. My fee was $200 per hour.
Q. Have you fees changed at all through expert research or work?
A. Yes.
Q. What are your fees now?
A. 1998 they are $300 per hour compared with the $200 per hour that I was charging in 1988 when Mr. Garnick contacted me.
Q. Now, that research you did, that's the basis for your opinions today, isn't it?
A. Correct.
Q. If you hadn't done that research, you wouldn't have a basis to be sitting here today doing this deposition, correct?
A. That is very correct.
Q. So, how many hours have you spent doing this research to prepare yourself to do this and other depositions?
MR. DODDS: I'm going to object again on the basis that you're permitted to ask about, according to the Florida rules, the
scope or employment and the pending case and the compensation for such service, his general litigation experience including
the percentage of work performed for plaintiffs and defendants, the identity of other cases which the expert has testified by
deposition or trial, approximation of the portion of the expert's involvement as an expert witness, which may be based on the
number of hours, percentage of hours percentage of earned income derived from serving as an expert witness.
However, the expert shall not be required to disclose his or her earnings as an expert witness or income derived form other
services.
MR. HOAG: Okay. I've already made my record that this is all he did, had he not done the research. So, it's directly related,
and you can argue it to the Judge. Are you instructing him not to answer?
MR. DODDS: I'm not instructing him not to answer any questions as of this time. I'm just reading the rules, and we have made
our record. And if you persist in asking questions not permitted by the Rules of Civil Procedure in the State of Florida, we will
make our motion at the appropriate time.
MR. HOAG: Okay. I don't agree with your interpretation of the rules.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. So, how many total hours have you spent working on this research that allows you to voice an expert opinion?
A. That project, which, as I mentioned to you, was conducted in 1988 and 1989, took approximately 1,000 hours.
Q. And the testimony that you've provided in all three of the tobacco-related cases, that testimony has been based on that
research; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. That is correct.
Q. And I said three. It's actually four counting the Engle case, correct?
A. Correct. Engle would make four.
Q. Now, other than the 1,000 hours you spent doing this study, how many additional hours, if any, have you spent in doing
additional preparation for your testimony in Engle?
A. It's a bit difficult for me to know precisely what the number of those hours have been, because there have been a number of
delays in the case since I was initially contacted. I would say a couple of hundred hours to review materials for this case done
in staccato fashion, if you will. I've had to redo some of my work.
Originally I was expecting to testify in the Engle trial last fall, so I did some preparation at that time for that. As you know, that
was postponed. I was then advised that I would be deposed for the Engle case in the second half of January or February, so I
reviewed for that. That got delayed until today, and I've had to review again for today's deposition.
In the order of a couple of hundred hours throughout all of that.
Q. What did you have to review to prepare for the Engle case?
A. I heeded to refresh my memory and subjects that I investigated eight, nine, 10 years ago. I reread some important articles.
I read -- you'll have to excuse me -- what do you call the statement that puts an expert's views? You have it in front of you, a
Disclosure Statement. I studied the Disclosure Statement, articles that were pertinent to the opinions in the Disclosure Statement.
I reviewed my testimony from previous depositions and my one trial appearance both to refresh myself with the subject matter
and as well as to make certain that I could be as consistent as humanly possible so that my testimony for this case would be
as accurate as humanly possible. Things of this sort.
Q. What was then trial that you testified in?
A. The Cutler trial in Boston.
Q. What was that case about?
A. I can only say of it, it was a case filed on behalf of an individual smoker, and I did appear as a witness in that case. That
was my first and only trial appearance.
Q. What year was that?
A. 1991, to the best of my recollection. To the best of my recollection, it was February 1991.
Q. What was the allegation made by the plaintiff in that case?
A. I don't have any idea.
Q. But during that trial, your testimony focused on your research of the published public domain articles related to smoking
and health between 1930 and 1964; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. That is correct. My testimony for the one trial appearance and now my fourth deposition on tobacco has all pertained to
the same specific area, the state of knowledge in the medical and scientific community from the published literature from the
period 1930 to 1964.
Each of these have dealt with that specific area and each of these arose from my original investigation done at investigation
or after speaking with Murray Garnick in August 1988.
Q. Now, were any of the documents that you reviewed in what you term systematic analysis, were any of those documents
provided to you by the representatives of the tobacco industry including attorneys?
A. Not to my recollection. As I said before, one of the ground rules that I laid out at the beginning was that this would be my
research, and I was the one to decide what needed to be examined or what didn't need to be examined, how to go about doing it.
The articles that were investigated at that time were all articles that I thought were important to look at.
Q. Did you prepare any written report about your analysis?
A. No.
Q. So, even up to this date, you haven't prepared any written report concerning your analysis; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Do you have any plans to publish your analysis?
A. No. May I make an amendment or an addition to my answer?
Q. Yes.
A. This deals with your question about articles being supplied.
Q. Yes.
A. When I did the research, I generated my own bibliography, and it's my understanding that those have been sent to you.
The project involved a review of the world's literature. Almost the entire literature at that time was in English, but there were
occasional articles that were published in French or other languages, and Mr. Garnick and access to a translation service.
So, on those instances where articles by their titles seemed important to me to read from Spain or France or wherever they
might be, I would periodically give Mr. Garnick a list of those articles and request that they be translated in to English.
So in that sense, he sent me the English translations of articles I had requested.
Q. A hypothetical question. If you had been asked to compare the published scientific information on smoking and health to
the unpublished internal scientific research of the tobacco industry from 1930 to 1964, would you have done that?
Would you have been willing to do that?
A. Would I have been willing to compare it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Yes.
A. I possibly would have depending on time. It was a very large job to do the published literature. It took a personal toll to
be able to do the project from the published literature in a thorough and comprehensive way without sacrificing my ongoing
professional and personal responsibilities.
To take on a huge internal literature would have been quite a large project. I don't know if I would have had the time. I don't
know if I would have been able to do that or not. I was willing to take on a project at that time.
I don't know if I would have been able to take on two projects, especially since looking a internal documents of such a large
industry in an such an extensive and time consuming process.
So, I don't know if I would have or not.
Q. It would have taken you longer to review the internal documents than to review all the other documents; is that correct?
A. I don't know. I don't know how much, if any, work there was of a scientific sort on this subject internally. There are quite
a few internal documents. It's not clear to me if your question is referring to all internal company documents or an internal
company document of a particular issue.
Certainly, to look at all company documents would be an even more monmouth undertaking. I don't know how extensive the
documents are in terms of company sponsored research.
But even if that is relatively modest in size, it would have been another project. Taking on the first project was time consuming
enough, and I had limited time and other personal, professional responsibilities.
Q. Do you know whether or not any tobacco industry scientists asked for permission to publish scientific papers and have been
denied permission my the tobacco industry employer?
A. I have no information to that question.
Q. Does it make any difference to you?
MR. DODDS: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not Certain that I understand the question that you're asking.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Well, does it make any difference to you as far as your systematic analysis of the published research from 1930 to 1964
is concerned?
In other words, if there were a number of tobacco industry scientists who wanted to publish original research and were denied
the opportunity to publish it, could it have viewed the results of your study of your systematic analysis?
MR. DODDS: I'm going to object to that, (a) on the basis that it's speculative, hypothetical. secondly as to form, and third
no foundation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. You can answer it.
A. First of all, as you stated, this is a hypothetical. Secondly, the second part of my answer is: As I've said before, I have no
information at all concerning company behavior, company policies, et cetera.
And thirdly, since my assignment dealt with the published scientific literature, by definition, something that was unpublished,
whether the work of -- in the hypothetical scenario, whether the work of a scientist with the tobacco company or equally an
investigator at a medical school, who, for whatever reason, chose not to publish results -- and there are many legitimate reasons
that scientists don't publish results.
In either case, it would not have affected my project because I was dealing with the published scientific literature.
Q. New back to the Frank Statement. You've read the Frank Statement during the course of your assignment with the tobacco
industry, correct?
A. I have seen the Frank Statement, I don't have a copy in front of me as we speak. I have seen the Frank Statement.
Q. What do you know about the Frank Statement?
A. To answer your question accurately, could you please be a little bit more specific?
Q. Are you familiar with the contents of the Frank Statement?
A. I have read the Frank Statement. I'm acquainted with the contents. As I said, I don't have a copy of it in front of me. I have
read the Frank Statement.
Q. Now, in that statement, the tobacco industry said the health of the American public was of paramount importance to them,
correct?
MR. DODDS: I'm going to object to you asking him taking out specific little portions, which may or may not be accurate,
either in terms of your quoting them or the contort in which you're taking them. I think it's only fair to the witness to put the
document in front of him.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Is that correct?
A. The statement that you read?
Q. The question that I asked you.
A. Could you please re-ask the question?
MR. HOAG: Could you read the question for me?
(The record was read by the reporter as requested.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
THE WITNESS: My recollection is that the statement contained words to that effect. Without the statement in front of me, i
don't know that those were precisely the words, but it sounds familiar. As I've said already, I don't have the statement in front
of me, but it sounds familiar.
Are you reading from the statement? Would that be the term that you represent that this is in the statement?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Well, all I can represent to you is that's my question about the Frank Statement. If your recollection is different about what
it says, your recollection is different.
A. Are you reading?
MR. DODDS: Wait for the question.
THE WITNESS: Are you reading?
MR. DODDS: There's no question pending.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you know in how many states the Frank Statement was published in?
A. No.
Q. Do you know why the tobacco industry decided to publish the Frank Statement?
MR. DODDS: Objection. No foundation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. I'm asking your opinion why. That's all my question is. Do you know why the tobacco industry decided to publish the Frank
Statement?
MR. DODDS: Same objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Do you know?
A. My knowledge of that is through the tobacco companies' own explanations in the Frank Statement. I have no further
information on that beyond what the tobacco company says in the Frank Statement.
Q. Have you ever heard of the Tobacco Institute?
A. Yes.
Q. What is the Tobacco Institute, if you know?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. I don't have a great deal of knowledge or understanding of it. I'm interpreting Tobacco Institute to TIRC, Tobacco Institute
and Research Counsel.
Is that the same organization? If it's not the same organization, then I'm not certain. I can only say there are some industry-
wide organization.
That's the extent of my knowledge. I couldn't tell you who belonged and what their specific purposes were.
Q. What you refer to as TIRC, the Tobacco Industry Research --
A. I've seen reference to TIRC.
Q. Do you know whether or not they funded any research?
A. I don't know precisely who or how within the tobacco industry research was funded. I do know that some medical research,
all of it reputable that I have seen, was funded in part with the assistance of tobacco funds.
I don't know if this came from individual companies or an industry-wide organization that was funded by each of the companies.
If there was an industry-wide foundation, I don't know its precise name.
I just know that the tobacco industry did fund a considerable amount of what we would call external research, outside the
company, providing research grants to investigators in different disciplines at a host of medical schools and research institutes
and so forth.
Q. Have you ever heard of special projects funded by the tobacco industry?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever heard of the Council for Tobacco Research?
A. That is a name that I have heard. I could not tell you the difference in purpose or organization or funding between that and
the Tobacco Institute. My knowledge essentially is I've heard the name.
Q. Have you ever reviewed or read any tobacco industry press releases?
A. Outside of the Frank Statement, which I believe you said was from the Tobacco Institute, are you referring to things beyond
the Frank Statement?
Q. Yes.
A. Beyond the Frank Statement, no, I have not. The only Institute or industry-wide release that I have seen is the Frank Statement,
or at least I should say, that I recall having seen as we talk today.
Q. Part of your Disclosure Statement, your expert witness Disclosure Statement, says that you night be asked to comment on
the opinions and basis that was expressed by plaintiffs' Witnesses related to the evolution of medical knowledge of smoking
and health.
Are you familiar with any of the opinions of plaintiffs' witnesses in Engle?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
A. Net at this time.
Q. Have you reviewed any of the opinions of plaintiff's witnesses in Engle?
A. No, I have not. I don't know even know the identity of the plaintiffs' witnesses at this time.
Q. That was my next question.
Let's take a five-minute break. I'll probably be finished. I may be finished now. I may have a couple more questions.
A. Okay.
(A short recess was taken.)
MR. HOAG: Okay. I don't have any other questions.
MR. DODDS: John, I have one or two.
BY MR. DODDS:
Q. Dr. Ludmerer, at that time that Mr. Hoag asked you about the opinions that you might express concerning testimony by any
other witnesses in this case, did you know that Dr. Elizabeth Whelan was an expert in this case?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Have you reviewed or seen any opinions by Dr. Whelan was an expert in this case?
A. In this case?
Q. Yes.
A. No.
Q. Have you seen or reviewed any opinions expressed by Dr. Whelan in other cases?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. If Dr. Whelan expressed the same views in this case as she has in other cases, would you have views to share regarding
those opinions?
A. Yes.
Q. And your testimony on such occasion would be similar to what you would expect to give regarding her testimony in those
other cases?
A. Yes.
MR. DODDS: That's all I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. What is your opinion concerning Dr. Elizabeth Whalen's statement that you're familiar With?
MR. DODDS: I'll object to the form of that question, but you can answer.
THE WITNESS: I have seen an expert report that she did for the Tompkins case.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. Which case? I'm sorry.
A. Tompkins case.
Q. And what in that expert report did you agree or disagree with?
MR. DODDS: Objection to the form. You can answer.
THE WITNESS: I don't remember precisely. It's been a while ago since I saw that report. I do not have that report in front of
me now. I do remember that the report was more far-ranging in scope than my testimony.
My testimony, as you know, deals with the state of knowledge in the scientific and medical communities from 1930 to January
of 1964, and that's it. I do remember that her report covered other topics that I have not been at all involved with.
But insofar as she did have interpretations of events in that report pre-1964, I did not think that her interpretation was accurate.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q. What specific event did she discuss and interpret that you disagreed with?
A. Again, I am speaking from recollection, not having reviewed that recently and not having it in front of me now, but I do
remember that the general thrust of her report was hat the knowledge that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer was -- that
knowledge in the scientific community and consensus in the scientific community that smoking caused lung cancer existed
much earlier than it, in fact, did exist.
My Disclosure Statement, as you know, indicates that it's my view that the controversy over this issue continued through January
of 1964. Her report indicated that things were pretty wrapped up significantly before then, and I disagree with that view.
My comments about her report, I do want the record to understand and reflect, the recollection or her report that is not in front
of me now. So I don't want to mischaracterize it in any way. But to the best of my recollection that's, I think, the most accurate
answer that I can give you at this time.
Q. Well, aside from the fact that Dr. Whelan disagrees with your opinions that it was not a controversy up until 1964, that general
opinion, are there any specific details that you disagree with that Elizabeth Whelan stated in her report that you're familiar with?
A. Well, I would say again that I strongly disagree with her interpretation of events, but without the report in front of me, I'm
not able to specifically look at point by point types of items.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
Q. Can you provide one example of an event or interpretation you disagree with where you disagree with Elizabeth Whelan's
interpretation?
A. Yes, I can.
Q. What is that?
A. She, at least in that report, presents a one-sided view of events, picking and choosing articles selectivley that support a
preformed opinion. But having studied the period article by article over a 34 year period, looking at the totality of the world's
literature, I was impressed by the absence of many important articles and studies and investigators from her report when those
articles contain contrary views to her interpretation.
Q. What researchers did Elizabeth Whelan leave out that you consider to be important?
A. I would have to see the report. Right now I don't have it in front of me. It's not been recently that I have read it, and I believe
that it's very important that my answers to you be accurate.
I would really need to see the document to answer that question.
MR. HOAG: I know we requested any information that he relied on or planned to testify about. This is a document that is not in
our litigation that may base an opinion on a witness in our litigation that I don't have in front of me, that I've never been provided.
To the extent that he's unable to answer questions about this, I move to strike his testimony about Elizabeth Whelan during the
trial. So, I guess this is something we're going to have to deal with at that time.
MR. DODDS: I point out that this was a report that I had not seen, was not provided to us prior to Dr. Whelan's testimony in this
case. It was withheld from us and was not provided by us to Dr. Ludmerer, and it seems that if there's going to be any preclusion,
it would be of the testimony of Dr. Whelan on the basis of failure to disclose important and material aspects of her testimony.
MR. HOAG: He somehow reviewed it in some other litigation. I guess we'll just have to deal with this later.
MR. DODDS: Well, he is here now. If you want to ask him questions about what he recalls, that's fine. If you want to lay
in front of him any document or other piece of her testimony in this case, this is the time to do it. And if you don't take the
opportunity, you will not be heard later to complain that you couldn't.
MR. HOAG: Well, he hasn't read anything from Elizabeth Whelan in this case. Therefore, there's nothing showing that he
could present an opinion on Elizabeth Whelan if he hasn't read it. But you certainly had every opportunity to show it to him
prior to the deposition.
So, again my statement holds. So I, guess we're at an impasse here. So, there's nothing more he can recollect.
MR. DODDS: All I can say is if you want to fax anything from her, he will be very happy to comment on it.
MR. HOAG: That would have been your responsibility to provide to him a long time ago. He's at deposition, and you could
have provided to him prior to this deposition. So, as far as I'm concerned, he already answered questions about what he knows
and what he intends to testify.
If at some future point you want to show him information, depositions from other witnesses then you need to let us know and
address that issue at a future time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al, Plaintiff, v. R. J...., 1998 WL 35271772...
That's my opinion. I understand you have a different one.
MR. DODDS: We can agree to disagree.
MR. HOAG: Okay. That's what we're doing. So, I'm assuming we are concluded. Thank you very much for your time.
(The deposition was concluded at 3:30 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28
