UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Original Image of 2002 WL 34428170 (PDF)
2002 WL 34428170 (D.D.C.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, District of Columbia.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff,
v.
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., Defendants.
No. 99-CV-02496(GK).
August 8, 2002.
The Videotape Deposition of Kenneth Ludmerer
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: RICO >> Civil
Case Type: RICO >> Criminal
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Deceptive Acts/Practices
Jurisdiction: D.D.C.
Name of Expert: Kenneth Marc Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances For the Plaintiff: U.S. Department of Justice
Civil Division
1331 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W.
Suite 1150-20
Washington, D.C. 20004
By: Ms. Mary Jo Moltzen Ms. Noelle M. Kurtin.
For the Defendant Lorillard: Shook, Hardy & Bacon
One Kansas City Place
1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105
By: Mr. David M. Woods.
For the Defendant Philip Morris: Hunton & Williams
1751 Pinnacle Drive
Suite 1700
McLean, Virginia 22102
By: Mr. Daniel C. Jordan.
Also Present: Ms. Chris Walker-Byerley
Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Video Operator: Mr. Brent Christopher Christopher Video
4024 State Line Road
Kansas City, Kansas 66130.
THE VIDEOTAPE DEPOSITION OF KENNETH LUDMERER, produced, sworn and examined on behalf of the Plaintiff,
pursuant to Notice, on Wednesday, August 7, and Thursday, August 8, 2002, at the Office of the United States Attorney, 400
in the City of Kansas City, in the County of Jackson and State of Missouri, before me,
ALISON A. TRACY, RPR, CCR #554 of JOHN M. BOWEN & ASSOCIATES Court Reporters, a Notary Public, Registered
Professional Reporter and Certified Court Reporter, in a certain cause now pending in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, wherein UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is Plaintiff and PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., are Defendant.
INDEX
WITNESS: Kenneth Ludmerer
Direct Examination by Ms. Moltzen ... 4
August 8, 2002 Session ... 250
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT NO. ... PAGE
1 - Notice of Deposition ... 25
2 - Expert Report of Dr. Ludmerer ... 26
3 - CV of Dr. Ludmerer ... 27
4 - Joint Defendants' expert disclosure for Kenneth Ludmerer ... 30
5 - List of deposition and trial testimony ... 31
6 - Updated CV of Dr. Ludmerer ... 28
7 - Handwritten notes ... 103
8 - References ... 112
9 - Handwritten Paradigm ... 117
10 - Paradigm ... 119
11 - Supplemental Bibliography ... 125
12 - Additional Bibliography ... 128
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
13 - Smoking and Health, Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General ... 129
14 - Report on Visit to U.S.A. and Canada 17th April - 12th May 1958 ... 208
15- A Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers ... 221
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Today's date is August 7, 2002. The time is 9:18 AM. This is the deposition of Kenneth Ludmerer.
My name is Brent Christopher from Christopher Video. The court reporter is Alison Tracy from John Bowen & Associates.
The case caption is United States of America versus Philip Morris, Inc., et al. Civil Action No. 99-CV-02496. Counsel please
state their appearances for the record.
MS. MOLTZEN: Mary Jo Moltzen representing the United States.
MS. KURTIN: Noelle Kurtin for the United States.
MR. WOODS: This is David Woods with Shook, Hardy & Bacon in Kansas City for Lorillard Tobacco Company.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Please swear the witness.
KENNETH LUDMERER, the Witness of lawful age, being produced, sworn and examined on behalf of the Plaintiff, deposeth
and saith:
DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MS. MOLTZEN:
Q Dr. Ludmerer, would you please state your business address for the record.
A Washington University, Department of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8066, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.
Q Have you ever been deposed before?
A Yes, I have.
Q This deposition is being conducted pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the case management orders issued
in this case. But it is important for the record that I give you some basic instructions which you have probably heard before and
ask you some basic questions. You were given an oath at the beginning of the deposition. Do you understand that the answers
you provide today are the same as if these answers were given to a judge in a courtroom?
A Yes,I do.
Q I'm going to ask you a series of questions. It is important that you understand my question before you begin to answer. So if
you do not understand a question, you will ask for clarification, is that agreed to?
A Yes.
Q The court reporter will be taking down your answers to my questions. For that reason you must provide clear, verbal answers,
no nods, shrugs, uh-huhs or huh-uhs. Is that agreed to?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Yes, it is.
Q I will try to ask clear, concise questions today. But if you are confused in any way, please let me know. Is that understood?
A Yes, it is.
Q If you don't hear any part of a question, please ask that it be repeated. Is that agreed to?
A Yes.
Q If you do not ask a question -- to have a question clarified or repeated, I will assume that you heard and understood the
question. Is that understood?
A Yes, it is.
Q It is important that you allow me to finish my question before you start to answer, and that I allow you to complete your
answer before I begin my next question. Do you understand?
A Yes.
Q And the court reporter will let us know if we need to slow down or if for any reason she is having difficulty with hearing us.
According to order number 150 in this case, I am to give you the following instruction at the beginning of this deposition. You
must ask me rather than your own counsel for clarifications, definitions or explanations of any words, questions or documents
presented during the course of this deposition. You are to address your inquiries regarding clarifications to me. If you need to
take a break for any reason or if you just get tired, will you tell me?
A Yes.
Q There is one exception to that, there can be no break or recess between a question and a pending answer.
A Understood.
Q Have you taken any drugs or medication which might affect your ability to answer questions today?
A No, I have not.
Q Do you have any medical conditions or problems which might affect your ability to answer questions today?
A None that I'm aware of.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 9:22 AM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 9:24 AM.
MS. MOLTZEN: Could you introduce yourself, please.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
MR. JORDAN: Dan Jordan with Hunton & Williams here on behalf of Philip Morris.
MS. MOLTZEN: Mr. Jordan just entered the room so he missed the preliminaries. Would you introduce yourself please?
MS. WALKER-BYERLEY: Chris Walker-Byerley with Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q One more question in those preliminaries. Is there anything else that might impair your ability to recall or tell the truth?
A None that I'm aware of. May I ask you a procedural question?
Q Absolutely?
A Actually two. I appreciate your going through the guidelines as you have. Having given seven or eight depositions in the
course of my involvement over 15 years, the instructions that you have given in general are familiar and what I expected. Two
specific questions. Are there any rules, procedures, ways of doing things that are different because this is a deposition in federal
court with the U.S. Government as opposed to a civil court? As I recall previous depositions -- I believe this is the first federal
deposition, U.S. deposition that I have been involved with. Is there anything different that I should be aware of?
Q I have never taken a deposition in state court so I can't answer that. I'm sure there are some small technical differences but
I can't think of any?
A Essentially the rules are the same. What you recounted now is what I was anticipating the guidelines would be. And my
second question, I do not recall a previous video deposition. Are there any rules or procedures for you as well as for me that
are different because this is being videotaped?
Q No, there are not.
A Thank you for that clarification.
Q You're welcome. Dr. Ludmerer, in what field of expertise are you offering your opinions as an expert in this case?
A As a historian in medicine dealing with the historical issue of how we came to our current understanding that cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer.
Q Is the association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer the only disease that you will be offering opinions about?
A I'm not entirely certain what opinions, if any, I will be offering. I don't know if I will be asked to testify and, if so, what the
nature of that will be. The focus of my research and opinions does deal with the issue of lung cancer specifically and cigarette
smoking. On the other hand, the studies, particularly the magnificent prospective trials of the fifties and sixties which really
became the basis of our current understanding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer did demonstrate that cigarette smoking
either caused or was associated with many other diseases as well. And the Surgeon General's report which what I reviewed as
part of my study discusses other diseases as well.
So I think it would be fair to say that cigarette smoking and health from the scientific standpoint would be the focus of my
testimony with a great emphasis on lung cancer, but it wouldn't surprise me if I were asked to make some comments on other
illnesses as well. The focus is on cancer. I do want to make that point.
Q Will you be offering opinions about cigarette smoking and emphysema?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Again I don't know what I will be asked to discuss or not.
Q Let me ask that in a different way then. Do you consider yourself an expert in the field of medical history and smoking as
it relates to emphysema?
A I would say that I would consider my expertise smoking as it relates to lung cancer, that has always been the focus, not
other diseases.
Q That is all true then for cardiovascular disease?
A That's correct.
Q That is also true for COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
A That's correct. The focus of my study all along, my testimony if asked to testify is on cigarette smoking and lung cancer,
and not these other conditions that you are mentioning.
Q I'm going to ask one more. Nicotine addiction?
A I'm not addressing that issue at all.
Q What is the value of the history of medicine as a science or discipline?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Could you clarify that? The value? That's a broad -- I'm not trying to knit pick your question. Perhaps you could help me
a bit with that.
Q This is a general, this is not specific to this case, but in a general overview how does the historian of medicine help us reach
scholarly goals?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Are you asking how the historian of medicine goes about the task of doing history, what can be learned from history of
medicine?
Q That's my next question. I just wanted to -- we will move on to that then if this is unanswerable. In this particular area, the
history of medicine, is it important that the historian also be a medical doctor?
A In this particular area? In my opinion no. I think a good historian of medicine is a good historian of medicine. Some historians
of medicine do have medical as well as historical training as I do. There are certain topics in the history of medicine or the
history of science in general that definitely do benefit, in my judgment, by a person who is intimately familiar with the science
and the internal concepts of that field. But insofar as we are talking about this particular case and the historical evolution of our
understanding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, it is not like reading this week's New England Journal of Medicine,
Journal of Biochemistry. I think that a well-trained historian without medical qualifications certainly is qualified to do study in
this area to speak on that. It would not require a medical background in my opinion.
Q Who do you consider to be some other authorities in this field of expertise that you are going to be testifying on today?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A In the history of medicine in general?
Q Let's start there, a couple of names from the history of medicine in general.
A The history of medicine is a large field so there are many fine historians of medicine, most of whom do not have MD
degrees, appropos to your earlier question. Some of the leading historians of medicine today in my judgment, and this list is
suggestive, not totally inclusive, but Charles Rosenberg, Barbara Rosenkrantz, Daniel Fox, Rose Mary Stephens, Judy Levitt,
Juan Numbers, Gert Breeger. These would be examples of individuals who are very eminent figures in the history of medicine.
Gert Breeger has an MD degree in addition to a Ph.D degree. The other individuals that I mentioned are peer Ph.D historians
and in my judgment they are all outstanding scholars.
Q That was my general question. Now a more specific question. Who else do you generally considered authoritative in the field
of the history of medicine as it pertains to smoke smoking and lung cancer?
A Well, a number of people have written on this and I have not reviewed for this deposition all of the secondary sources that
I read back in the late eighties or early nineties when I did my research. There have been a number of important books and
articles that I remember was in them, not necessarily who wrote them.
But from my perspective some of the best historical work by contemporary workers has included work by John Burnham, Alan
Brandt whom I know is a witness for the plaintiff, I believe Sir Richard Doll who I don't know if he would call himself a
historian, Ernest Wynder, both of them have written very helpful historical recollections of their experience and I have found
those to be authoritative and reliable and helpful. Others who have written about this from an historical perspective, particularly
as the field of chronic -- epidemiology of chronic diseases grew out of this controversy, Susser, I forget the first name, and
Terrace. Vanderbrook would be another name. These would be examples of individuals that I think have written authoritatively.
Of that group, Professors Burnham and Brandt are pure historians and they are both very fine historians in my opinion with
deservedly high reputations. The other individuals that I mentioned are not pure historians in that sense. They are more very
thoughtful individuals, epidemiologists who lived through the events and wrote what I considered to be very helpful accounts
of the events but they don't go to the history of medicine meetings and that type of thing.
Q Within your field, the history of medicine, describe the scientific method in a general sense, not for this case, but describe
the scientific methodology employed to solve a problem or answer a question or tackle an issue.
A Gladly. I will speak in general because there will be specifics that are determined by the problem you study. But, as a
generalization, the historian of medicine will want to do a lot of reading in secondary sources to help put the events under
consideration in a proper context. If you are writing about the history of the evolution of our understanding that cigarette smoking
causes lung cancer, history of or the scientific understanding that cigarette smoking and disease more broadly; examples of
important secondary reading, history of public health, history of cancer, history of NTH, scientific fundings, history of public
health, preventive medicine. But there are a number of topics that around any specific issue you are examining and historians
recognize that understanding the context is important to interpreting the events and bringing out their meaning and richness. To
summarize, Ms. Moltzen, I think I said context would be one important, learning everything you can about the general area and
the subject to interpret events. One needs to be accurate in assessing primary sources. Secondary sources as well. But honesty
and accuracy is important in all scholarly research. It is just as important in history as it is in any other field. You don't want to
make up data. You don't want to falsify data. You don't want to pick and choose selectively. You have to be as fair and objective
as possible and represent things as fairly as possible. So we could call it accuracy and fairness a second quality.
It is extremely important to be comprehensive, to look at everything. One of the most common errors in my judgment by non-
historians who try to do historical work is that they are not comprehensive in their research. They will trace one idea but they
won't look for alternative views or they won't look to see how that idea was received. What you really have to do as a historian
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
is look at things from the perspective of the time, very comprehensive, get a total picture. Historians are aware of this but one of
the easiest error for non-historians to make in trying to do history from my own personal experience teaching has been failure
to be comprehensive.
Another qualification of doing history is or quality of doing good history of medicine is avoidance of hindsight. I think, and
getting back to your first question, what does history have to offer. I wasn't trying to avoid the general question, but this is
one way in my judgment that history does have something to offer. You can only make decisions and do things based on what
you know at the time. No one knows the future. And one of the tasks of the historian is to bring to life and explain reality of
what things were like at that particular time, not to apply current standards that may not yet have existed or been created to a
previous time. It is unfair to be a Monday morning quarterback. We all know who won the Super Bowl last year but a lot of
us particularly in St. Louis thought it was going to be the Rams, that they wouldn't be beaten. I think what's going on today
economically is another example. It is not at all clear whether this is fabulous time to invest long term in the stock market or
if the market calamities that we have experienced the last few months are a prelude to even more calamities. Five or 10 or
15 years from now people will know. It would be easy for a non-historian to say gee, Mr. Woods, you should have put all of
your money in this stock or gee, Mr. Woods, you should have sold everything. It is not so clear at the time. I think avoiding
hindsight. Evaluating events in terms of what was known at the time, not what came to be known later. I think that's another
important quality of good history.
And then if you are talking about the history of medicine or history of science specifically in distinction to other branches of
history, history of medicine is one branch of history, there is an intellectual component to the history of medicine and history
of science. And what historians of science and medicine learn is that history is messy. It is messy and it is untidy, and that the
evolution of scientific knowledge is not a straight line of progress. This would be another distinction in my opinion in view
of the trained historian of medicine versus someone who is not trained in the field, a scientist or physician who is looking
back at the time.
It is easy to take what we know today and get a sense that it is just a straight line of progress. What you find in fact is that it didn't
happen that way, that for every two steps forward, there were steps backward, steps sideways and that there was -- there have
been many ideas that subsequently came to be accepted but then encountered hostility and resistance at that time, as surprising
as that may seem to us today because we have accepted it. We find many instances where the common judgment advocated
ideas that have subsequently been disbanded so the consensus is not always right. There is a lot of noise. For every step forward,
a step backwards and sideways and false paths. There is an untidiness and messiness in the evolution of knowledge. It is not
a straight line of progress from the ignorance of the past to the great certainty of the present. This type of view is something
that historians of medicine and science acquire in their training and can bring to the public discussion or teaching discussion
of issues in the field.
Q So those are the most important qualities of a good medical historian?
A As we sit here today I would say. I don't mean those to be exclusive, but I would certainly --
Q They are important?
A -- underscore their importance, yes.
Q What about the specific methodology that is used by a historian, steps one through 10? What are they?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I'm not certain it is possible to answer that because there is a certain art and craft to doing history. There are as many ways to
publish a good book as good books get published and different people go about the process in different ways and some people
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
jump into the primary literature first and others do a lot of reading in secondary literature. Some people begin writing very early
on, other people begin writing very late. I think that the general principles that I described before would apply to everyone.
But I don't know of a protocol step 1 you do this, step 2 you do this, step 3. Part of it is problem-determined because different
problems and questions in history will suggest different types of approaches. But there is a lot of individuality and variation
as well. I think if you were to get 10 great historians they all have their own idiosyncracies and personal ways of doing things
that were different from one to another.
Q Am I correct to say then that there is no one and one only methodology that is commonly accepted across the field of medical
history?
A I'm not certain I would phrase it exactly like that. I think that there are certain principles of the history of medicine that are
widely taught and implemented in the history of medicine training programs, a certain educational and factual background; so
none of the things that a person does in becoming a historian or a scholar in any field is you learn what is there and you get a
sense of what is known, the current state of knowledge is in your own particular research area as well as more generally.
There is lots of discussion, much of which comes at the seminar level. It is not that you teach a course in methods but you will
have a seminar on methods, you will critique a paper or you will do a draft of a chapter for a dissertation, your mentor will go
over it. So a lot of the type of teaching and discussion is informal as well as strictly formal.
But these issues of what type of evidence is needed for the question at hand. How do you get the evidence. How do you use the
evidence fairly. Have you been representative, have you been comprehensive, have you brought about the proper interpretations.
Have you put it in a wider context. These sorts of principles I think are general. But in terms of a specific way to doing something,
a historian to wants to write a new biography of Abraham Lincoln, one could take a lot of different comparable paths to the
same goal and that's the distinction I would like to make.
Q Has any court of law ever refused to qualify you as an expert witness?
A No.
Q Has any party ever challenged your expert witness status?
A Not that I'm aware of.
Q Have you ever smoked?
A No, I have not.
Q Do you believe that smoking causes disease?
A Yes,I do.
Q Why do you testify for the tobacco companies?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Number 1, I'm testifying strictly historically, not present day. But I'm an advocate of accuracy in history. I'm not changing
the historical record to justify any cause, no matter how politically correct it may seem to us today, and my involvement with
these cases as you perhaps know began in 1988 and at that time plaintiffs in other cases had witnesses who were completely
changing the historical record about this subject and that testimony was brought to my attention. I will be very candid, Ms.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Moltzen, it really created a dilemma to me because I believe that smoking causes cancer, I always have, still do, and I believe
that cigarette smoking is a very serious health effect. But I was also terribly upset to see the historical record being changed in
these cases to support a prefabricated concept of public history. In my judgment I have an advocacy to accuracy in history and
to portray the events as objectively as one possibly can and not changing the facts. Not suing a doctor for not using Penicillin
before Penicillin was discovered, this sort of thing.
So I sought counsel. I discussed the subject with my department chairman, with the Dean of the medical school, with I believe
the Chancellor of the university, certainly with two or three very eminent, very senior, very wise members of the faculty. They
were all of the view it was appropriate for me to be a witness, A, as long as I was speaking strictly historically; B, as long as I
made clear that I don't believe that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, that it is a major public health hazard, and so forth.
Their counsel was that an equally important principle was not changing the facts of history and it would be appropriate for me
to give a historical account how we came to know what we did in the events that culminated with the Surgeon General's report
of 1964. So that's how I got to where I am. Would I rather be testifying for the US government? Of course I would. On the other
hand, these were the circumstances I sought counsel from leaders at my university and that's how it came to be.
MS. MOLTZEN: Let's go off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 9:51 a.m.
(Short recess was taken.)
(Deposition Exhibit Nos. 1 through 5 were marked for identification.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record.
The time is 9:53 AM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer number 1. Have you seen that
document before?
A These documents get confusing to me. I believe this is the document that says I'm to be deposed today?
Q It is.
A Yes, I have seen it before.
Q It a Notice of Deposition of Joint Defendants' Expert Kenneth Ludmerer.
A Yes, I have seen that before.
Q Thank you. I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer 2. It is entitled Expert Report of
Dr. Kenneth M Ludmerer, MD. Can you identify that document for the record?
A Yes, I have seen that before.
Q Did you write this report? Let's try this. On Page 7 there is a signature. Is that your signature?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A That is my signature.
Q Did you prepare this report?
A I participated in its preparation. I did not actually draft the report. It was drafted by individuals at one of the firms based
on previous testimony, previous conversations, previous depositions. It was sent to me for editing so I read it, approved it, it
represents my views. I did not physically compose it.
Q When you say one of the firms, who do you mean?
A Well, I presume it was the Shook, Hardy, Bacon firm.
Q Law firm?
A Law firm. I would presume that, but I have been involved with a handful of cases as you know and quite frankly I don't
know who initially prepared it and how it has been edited over time. The expert statements for the handful of cases I have been
involved with have been very similar and they go back a long way. So I would be guessing to say that it was done at the Shook,
Hardy, Bacon firm. It could have been another firm that represents the defense.
Q Do you know who you worked with in editing the drafts of the report?
A From that point it would be David Woods and Chris Walker who are here today.
Q I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer 3. Can you identify that for the record?
A Deposition 3 is a copy of my curriculum vitae.
Q Is this, is Exhibit 3 an accurate and current version of your CV?
A It is accurate but it is not current. I recently updated it, I think Mr. Woods provided you a new version of it. If it would help,
I could mention to you the main changes.
Q That would be helpful. I think we will first mark this as the next exhibit.
(Deposition Exhibit No. 6 was marked for identification.)
Q The updated CV has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer 6. Can you tell us the main changes between that and
number 3?
A Correct. Number 3, Ms. Moltzen, is June, 2001. Item number 6 is May, 2002. Basically they are the same but if you are
looking at what the significant changes, I won't go through the small things, there are a few more published articles, that type
of thing. If you look at the invited lectures and visiting professorships which is item --
Q Roman Numeral XI?
A Roman Numeral XI, it is clear from the earlier CV of June, 2001, that I received a lot of invitations to be a visiting lecturer,
named professorship. I can't accept them all. There are 102 such named lectureships listed on the June, 2001 version. On the
May, 2002 version we are up to 122. So in the 11 intervening months I delivered an additional 20 named lectureships or named
visiting professorship in an educational institution 20 times.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A second change is that, it is minor but it is something I'm proud of, on the June, 2001 version I list seven professional journals,
either historical journals or medical journals in which I served on the editorial board. In January of this year I was invited to
serve on the editorial board of Isis. It is a small change. It is eight journals rather than seven. On the other hand, Isis is a very
important scholarly journal in the field of the history of science. It is the official journal of the History of Science Society so
I'm proud to be on that board. So a small but it is present on the new version, it was not present on the old version.
And then lastly I would bring to your attention that in the spring of this year, 2002, I was elected to the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences and that is indicated on the May, 2002 version by definition. It is not in the earlier version because I wasn't
a member of the academy at that time.
Q Which Roman Numeral is it under?
A I listed it in two places, it is listed professional society because it is a professional society. But as you are aware, it is an
extremely organization, one that I feel very honored to be part of. I also listed it under awards and honors where you frequently
see it listed in professional so I put it under the awards and honors category. Those are the main changes. I'm sure I could take
out a microscope and additional paper and additional community service board and so forth but those are the chief changes
from the earlier version to the present version.
Q I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer 4 and it is entitled Joint Defendants' Expert
Disclosure for Kenneth M. Ludmerer. This was the cover document that was sent to the United States along with your disclosure.
The reason I'm doing this is because in the second paragraph it says, “Accompanying this expert disclosure and report are the
data, exhibits, and/or information that Dr. Ludmerer considered in forming the opinions expressed in his report; a curriculum
vitae; publications authored by Dr. Ludmerer within the last 10 years; and transcripts of trial and deposition testimony within
the last four years.” And we are going to be take talking about some of those so I wanted that on the record. Instead of bringing
all of the trial and deposition transcripts over the last four years with me, I made up a list, it has been marked as Deposition
Exhibit 5. I am doing this because I don't want -- this is not a memory game. We don't have to sit here and you try to remember
when and where.
A I appreciate that, thank you.
Q If this is incorrect, that's fine. It is just as a tool we can use. From the documents that your attorneys sent me, these were the
cases over the last four years that you had either been deposed in or had testified at trial. As you look over that list, are there
any errors there or are there any additions?
A We have a camera going, a videotape going so I will try not to be too silent. We have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, 10, 10 events, four trials, six depositions. That looks about right. It is pretty close.
Q As we sit here you can't think of any additional cases that you were deposed in over the last four years that come to mind
right now?
A Not that immediately come to mind. This looks right.
Q Going back to your CV which was Exhibit -- it was 3 and 6, wasn't it? Is the education on that current and accurate?
A Yes, it is. There is nothing that is inaccurate in the earlier CV. It is just --
Q Incomplete?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Or incomplete or inaccurate, it is just in the intervening year of some notable things happened. Without taking your time
to go into every new article and every new committee and every new that just highlighted what I considered to be the most
important events of the last 11 months. Everything in the earlier CV is accurate.
Q As far as during your years of education, did you do any research projects yourself?
A Yes, I did.
Q Can you describe them?
A Are you talking college education, medical education?
Q Let's start with medical education.
A I interrupted formal medical school to do a project in the history of medicine.
Q Where was that?
A This was at John Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland.
Q What did the project consist of?
A I wrote my first book at that time, Genetics in American Society. And actually I think it might be more accurate to say that
my research involvement goes back to my college days, my college undergraduate days which were at Harvard University,
and I concentrated in the program called history and science, and the name is and science, not of science. And that was a very
popular field of concentration for pre-medical students. You got as much science as if you had majored in conventional science
so you didn't feel like you were depriving yourself. You could take as much science as if you had chosen to major in biology or
chemistry, but there was much more emphasis on the liberal arts and history in general on the history of science in particular;
and the department was administered by the history of science faculty at Harvard and our senior thesis were in the history of
science. So as a college undergraduate I essentially had a double major, history being one of them. I wrote my senior thesis on
the history of the American eugenics movement and really made that a major project. That was a big activity for me at that time.
I received the departmental prize for best thesis. It was really closer to a master's thesis than to a college undergraduate thesis. I
went to medical school at John Hopkins because that's where I had dreamed to go to medical school. I was lucky enough to get
in, and really thought that would be the end of my work in the history. But by sheer coincidence Hopkins is one of the minority
medical schools that has a history of medicine program in the school. There is a department the history of medicine, and we
had required courses in the history of medicine in both the first and second years of medical school. I went to all of the lectures,
my two traditional courses. I got to know the faculty well. And how many medical students have a genuine interest in medical
history? Not that many, so it wasn't hard to get the know the faculty well. But that contact, that exposure gave me the idea of
turning my college thesis into a book. So the presence of the department of the history of medicine facilitated that.
I took a leave of absence from medical school per se, I was a graduate student in the history of medicine at John Hopkins. I
attended the seminars they asked me to do and did the other things that graduate students do but essentially I turned my college
thesis into a book. That's the first book listed in my CV. It is entitled Genetics in American Society. It was an outgrowth of my
college undergraduate thesis that I have the opportunity to pursue as a graduate student in the medical history at John Hopkins
and that became my first book.
Q Did any of that research work and the eventual book that came out of it, is there anything in it is that is related to smoking
and health?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Not directly.
Q This covers a couple of sections of your CV. I want to talk about employment and experience and flesh out the CV a little
bit. Research Associate, Department of the History of Science at Harvard University. What were your duties, what did you
do at that point in time?
A I did work in the history of medicine full-time. This CV probably reads a bit differently from a conventional CV from a full-
time Ph.D historian because I have combined the history of medicine with work in clinical medicine. I had done a residency, a
medical residency in medicine we have post-doctoral fellowships and training vehicles that are much more common in medicine
than they are in the arts and sciences. But essentially what happened was that I did my first book, I did my work in the history
of medicine at John Hopkins that I described to you. I returned to medical school proper and received my MD degree from
Hopkins. I went to Barnes Hospital, which is the teaching hospital of the Washington University School of Medicine in St.
Louis, and did three years of an internal medicine residency, qualified for the boards in internal medicine, took the boards,
passed them my first attempt, and then funded by the Department of Medicine went back to Harvard for two years as a post-
doctoral student in the history of medicine. We are kind of making up terms because it was uniquely created by my department
chairman to help promote my own academic endeavors. I remained very close to people at Harvard.
My first book had grown from my experiences as a Harvard undergraduate. I thought to myself you know if I can be at Harvard
and get an idea for one book, maybe if I went back for a couple of years I can get an idea for a second book. So I was a full-time
student in the history of science. I wasn't taking things for credit. I already had my degrees. But I was auditing courses, talking
with people, which was is a large part of the experience, thinking, reading, reflecting, and that is when I became interested
in the history of medical education as a subject and that began my -- my second book began during that two years as a post
doctoral fellow at Harvard in the history of science.
Q It also says that, I take it during that time you were an instructor of medicine at Washington University. What kind of courses
did you teach?
A Well, we were -- let me backtrack. My department chairman at Washington University, Dr. David Kipnis, gave me the
opportunity to pursue a unique career, to be an academic internist with a significant academic participation at a first tier level
in the history of medicine. No one had done that before, combining the two in that fashion. And he used conventional medical
instruments, educational instruments to help me achieve those goals.
What we have in internal medicine are what are commonly -- all of medicine what are commonly called post-doctoral
fellowships so say you finish a residency in internal medicine and you want to become an academic cardiologist. So you do a
cardiology fellowship for a few years and that means you spend a portion of your time in clinical cardiology. But if you have
academic goals, most of your time is in research. So we created a self-designed fellowship in general internal medicine in which
I combined work in general internal medicine with what I did for most of the time which was research and study in the history
of medicine. It gets complicated, and I apologize.
Q That's all right.
A I went back to Harvard for two academic years and did work full-time in the history of medicine and history of science and
discovered medical education. The summers I came back to St. Louis to meet my clinical obligations for the fellowship and I
attended on the medical service of the Veteran's Hospital.
Q What did that entail?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A That entails being responsible for a resident, an intern and a team of students, supervising them in their care of patients and
teaching them as you go.
Q So here when it says instructor of medicine, you did not actually teach students in a classroom?
A That is not entirely correct. Most teaching in all clinical departments is bedside and small group teaching. That is the type of
teaching that I engaged in and that is the type of teaching that everyone engages in and most of the teaching that I did then and
that I do now is of that sort. In addition to that, I'm talking clinical, I'm talking internal medicine, and clinical departments, the
same would be true of pediatrics or surgery. There are conferences, there are rounds, and occasionally faculty members will
give a talk on this subject or that subject or present a grand rounds and I have done some of that also. But unlike the arts and
science campus where a professor of history including myself will have a course on the history of medicine, as an instructor
in internal medicine I don't offer course in internal medicine, I assume responsibility for the care of a group of patients and
the students and house staff who are involved with their care and it is a small group, informal, teach as you go, this morning's
discussion is going to be determined by who was admitted last night and what those issues involved and that type of thing.
Q From '79 to '86, according to your CV, are you both and assistant professor of medicine at the School of Medicine at
Washington University, and an assistant professor of history, Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Washington University. How did
your duties change in those years from the prior years?
A There was an intervening year that we might mention. It is a year that I'm proud of so I mention it. But I was chief resident
in internal medicine for the Washington University system. That was an entirely clinical year. It was not an historical year.
We had two chief residents who essentially ran the clinical service and the teaching service in internal medicine. And if you
will permit to say so, it is a great distinction to be chosen to be the chief resident and had always been a dream of mine. I was
very product of that. That was '78, '79.
Q Does that include more administrative work than being the instructor of medicine?
A There is a bit more administrative work. Now the job has changed, by the way, because I was chief resident in '78, '79. But
a chief resident has different duties today and has more administrative duties today than at that relatively simple time not that
long ago. Yes, there are more administrative duties because you are making up the schedule and that sort of thing. The single
hardest administrative duty was actually that because we had about 85 to 90 house officers. I'm defining the house officers as
the interns, the first year residents and the second year residents. So we had to make up their schedule for the year. We also note
that we had certain services to cover. We had four floors in private service, we had three floors in what we then called ward
medicine, we had a Veteran's Hospital we had to staff, we had the city hospital, now closed, but we had a municipal hospital,
we had to staff that, we had emergency room, we that coronary care room, we that electives. We had to keep them all staffed.
It was our job to arrange each house officer's schedule on this month you are on ward medicine, the next month you are in
emergency room, two months of private medicine. We had to make up the call schedule. Not only are you on ward medicine,
but you are admitting every third night or every fourth night, this is when you are on, this is when you are off, this is who
you are working with. So there was a significant amount of administrative work to create such a schedule. It sounds simple
but when you have close to 90 people and before computers and all the services, you try to take into account people's wishes
and preferences. My best friend is being married in February, can my vacation come in February, this sort of thing so I can
attend. To tell you the truth, it was a ton of work to do then. Fortunately it was done before the year began. The year was like
July 1 to June 30 and my co-chief resident and I worked on the schedule like April and May. So by the time the year began it
was pretty smooth going. The hard administrative job had been done. Putting together that schedule was a bear. Then there are
minor administrative things that come up all along. If there is a problem in the clinical service. One of the honors of being chief
resident is that you are the one who is called and you resolve this issue, you put out that fire. So there is more administrative
work than I had subsequently when I was actually a full faculty member. I didn't have to worry about some of the things they
year when I was chief resident.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
MS. MOLTZEN: Off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record for a tape change. The time is 10:19 AM.
(Short recess was taken.)
(Deposition Exhibit Nos. 7 through 12 were marked for identification.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 10:30 AM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, from 1979 to 1986, you were assistant professor of medicine at the School of Medicine and assistant professor
of history at the Faculty of Arts and Sciences both at Washington University. How did your duties change with those two new
positions?
A I don't understand the question. How did I do the change?
Q How were those jobs different than what you had been doing previously which was it looks to me like chief resident and
instructor of medicine?
A As chief resident, one is given the faculty title instructor. Essentially what happened in 1979 was I finished my training
and joined the faculty. Because I was fully trained both in internal medicine and in the history of medicine, I qualified for an
academic appointment in both departments. I was actually the first person that I'm aware of in the university who received a
full academic appointment in two departments, in two different parts of the university. So I became an assistant professor of
history in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and assistant professor of medicine in the School of Medicine. I was on the tenure
track. But essentially the earlier part of the CV deals with education and training, earlier research experience and so forth. Now
I'm a faculty member, assistant professor.
Q What did that entail?
A It entailed clinical work, teaching and research. And the history of medicine side it together because the great gift that the
department of medicine gave to me was in allowing the work that I did in the history of medicine to count as my scholarship in
the department of medicine. I did not have to moonlight as a historian and do laboratory work during the day or clinical studies
during the day or drug trials during the day. I had to be productive in a scholarly fashion as all members of the academic track
were expected to be. As a publisher perish, if you don't get tenure, you are booted out type of thing.
But their gift to me was allowing my scholarship in the history of medicine to count. So I met my clinical obligations as an
attending physician, attending on the internal medicine service, at that time I would estimate five months a year. That was
similar to the attending I had done as a fellow. I had a resident and intern and couple of students and be responsible for that
group of patients. The teaching would be small group tutorial individualized based on the cases. Every once in awhile you get
asked to give a lecture or to take rounds or to do teaching with a larger group of people.
So from the department of medicine side I lumped the clinical and the teaching together because they go hand in hand. In the
history side I began offering a similar course in the history of the American medical profession which I continue to do today.
I would have occasional students, usually undergraduates, sometimes graduates, who would do research electives with me,
tutorials, theses, dissertations, that type of thing, and the majority of my time was in research and the research was the history
of medicine. And it was during that time that I wrote my second book, Learning to Heal, on the creation of how the system
of medical education in the United States, where medical schools came from, where the teaching hospitals came from, how
our system of educating physicians grew.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Then in 1986 you become associate professor both at the School of Medicine and on the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. Did
your work change at all with that promotion?
A Not in any substantive way. I was promoted, I received tenure, so you are higher up in the academic ladder. But essentially
my duties were the same. As one becomes more senior on the faculty, at least at my school sometimes it is more committee
work, often on an ad hoc basis. I have always had a very close relationship and continue to do so with the chairs of both history
and internal medicine as well as with the Dean of arts and science and the medical school as well as with the Chancellor of the
university. Frequently each of those individuals would call me with special projects or I could appreciate your advice or input
on this or that. As I was tenured in associate professor there was a bit more of that than there had been.
But the main change is that on the basis of the book that I mentioned, Learning to Heal, I was promoted, I got tenure, I knew
I wouldn't have to leave St. Louis, and could relax in that sense. There was really no substantive change in my duties. The
teaching clinical work and research and scholarship and history of medicine continued onward as it had before.
Q Were you still doing the same amount of clinical work? You had testified approximately five months a year.
A At that time we were doing -- at that time I was on one service or the other approximately five months a year. That didn't mean
that it took all day every day to be on the service. It usually took the morning. Attending regulations at that time were not as
stringent as they are now in terms of recordkeeping and documentation. So it didn't mean that I was all day long occupied. But
I was responsible for a service approximately, in most -- it would vary from year to year. But on the average about five months
a year. That was divided between Barnes Hospital, our main university teaching hospital, and the John Cochran Veteran's
Hospital which is two or three miles from the university, it is an acute care Veteran's Hospital. We have a service there, all of our
medical students and all of our Washington University internal medicine house staff rotate through the Veteran's Hospital, and
accordingly we need some of our faculty to do attending rotations there. I did some of my attending rotations at the Veteran's
Hospital and some back at Barnes, the mother hospital.
Q Then in 1992 you became a full professor of medicine at the School of Medicine and a professor of history on the faculty
of arts and sciences?
A That's correct.
Q Does that continue up to the present?
A That is correct. I was promoted to full professor both in internal medicine and in history on the basis of my scholarship in the
history of medicine. As I mentioned to you before, the gift that the department of medicine gave me was allowing scholarship in
the history of medicine to count for the department, as long as it pertained to medicine, and they accepted that. That was novel.
Other people are doing that today with positions based on mine. To my knowledge my appointment was the first that allowed me
to do that clinical department to be a doctor and have an historical scholarship count as my scholarship instead of having to go
through genetics and be a doctor. So I was promoted to full professor in both departments on the basis of progress accomplished
to that point on what became my third book and my most recent book called Time to Heal. That was published about two and a
half years ago. It hadn't come out yet but I was getting grant support for the book. I could demonstrate progress was occurring,
people were excited about it, and I was promoted to full professor in both departments, and as with my promotion from assistant
to associate professor, it was largely a change of stature. It is a greater honor to be a full professor than an associate professor.
It was even easier to have the ear of the Dean or the Chancellor or the department chair in the history of medicine or that sort
of thing. There were not any substantive changes in my work.
Q That was going to be my next question. Were you still doing about five months per year of clinical work? Are you still doing?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Actually now it is about four. Somewhere in the early or mid nineties when all of the hospital mergers are occurring and all
of the consolidation of the health care system was occurring in response to the possibility that the Clinton administration might
pass legislation, somewhere around that time Barnes Hospital merged with Jewish Hospital, which is an ancillary Washington
University teaching hospital, they are across the street from each other, and then the house staff merged, the Jewish Hospital used
to have its own house staff and we would have our house staff. Now we have one house staff. The service became larger, more
complex, more to cover, and we switched from -- and also with that we wanted to give our students more ambulatory instruction
rather than pure inpatient instruction. To do all of the, with the merger and the desire to increase ambulatory instruction, from
the time I had arrived at Washington University in the mid seventies as an intern through the mid nineties, the clinical rotations
were six weeks in duration and I would have typically four rotations. With these mergers that I have been describing, the clinical
rotations were shortened to four weeks. So and then I had four rotations as before but now we are talking four week rotations
rather than six rotations. So on average my time in the clinical service changed from about five months to four months.
Q Since 1979 have you maintained an office for the private practice of medicine?
A I do not have an outpatient practice. I'm part of the Washington University faculty practice plan which means that when I
see patients they are considered my private patients, and billing is done by the Washington University business department and
I'm the physician of record and responsible physician.
For various reasons my clinical work from the beginning through the present has entirely been on the inpatient service. I have
not had an outpatient practice following individuals as ambulatory patients. If I were coming along today it is very possible
that I might have. But at the time we did not have the division of general internal medicine. I was only a general internist on
the full-time faculty of an intensely research-oriented medical school which I think is second this year in NIH grants. It was
an unusual appointment.
My chair and I felt that if I had an outpatient practice, what if I needed to go to Washington to do research, how could I be
responsible for Mrs. Smith if she had a headache or needed to call. There were just logistical problems that suggested that it
would be wiser that I do all of my clinical work on the inpatient service. I think that for me at the time was the right decision
and that's what we did and that's what we have continued to do through the present. Now today we have the division of general
internal medicine which we didn't have at that time. I was appointed to the office of the chairman. I still am in the office of
the chairman. If I were joining the faculty today I would probably be in the division of general internal medicine. It is likely
today I would have an outpatient practice in addition to inpatient attending, but this is today, that was then, and that's how
things came about.
Q Have you ever had a professional license denied?
A No, I have not.
Q Have you ever had a professional license LUDMERER, Kenneth - AUG 7 & 8 '02 Page 52 suspended, revoked or limited?
A No.
Q Have you ever had any disciplinary action taken against you?
A No.
Q I believe your CV says that you published three books, not your CV, your expert report, Exhibit 2 at Page 1 says you published
three books, more than 30 original articles concerning the history of medicine, and numerous book reviews. Were the articles
and book reviews peer reviewed?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A The articles were peer reviewed. To my knowledge the book reviews were not, would not be common for a book review
to be peer reviewed. It is common practice in the history of medicine for articles to be peer reviewed and most, if not all, of
those articles were peer reviewed. For book review generally either depending on the journal, if it is a small journal, the editor
will contact you. If it is a large journal they will have a book reviewer specializing in book reviews. But in general a scholar is
contacted by the journal. We have this book, would you be interested, we would appreciate a review from you, are you interested
and able, that type of thing. And if I'm able to, I try to accommodate. But those are not peer reviewed in the same sense that
books or articles are peer reviewed, sent out to referees. It would just take too much time and effort.
Q Did you ever submit an article or a book review for publication that was not accepted by a journal?
A I have never submitted a book review that was not accepted. I recall one or two articles early in my career during my graduate
student and history days that was submitted and not accepted.
Q Do you remember the topics?
A Yes, I do.
Q What were they?
A One topic dealt with a man named John Shaw Billings who is an eminent figure in 19th and early 20th century history of
medicine, extraordinarily broad individual in each of his contributions. He was a statistician, a public health officer, he was a
demographer, he was involved with the US Census of 1880 and 1890. He was the creator of Index Medicus. He founded the
National Library of Medicine. Later he became the first director of the New York Public Library, was a quote unquote scientific
influential whose views were widely sought and consulted, to leading public and private individuals of the time. He was also a
pioneer in the new medical education, learning by doing and the importance of having full-time faculty and converting students
from passive observers who would listen to lectures to active learners who had clinical clerkships and learn by doing and
become active in the process. So the first paper I ever wrote or one of the first papers I ever wrote was on John Shaw Billings.
I submitted it to a journal and it was too unwieldy and they rejected it.
Q Do any of your publications, the articles or the books, deal directly with tobacco and health?
A Can I tell you about my other article that was rejected?
Q Of course you can.
A I say this because someone stole and plagiarized it.
Q Go ahead.
A The first article I ever wrote was the summer between my sophomore and junior year in the history of science program at
Harvard that I mentioned to you before. I discovered that the history of eugenics as a subject I was interested in and indeed that
became my first book. Getting back to your earlier question how do people write books. There are lots of ways to do books. In
the three books that I have done, they have grown out of articles. I didn't just one day decide I'm going to write a book on the
history of eugenics. I got interested in the subject, I started writing articles on this aspect of it, that aspect of it, term papers, this
and that, the knowledge of the field and the interest in the subject grew, and ultimately I could see a book, and the book grew
in that fashion. But the first article I wrote was entitled Madison Grant, Portrait of a Racist. And it was a study of one of the
racists in the early American eugenics movement. It was a dam good college undergraduate paper.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
I was spending the summer living with some graduate students in the history of science at Harvard. They were excited about
the paper, thought I should submit it for publication. My advisor in the history and science program thought it was a very good
paper, submit it for publication. I said okay. And I may be 19 years old at this time, I never published a paper before, there is
that excitement of seeing your name in print. I didn't need a lot of encouragement to send this paper off. So I said where should
I send it? They said send it to the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. In retrospect that was kind of an odd
place to send it because they usually don't accept papers that are submitted in that fashion, but I didn't know anything better.
And fortunately they rejected it. And I remember my advisor at Harvard asking me did you see any referee notes? I said no,
there weren't any. And he said that's really odd, usually whether they accept an article or not, particularly if they don't accept an
article, there are referee comments and explanations and so forth. That's unusual. I didn't know any better. I had never submitted
an article before. I didn't think anything of it. But it was that paper that led me to my college thesis. As I indicated before as
my college thesis that led me to the book in medical school.
Flash forward four years. I'm now in the middle of my career at John Hopkins, I've completed the first two years of medical
school, now I'm a graduate student in the history of medicine program and I'm working full-time on my book. I see the book,
that's what I'm working on. I came across somewhere a reference to this newly published article called Madison Grant, Portrait
of a Racist in some obscure journal published from the southeast part of the country. It was my paper word for word, over 30
manuscript pages, literally word for word.
And what clearly happened is someone who refereed it from the American Philosophical Society said that doesn't warrant in our
paper, in our publication, it is not a bad paper, this guy is probably some pre-med who is never going to do history of medicine
again, I'm going to take it for myself, I'm going to publish it someplace obscure where it is hard to track down and I've got a
free publication. That's what happened. And I remember thinking to myself at that time I'm glad that it is his name on the paper
and not mine because my understanding of the subject had grown and matured, I could see a book now that I didn't four years
ago. I could see it was not a bad paper but I was much more mature and sophisticated in my understanding on the subject, and I
remember thinking I'm glad that it is his name and not my name associated with it. I felt good about myself. I had internalized
some of the proper values of publication, it is important the quality of the work that you do, not just publication for the sake
of publication of getting your name out, that sort of thing.
So I mentioned it to my advisor who thought we should pursue things. I said no, let me just finish my book and I never did
anything. Years later when I'm a little older and more mature, I thought back and I got to tell you I was annoyed, that that was
not a nice thing that that person did to take my paper and published it under his name. And I tried to find it and I could not find
it. So I have never been able to take action in that sense. So he did do a good job of burying it. That was the other paper that
was not accepted for publication. It is out there under someone else's name somewhere.
Q I will ask the question that I didn't let you -- that I asked before you had finished your answer. Do any of your publications,
the three books or the more than 30 articles, or even the book reviews, deal directly with tobacco and health or LUDMERER,
Kenneth - AUG 7 & 8 '02 Page 59 smoking and health?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Not directly. Indirectly in the sense that they deal with scientific knowledge and its evolution, and both the concepts and
techniques are pertinent to understanding the subject of tobacco and cigarette smoking and health but they were not specific
studies of cigarette smoking or health related issues.
Q Your CV also lists eight research grants. Were any of those grants for research into any aspect of cigarette smoking and
human disease?
A No, they were not. They all in some fashion supported the work that I have done on medical education, US teaching hospitals,
US medical schools and American health care delivery system.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Do any of the publications, again the three books or the 30 original articles or the numerous book reviews, do you indicate
any of those publications that you have testified for the cigarette industry?
A I don't indicate mainly because it never occurred to me it would be significant; different topics, no conflict of interest.
Historians consult on different types of topics regularly, more regularly today than in the past. I don't comment and it did not
seem to me it was necessary to do so.
Q Who is it that you understand yourself to be working for in this case?
A In terms of plaintiff or witness experts? I'm not sure I understand the question. If you can rephrase the question.
Q Do you consider yourself to be working for all of the defendants in this case, or one particular defendant in this case, or for
a law firm that has hired you?
A My understanding is that if I am asked to give expert testimony in this particular subject matter, that it applies to all of the
companies that have been listed in the defense, that is my understanding, as opposed to Philip Morris alone or Lorillard alone,
or something of that sort. That's my understanding.
Q This list that I had gen you before which was Exhibit 5, that only lists the deposition testimony and the trial testimony for
the past four years. Do you know how many other times you have been deposed besides these six listed here?
A To the best that I can recall there was one deposition and one trial in what I call the early phase of my involvement. We are
talking late eighties, early nineties. Because there was a six or seven year period that I had no contact at all with any of these
issues. But back in late eighties, early nineties, there was one deposition and there was one trial.
Q What was the name of the case that the deposition was in?
A The deposition was for the retrial of the Cipollone case. I was not a participant in the original Cipollone case. As you know
that apparently is the first individual smoker case that was lost by the defense. Apparently the judge issued an order for a retrial,
and I was originally contacted to be a witness for the second Cipollone trial or the retrial, whatever the correct terminology
would be, and I did give a two day deposition for that. Every other deposition in here has been one day or even a few hours.
That was the longest deposition that I have given. I don't know what that would be called, retrial of Cipollone, Cipollone 2,
but that was the case.
Q And you said you had testified at another trial that is not on Exhibit number 5. Do you remember the name of that trial?
A Yes, I do. That would have been the Kotler case. That is Kotler with a K, if my memory is correct, K-o-t-l-e-r. It was an
individual smoker case. The trial was held in Boston. That would have been, if my memory is correct, 1991, early 1991, I think
like February of '91. And I appeared in that case.
Q Do you remember the results of that case?
A There was a verdict in favor of the defense.
Q Just talking about depositions now. Have you ever testified against the tobacco industry in your depositions?
A No, I have not. By testified against, you mean by a plaintiff?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Yes. Have you ever testified for a plaintiff in any case, in any depositions?
A For a plaintiff. The experience I have had to date has been at, the requests I have received come from the defense. So the
involvement to this moment through this moment has been on the defense side. The answer to your question would be no, I
have not been asked to give my testimony by a plaintiff.
Q Have you always been retained by Shook Hardy?
A No.
Q What other firms have you been retained by?
A I couldn't tell you precisely which firm for which case. If my memory gets --
Q That's fine.
A To me there are a string of names. But the firms that -- the firm other than Shook Hardy that I have had the most contact with
is the Arnold & Porter law firm of Washington D.C. It was actually members of the Arnold & Porter law firm who initially
contacted me back in the late eighties. So the work that I did at that time when I did my original work, the retrial of Cipollone,
that was Arnold & Porter. There have been other firms as well. Arnold & Porter. If I were -- the third firm where I have had
no recent contact but I had contact in the past was the Decker Price firm which is East Coast. There are individuals in their
New York and Philadelphia office that I had contact with. So I would say those three firms are the ones that I have had most
of my contact with. In the last couple of years it has been mainly the Shook Hardy Bacon law firm. At the beginning it was
mainly the Arnold & Porter law firm.
Q Do you remember who contacted you from the Arnold & Porter law firm?
A Yes, I do.
Q What was his or her name?
A His name was and is Murray Garnick.
Q Did he initiate the first contact with you or did you initiate the first contact?
A He initiated contact with me.
Q What was the -- did he ask you to do some kind of job for him?
A Ultimately it led to that. It wasn't quite that simple. But he explained to me that he was with the Arnold & Porter law firm,
that he was involved with the defense at least at that time of Philip Morris, that they had lost the Cipollone case, and from
what he told me an important issue in the Cipollone case was the state of the art of our understanding of how we came to know
that lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking, and that they were desirous of having a witness both with the historical and
medical qualifications to address this issue and speak to it credibly and in an objective and unbiased and fair fashion. It was
his claim to me that in the original trial the plaintiffs had a witness who was not an historian but speaking to history who was
distorting the facts of history and that was one of the issues that needed to be addressed in the retrial. They wanted their own
state of the art expert.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
So I discussed it further with him and there were a number of important qualifications that we had. Number 1, would I have
the freedom to pursue this completely, independently and thoroughly in ways that I thought were historically responsible and
necessary, and his feeling was of course we wouldn't have it any other way. I said that I'm going to call it as it is, I don't know
what I'm going to find. He said we have no problem with that. I said I want complete control over this. We wouldn't want it
any other way. I was still a bit uncomfortable basically for the reasons that you asked before, because I do think cancer causes
smoking -- that cigarette smoking causes cancer and we have known that since the Surgeon General's report and there was
evidence building up to it before that. That's the common wisdom. I do consider cigarette smoking to be one of the great public
health menaces in our country today. With my own patients if they smoke I tell them to stop. If they don't smoke, I tell them
not to start. So I said well let me see the testimony of this fellow. And I found that he was fraudulent. He was literally changing
the facts of history to build an evidence case, literally changing the facts of history, and it was disturbing and troubling to me.
The history in my view needs to be represented fairly. I felt an advocate of history, not an advocate of cigarette smoking, but
to change history to support any cause, you start sending documents, getting x-rays before one can discover x-ray just occurred
to me there is no limit to the mischief that can be done if you start changing the facts to support your view of the day. That's
when I had the conversations that I mentioned to you before with all these people at the university, including my department
chair and medical school Dean and people of that sort, and that's when I agreed to take the project. The conditions with Murray
Garnick were that it is my project, not yours. I will certainly alert you to what I find. I'm not going to sugarcoat things for you.
I'm going to tell you what I find. This would be my project, not yours, I'm going to do it in a thorough, responsible fashion
as I would anything I do in history, anything I have ever done. And let's make it clear that I'm speaking strictly historically.
I'm not commenting on cigarettes as a health hazard. I am on record, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. I'm not speaking
to issues of subsequent 30, 40 years or company behavior, that sort of thing. I'm looking strictly historically. My counselors at
the university thought that was appropriate, if I did it responsibly, if I spoke strictly historically. Murray Garnick gave me the
freedom to pursue this in a thorough, responsible fashion and I agreed. That's how I got started.
Q Who was the witness that testified at Cipollone?
A Jeffrey Harris.
Q And when you were reading his testimony, how did you know that he was distorting the history?
A He violated each of the general principles of history that I had mentioned to you before. I saw his report and I actually had
original sources. He went so far as to commit fraud.
Q Did you know that, at the time you were reading the report did you know that, or did you have to do some research yourself
before you knew that or believed that what he had testified to was fraudulent?
A Largely the latter. He was contending in that case that it was a scientific consensus known by everyone that cigarette smoking
causes lung cancer in the 1930's. As a historian, even if you don't specialize in an area, you still keep up with the literature
and there is a body of knowledge. And I had read work about cigarettes and the history of smoking. I had been a medical
student and a physician myself. That was different from anything I had ever heard from anyone. So many of the claims of the
report itself violated anything that I had ever seen written. It violated the common teaching about the subject both from the
historical side and from the medical side that usually points to the first Surgeon General's point is the termination point when
the consensus, when our present consensus emerged. In addition, Murray Garnick included references that Dr. Harris used.
Dr. Harris submitted an expert report and it looked very scholarly. He would literally -- he perpetrated fraud. He would do
things like this, Ms. Moltzen. Say, for example, Mary Jo Moltzen would write an article in the Journal of the American Medical
Association in 1936 and say the following. The lung cancer appears to be increasing in frequency. We are not certain if this is
real or perceived increase but certainly we think it is increasing in frequency. The cause of lung cancer is presently unknown.
A number of factors have been suggested as possible causes. Then he would list 15 or 20 causes, influence of pandemic of
1936, air pollution, tarring of the roads, tomato juice which was invoked for a brief while. Then he would say a few people
have suggested that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer; however, there is no data at the present time to support any of these
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
hypotheses, there is no data to support the idea that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. At present we must consider the
cause of lung cancer unknown. That's what the article would say.
In his expert report he would say Dr. Mary Jo Moltzen writing in the prestigious Journal of the American Medical Association
in 1936 wrote, quote, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. He would take those five words totally out of context. He would
have a footnote of the citation so it would look scholarly and authoritative but it was fraudulent. As a historian I was troubled
by that. Just as a laboratory scientist would be troubled by the discovery of fraud or creating data or changing data. It was
extremely troubling to me to see the historical record literally distorted in that type of a fashion. And that was my conflict back
in the eighties. Boy, cigarette smoking is terrible.
Then I saw history being misrepresented in this case, being changed, and I also very strongly felt the advocate of history and
not changing the facts because of the case at hand and that's how I got started. That led to the conversations that I have related
to you and that's how I agreed to take on the case.
Q Garnick along with Jeffrey Harris's testimony you said sent you reference materials. Throughout that initial time when you
were working for him did he continue to send you documents?
A No, he did not. The only things that he sent me, and I don't remember the exact sequence of events because we are talking 14
years ago, but this was early. The only thing he sent me on his own was the report and the documentation of the report. And,
if I recall, I asked to see that. He didn't just send it to me. It came up in the conversation, and I thought that before I made any
decision about my participation I should see that report and quite frankly I don't remember if I asked to see it or if he suggested
it might be useful to me in making a decision. We had a conversation of that sort. He did send me the material.
From that point on everything that I looked at, everything in all of my bibliographies both primary and secondary sources were
things that I did on my own initiative and found on my own. That was the only thing he sent me. The sole qualification would
be that they had access to a translation service and I surveyed the world's published literature and fortunately the overwhelming
majority of it was in the English language and even the Scandinavian countries like that they tended to publish in English. But
there were occasional papers from South America or Germany or France where I didn't speak the language and thought it was
important to review it and I asked him if he could have them translated for me, so that was my request. They had some sort of
translation service, so at some future time I would get the translated version of articles that I asked myself to see.
Q That was going to be one of my later questions. Do you speak any foreign languages?
A I used to be okay at Spanish but I'm not now.
Q Do you read any foreign languages?
A I used to be pretty good at Spanish but I'm not now. There were some Spanish articles that I wanted to see, and rather than
trust my Spanish, I asked for the translation service.
Q During that initial project from Mr. Garnick did you have other meetings than the initial conversation with him?
A Well, the initial conversation or two, I don't remember if they were one or two or three, early conversations, which led to my
examination of the Harris report, the claims he made, as I said what was troubling to me was the way he went about making the
claims, that led to my undertaking the project that I did to study the history of our understanding of the causes of lung cancer
and particularly in relation to cigarette smoking. That was 1988, 1989 that I did that project. And, as I said before, this once I
got going was totally my own initiative and direction and there was no outside interference. There wasn't even a glimpse of it.
I did it as I would any historical project of my own for publication. I don't recall exactly, but over that time every few months
we have a meeting and I would present my findings and we would discuss things.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Only to him or were there other attorneys also at these meetings?
A At that time there were generally other attorneys.
Q What were the most number of attorneys that were in any of these meetings?
A The most? Not all meetings were that large, but there were meetings where there might have been eight or 10. Most would
be smaller with Murray and one or two other people. I would say typically there might be two or three attorneys. But to answer
your question what was the most? I'm guessing eight or 10.
Q Let's get back from our shortcut to Mr. Garnick and go back to, we were talking about the times you have been deposed
and my next question is have you always testified as an expert witness as opposed to a fact witness? If you don't know the
differences, I will be glad to tell you.
A Please explain it to me. I don't understand.
Q A fact witness would be someone who would not be paid for and they would, let's say in a car accident, they would be on
the side of the road watching the accident and coming to court and explaining what happened. Whereas the tire expert or the
brake expert might come in and say in most cases by looking at these tread marks my expertise says that he didn't put on the
brakes. Have you always testified as an expert as opposed to a fact?
A It is my understanding the answer would be yes, that I have always been an expert witness, as you have defined it.
Q Have you ever been retained and prepared an expert report like this but then you did not have to testify at either deposition
or trial?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q Not counting -- no.
A There are a couple of dimensions to that reply. One I find very humorous. I have never at least to date testified in a trial
for which I have been deposed. The depositions that I have given for whatever reason either the cases were settled or they
decided not to use me, or the cases went away, I don't know. You understand this aspect. I don't. I have not testified in any of
the cases for which I was deposed. Conversely, in each of the cases for which, and there have been counting Kotler in 1991 a
total I believe of five, in none of those cases was I deposed. Somehow calls came, can you testify. So there were no depositions.
And there have been cases that I have declined to testify for on tobacco related issues and other issues largely because of other
obligations and lack of time.
Q Have you prepared expert reports for all of the cases that I have on Exhibit number 5?
A I don't think so. And the reason for that is this disconnect between depositions and trials. Because for the Williams trial,
Anderson trial, there are four trials listed here, and I do not recall having a statement such as the one that we have for here.
There was a call, a trial is coming up, are you available, are you willing to do so. I could be mistaken, and maybe there was
an expert statement from one of those, but in general I do not remember expert statements for the trials. There were expert
statements that I remember for most of the depositions, but not for the trials.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q That's not unusual. But my question, now let's twist this around. Have you ever written, however, an expert report, and then
you were never called for the deposition and you were never called to testify at trial? Can you remember an expert report like
that?
A That has happened. I couldn't give you the names of the cases. But largely it has to do with individual smoker cases and I
might receive a call in an earlier period from Arnold & Porter or more recently from Dave Woods at Shook, Hardy & Bacon and
say there is a case in Vermont that has been put up, in two years it might go to trial, can we list you as a witness, and sometimes
I will say okay, fine, often there is an expert statement that I sign associated with that and then nothing ever happens, the case
is dropped. The expert statements would be very similar to the one that you have seen for this case, but that has happened. That
for whatever reason the case is dropped, dismissed, goes away, I don't know. But I never hear anything further. As I have also
mentioned, sometimes I'm not able to testify if I'm too busy.
Q Do you have any idea, an estimate of the number of times that you have written a report and it has never gone any further?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I'm not sure --
Q If not, that's fine.
A -- what you mean by going further. Do you mean the case being dropped?
Q Deposition or trial. You have written an expert report but you have not been sworn, given sworn deposition testimony or
sworn trial testimony. Do you have an estimate of the number of times?
A My guesstimate, I will put guesstimate rather than estimate, we are not talking a huge number of cases. We are talking a
handful.
Q Five?
A Three, four, five. That is a guesstimate. It could be as low as one or two, maybe even seven or eight. I don't know. I'm just
working away as a doctor and trying to do my book and I get a call from Dave, from Mr. Woods, we got a case in a couple of
years in Austin, Texas, can we list you, and I said well, as far as I know my schedule is open in a couple of years, go ahead and
list me. That has happened a few times, three, four, five, I'm guessing at that number.
Q I have asked you this question as far as depositions went and I have given you my definition of a fact witness versus an
expert witness but that was with depositions. So the question again now for trial testimony. Have you ever testified -- have you
always testified as an expert witness at trial?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q Rather than a fact witness?
MR. WOODS: Same objection.
A As far as I understand from the definitions that you have given me, I have been an expert witness at trial.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q In Deposition Exhibit 5 which lists the trials and depositions over the last four years, in each of those four trials and those
six depositions that you have testified at, did your opinions -- did your testimony always deal with medical knowledge and the
relationship to smoking and health or smoking and disease?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A The testimony that I have given in each of these cases has been very similar. It has always been historical. It has always been
on the evolution of our understanding of the causes of lung cancer and particularly in relation to cigarette smoking so it has
been similar historical testimony, early 20th century culminating with the Surgeon General's report in '64. There is the same --
nothing has changed about that from one deposition or trial to another.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record for a tape change. The time is 11:27 AM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 11:35 AM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, when you are working on one of the tobacco cases, what percentage of your total, I will let you use the time
period, your total workday, your work week, your work month is devoted to working on the tobacco litigation?
A I would estimate that for the duration of this period that you have here on Exhibit 5, that the last four years which is around
the time that my participation resumed, I think I mentioned to you that I had that early activity the late eighties, early nineties,
then literally no contact at all for roughly a six year period and then things resumed somewhere around here. I would estimate
that since the resumption of my involvement with the depositions and trials that you have listed here, through the present, that
my work as an expert witness accounts for five percent or less of my professional time. I would estimate probably closer to
three or four percent. I am talking in terms of a year. Obviously today all day long is the deposition. But I'm not going to be
deposed -- whenever the deposition is over I'm going to be back doing my regular thing. Cumulatively over the course of a year
I would say somewhere between three and five percent of my time is involved with these types of -- these types of cases.
Q Has your medical or business conduct ever been subject of investigation by a professional review organization?
A No.
Q Has it ever been the subject of review or investigation by a law enforcement authority?
A Are you talking about my work as a doctor?
Q Your work as a doctor.
A No, I have never had any questions or investigations of that sort.
Q Have you ever brought a lawsuit?
A No.
Q Have you ever been sued?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q The judge in this particular case is Judge Gladys Kessler. Have you ever appeared before Judge Kessler before?
A To my knowledge I haven't. I do not recognize that name.
Q If you look at your expert report that is Exhibit 2, on Page 1, the third paragraph and it says, “I understand that defendants
may call me to testify in this matter on the issue of the evolution of medical knowledge of smoking and disease.” I want to
qualify that statement a little bit. When you talk about the medical knowledge of smoking and disease, are you limiting it to
the scientific and medical community?
A That is correct. In this report the term medical and scientific are often used interchangeably. I'm referring to our scientific
understanding, or medical understanding to use a synonym, in distinction to popular perceptions, common knowledge. Those
are issues that I do not address. If I may make one other qualification that I just happened to notice. I'm really talking cigarette
smoking, not all smoking. I'm not talking about pipes and cigars and other forms and earlier forms of smoking. If I were writing
this today I think I would insert the adjective cigarette before the word smoking.
Q What about that last word, disease, would you keep that as all disease or would you change that to lung cancer?
A I think I would essentially respond as I did before, the focus is lung cancer. But you cannot investigate this literature without
discovering that cigarette smoking became associated in some cases in the causal fashion with other diseases as well. So the
focus is lung cancer on the other hand, particularly in the pre 1964 period. I certainly did learn of other associations.
Q And again when we are talking about medical knowledge, are you limiting this to knowledge of those in the United States,
the scientific and medical community in the United States, or do your opinions deal with world wide?
A The latter, world wide. The scientific community as you know is an international community. Workers in United States
read publications in the Netherlands or France or England and vice versa. And the literature that I consulted was international
literature. So two important qualifications to reiterate are scientific community in distinction to popular perceptions and that
indeed the international views, not necessarily US views alone.
Q When you talk about the medical and scientific community, does that include the scientists who worked for the tobacco
industry?
A It does if they published in the subject. Scientists from any industry are part of the bonafide members of the scientific
community. I studied the published scientific literature and insofar as they have -- as they may publish articles on the subject,
then I encountered those in my research and encountered those in my view. 1 did not take it upon myself to examine laboratory
notebooks, unpublished work of anyone whether they be at the NTH or medical school or cancer institute or at a company.
Q And because the research studies that you included in your expert report only are published works, does that put the context,
as you described earlier, out of balance?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A In my judgment absolutely not. It is an excellent question and one that is always enjoyable talking about with students and
so forth. The scientific literature is the currency of science. It is the accepted way to understand the state of knowledge of
the original papers, the review articles, the textbooks or whatever they may be. So now I should say, and I'm speaking as an
historian now, that interesting questions can be asked and interesting information can be learned in select cases looking at how
a certain scientist may have come to the published view that they did. How did Banting and Best discover insulin. There was
an outstanding book on that subject by a fine scholar, Michael Bliss, who looks at the unpublished work and the notebooks
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
and how did the ideas develop, it allows you to ask questions such as how hypotheses formed, how are they tested, what is
the reality of life like in the laboratory.
Another great scholar in my opinion in the history of medicine, in the history of science, is Larry Holmes from Yale who has
published a number of important books, very esoteric and take a lot of scientific understanding to read, but he has looked at
Pasteur and Claude Bernard, I could give you some of the names, he has looked at Krebbs, the notebooks, and how did ideas
develop. This is a sub theme in the history of medicine, not many people have done this type of research. There is a certain
esoteric quality to it going through laboratory notebooks and that type of thing. I do wish to mention for completion. In general
every published paper in any science is a pre-history, goes through drafts, you are always hammering it out in seminars and
conferences and there is a pre-history to anything that is published. To look at the published literature what finally gets to
the New England Journal of Medicine or Nature or Science or Cell or whatever the journal may happen to be, to review that
literature is considered very acceptable in terms of understanding the current thinking of the time and also review articles are
very helpful too. Sometimes authors will --
Q I'm sorry, what is a review article?
A Review articles. By that I mean when you will take an expert in the subject who will review the state of knowledge 2002 on
a certain subject or 1948 on a certain subject. Not reporting a new finding, but what do we know about this subject, covering it
from different aspects, from the published literature. A synthesis and interpretation of current understanding. You could almost
call it a textbook chapter that appears in a journal as opposed to a book. Those are helpful too. But using the published scientific
medical literature is a very acceptable technique.
Q I think it is on Page 2 of your report you say, throw away sentence, very top, “A summary of the opinions that I am expected
to offer at trial is set forth below.” Are the opinions that are set forth below in this report accurate and complete as of today?
A In my judgment, yes.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 11:46 AM.
(Lunch recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record. The time is 12:23 PM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, Page 1 of your expert report, the fourth paragraph, the first sentence says, “In conducting my study, I followed
standard historical methods.” Now I'm not asking for the specific methods here because we will go into your primary and
secondary sources in detail. But when you say standard historical methods, what do you mean by that term?
A I'm referring to the discussion of techniques that we had before, the importance of understanding the context of the events that
you are studying. Looking at secondary literature, both to get a sense of what other people have said about the subject as well
as to give you a context to help interpret the events that you, yourself, are studying. Then appropriate use of primary sources.
As we discussed before, the specific primary sources will depend on the topic. But making certain that the primary sources are
identified, that they are looked at in a comprehensive fashion, not in a selective fashion. Either you look at everything or if
you are not able to look at everything, you have a system to make sure that what you do see is representative and not biased,
that you report accurately. Theoretical framework about the history of medicine, a seasoned historian will bring into the project
to begin with what you already know in the general framework. The text of things we talked about before. But specifically
understanding the context through secondary sources, and then identifying the appropriate primary sources and using them in
an appropriate fashion.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q That paragraph goes on to say, “My research had two parts; first I reviewed the secondary literature, that is the literature that
people wrote after the fact.” What do you mean by after the fact?
A Essentially someone looking back at a later point of time reflecting on things. Historical research -- excuse me, historical
publications by definition are secondary publications. A biography of Abraham Lincoln would be a secondary source in contrast
to letters that he may have written himself, diaries he may have kept, speeches or articles he may have written which would
be considered primary sources.
Q What about a biography written, let's just say that Lincoln had written a biography in 1862 or an autobiography. Is that a
primary or secondary source?
A Well it depends on the subject. And one can get philosophical and debate some of the esoteric aspects of these things. If
a scholar today were writing a biography of Lincoln and Lincoln had written an autobiography in 1882, which or course he
couldn't have, he was already dead, but say he had done so in 1862 when he was still alive, I would probably tend to define that
as primary source. Because even though he is giving his interpretations and assessments and still at the time, I would suspect it
would have a greater value as a primary source to today's historians than as a secondary source. These things can get esoteric.
For example, what if you have primary sources in a certain field, important articles in the history of the evolution of our
understanding of lung cancer and cigarette smoking, maybe the most important clinical and pathological studies. Well essentially
they are primary sources, they were published at the time. But what if you collect these into a published book that you can use
in a classroom so you are reading it. Historians have debated whether that becomes a secondary source or primary source. It is
possible to at the edge of to engage in debate about what constitutes a primary source and a secondary source. In general it is
pretty straight forward. I think that today Lincoln's autobiography from 1962 that would probably be a primary source.
Q What processes did you use to -- you said that you shouldn't try to be selective, but at some point in time you had to select
your secondary resources?
A That's correct.
Q What kind of process did you use to choose which secondary resources?
A Secondary? Well from my general background as an historian in medicine, I identified topics that I thought would be useful
in providing a context, understanding this debate and this intellectual evolution. These sources were listed in the bibliography,
secondary bibliography. Examples, what have others -- I'm talking 1988 and '89 when 1 did this project. What accounts of the
tobacco controversy have been written, so I read pretty much all of the published accounts that have been written to that point
in time to get a sense of the feel and what others were saying. I read work in the history of public and the history of preventive
medicine, the history of cancer. It was interesting to learn how barren a field of research cancer was if you are looking the
mid 19th century when it was an area that you went in only if you wanted to have a dead end career in science because the
intellectual challenges was so great at that time. I read about the NTH and the development of research support for biomedical
research. These are examples of the types of subjects that I read about when I did my quote unquote secondary research.
Q How did you select those particular topics?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Experience as a scholar and teacher in the history of medicine made it clear that these were areas that were very pertinent to
understanding the evolution of our understanding of the causes of lung cancer. Public health, the history of cancer, the history
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
of cigarette smoking, the history of research support, they were from experience and previous research and previous teaching
I had done and I knew these were relevant considerations to understanding that subject.
Q Were your selections, do you believe your selections were comprehensive?
A I believe that they were thorough and that they were representative. I have a list that is pretty extensive. I looked at everything
I could find on the subjects that I've related to you so I believe that -- in fact, the second -- the study of secondary literature
was one chapter of the research project, an entire chapter that I undertook at the time. We are talking 1988, 1989, it was in
and of itself, if I recall correctly, the subject of one of the handful of meetings that took place between myself and attorneys
representing some of the defense firms. So I did do it I think in a very fair and comprehensive and thorough fashion.
You have to set boundaries. I did not seek out to be exhaustive. I think it was pretty thorough and pretty comprehensive. Even
more so, and I suspect you will get into this, when I got to the primary literature, there I made every possible effort to be
completely comprehensive, an exhaustive effort not to miss anything, to make sure I saw everything. The secondary literature
I think was done thoroughly and comprehensively. But I can't say that I missed an article in a book that might have helped.
Q You just said that it was the first chapter of your research project. But you are using that word chapter figuratively, correct?
A Correct.
Q You didn't really write a Chapter 1?
A The first thing I did.
Q Then my next question is, as part of that initial project for Arnold & Porter, did you produce some kind of written document?
A No, I did not.
Q Did you review literature only in English? I'm sorry, we are still on the secondary literature.
A That's correct. Everything that I reviewed in the secondary literature was written in English, that is correct.
Q And did you review any letters or correspondence or memos that weren't in the -- that weren't found in some publication
or another?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I'm not certain I understand that question. Could you rephrase that please?
Q There might be some, let's just say internal correspondence in a company that never was meant to be published but for one
reason or another might now have found its way into a book about the tobacco industry, let's say. So then I couldn't say to you
did you only review literature that was published because that would include those kind of internal memorandums and letters.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q Did you review any published letters and memorandums?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Are you referring from tobacco companies or in general?
Q In general.
A I think it would be fair to say that in the review of the secondary literature, everything was secondary, it was published. I
don't think anyone looking at that list today would have any doubt that that's secondary literature. Now, any time a historian
is doing a book they are going to be primarily quoting documents. So you can read, using our example of President Lincoln,
you can read a biography of Lincoln and letters will be quoted in that. So I really don't remember the specifics of everything I
read. But I would be surprised if there were not primary documents quoted in some, if not most of the secondary sources. The
nature of the documents would depend on the nature of the book. A book on cancer research or our history of understanding
of that might cite primary papers, reading someone's letter. History of the public health movement might have a different type
of primary document, or the public health association went on record and such and such or president so and so wrote a letter.
I'm sure there are primary sources in the book. I can't really speak very well at this point to the various letters and so forth that
were cited in those books. But I would be startled if they didn't cite themselves primary sources. To me or to anyone reading
them today you are reading a secondary source. An historian is writing from primary sources as well as secondary sources. So
I'm close to certain that there are primary sources in those books.
Q Now I'm not sure where to put this next category, whether it is primary or secondary. It probably doesn't even matter. Let
me know if it does or not. Often in the scientific journals there will be an article that you read and that you used as one of your
reference materials; and then either maybe in that issue or a following issue there will be an editorial and then maybe later there
will be back and forth letters to the editor. Did you consider those as part of your reference materials?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Yes, I did. Certainly there frequently is give and take in the medical and scientific literature such as you describe. An article
will frequently be accompanied by an editorial. Sometimes that will prompt someone else to write a response that appears in a
later issue. I read all of those to the best I could identify them in the period 1930 to 1964 and they would be considered, from
my perspective, primary sources in terms of this project. So if someone wrote an article and then there was an editorial in the
same issue on that, I would read the editorial as well as the article. I would define both as primary sources.
Q Will the letters to the editor and editorials, are they also included in your list of reference materials?
A Insofar as I cited letters to the editor, they would be listed and I would consider them to be primary materials. They are part
of the debate going on in the thirties or the forties or the fifties or the sixties or whatever it is. I did not systematically search
out letters to the editor in the way that I systematically sought out the original articles, review articles and editorials.
Q Have you ever done any similar kind of review or a massy of articles with the respect to any other medical or scientific topic?
A Well the techniques that I followed for this project were similar to the techniques that I followed for my three books. The
specifics, of course, vary, but in terms of techniques and methods, I would say that the approaches were similar.
Q At the bottom of Page 1 and the top of Page 2 you say, “Second, I reviewed the primary literature, articles published in the
scientific literature between 1930 and 1964.” What was your purpose in reviewing the primary literature?
A Well the primary literature is really the language of communication in science, getting back to some of the conversation that
we were having before lunch. The published article or the official response to it as an editorial might be or a sounding board
position might be. This is the currency of science, the published scientific literature, and those are considered primary sources
and ultimately I felt the responsibility as a responsible historian not to draw conclusions about this issue from what others have
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
written about it but to go back and see the primary data myself. That's what really makes it original research, when you start
examining the primary data.
You can learn a lot from secondary literature, it certainly can help in terms of developing a general context, certainly can help
in terms of teaching. If you are teaching a survey course in the history of medicine, you use the secondary literature to put
together a lecture. But it doesn't give you that same sense of knowledge and authority of really doing the original research
yourself. In any historical subject you need to deal with primary sources, to get into the meat of it yourself, and this particular
case not what those in 1988 or 1990 were saying about lung cancer but what were people at the time saying about it. Well,
there is scientific literature. So I did a systematic, comprehensive, indeed exhaustive review of the worlds published scientific
literature in 1930 through January, 1964.
Q Did you first review the secondary materials and then start going into the primary materials?
A My recollection is that there was overlap. But, as a generalization, I focused on the secondary sources first. I could read a
book at home. I couldn't check out a journal from the library from 1938 but I could check out a book. So as a generalization I
did the secondary literature first and the primary literature afterwards. But I'm sure there was overlap. I would be finishing the
secondary literature, have a few extra hours so I could go to the library and start the primary literature. But as a generalization,
the primary sources after doing the secondary sources.
Q What process did you use to select the primary literature?
A That was an easy one because of the availability of the Index Medicus which is a bibliography to the biomedical -- the
published biomedical literature and the same way that the reader's guide is a published bibliography to popular magazines and
periodicals. I had to do it manually because the computerized literature searches weren't being done at that time. Actually they
were being done at that time but the earlier years were not on it. But each year there is a publication -- there is a publication
called Index Medicus. And I think issues come up monthly, but they are bound together and each year there is a volume. It is
by year, 1930, 1931, 1932, so forth. This is an exhaustive bibliography to the world's biomedical literature. I'm purporting your
earlier question was this US or international. The world's scientific literature is listed there.
And what I did was go through the categories because the index was listed by subjects. There may have been author index too
but I did it by subject. And I looked under four topics; lung cancer, bronchogenic cancer -- curiously I would have thought there
would have been one entry, but in fact there were two entries during this time, lung cancer and bronchogenic cancer, and many
articles would actually be listed in both. But, in fact, there were articles that for whatever reason would be listed in lung cancer
but not under bronchogenic cancer or vice versa. So to be complete, I looked at both. In addition, I looked under tobacco and
under cigarettes. I forget if it was tobacco smoking and cigarettes. There were two tobacco-related entries that were present. So
there were a total of four entries. I literally wrote every one of them down. I tend to write on these notebooks too except I use the
smaller version of this. So I would go to the Index Medicus, 1930, I wrote down every article from each of the four categories
that I mentioned. And in my judgment, as far as humanly possible, I had in front of me the world's scientific literature on that
subject. Included original articles, clinical reports, case descriptions, editorials. It did not index letters to the editor. I did that
from 1930 to January, 1964. I wrote down the complete list, every article I could find under those topics so I had as close to
humanly possible 1 believe the world's scientific literature on that subject. Then I went and read every one of them.
Q Do you remember how many articles that was?
A Yes, and they presumably have been made available to you as part of the materials. But I would say all together in the range
of 1100, 1200 articles with the number of articles increasing significantly after 1950 reflecting the watershed year of 1950
and how intensely this became a subject of scientific inquiry at that time. But if you were to take the three -- I have three
bibliographies. One is 1930 to 1950. That made sense because 1950 was such a watershed year in view of everyone who had
studied the subject. I agree with that interpretation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Then there is a second bibliography 1950 to 1959. The only reason it stops in 1959 is that the number of articles each year is
increasing and, as I mentioned before, periodically there were meetings with the Arnold & Porter group and others who may
have chosen to attend in which I would discuss the findings and what I found and here is what we have. There was so much
material after 1950 that we decided to have a conversation in 1950 to 1959 and then I completed this on 1960 to January, 1964.
Q I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 7. Can you identify this one?
A Yes, I can. This is Exhibit 7. This is a copy of the bibliography and my comments having read the articles from the 1930 to
1950 period. Between that period there were 276, in the range of 280 articles, plus or minus one or two, I identified from the
Index Medicus in the fashion that I described to you. I would have my notebook, I would have the Index Medicus, I would be
in the library to do this. I would look under lung cancer, bronchogenic cancer, under cigarettes, under tobacco, and I literally
wrote down every article that appeared in Index Medicus. I did not duplicate. So if there was an article that was listed under
lung cancer and under bronchogenic cancer, as much as possible I only entered it once. I'm sure I slipped a few times but
essentially I entered it one time.
Then after generating the bibliography, I went and read the articles and evaluated what the author had to say. This is
comprehensive. Everything is there. It is representative. All views are there. It meets sound historical methodological approaches
because you find out not only what people are saying but what people had to say about that view, did they accept it or not, did
they reject it or not, did it create a stir. Everything is there. Then these comments over here I would read the article and sort
of summarize what it was about, what the point was, etc., etc.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, would you agree that this document is very difficult to read?
A Yes, I would.
Q Do you have your original notes?
A No.
Q Do you know where they are?
A Plaintiff attorney Mark Edell took them from us in 1990, promised to return them, never has done so.
Q I just want to put on the record the United States reserves its right to depose Dr. Ludmerer on these reference materials should
the United States ever obtain a copy that it can read.
A May I put on the record that as far as these things go, I would love to have my originals returned to me. I cannot read these
any better than you can. But a plaintiff attorney from another case, not related to the US government, took them and never
returned them.
Q Do you remember the name of the law firm?
A I remember the name of the lawyer but not the law firm. The lawyer was Mark Edell.
Q Was it in the Cipollone case?
A This had to do with the retrial of Cipollone. Mark Edell was the attorney who won the original verdict. He was the attorney
who was leading things for the retrial of the case and he was the attorney somewhere in New Jersey, who deposed me on my
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
first deposition, the one I mentioned before, for the retrial of the Cipollone case, in 1990. And I had my originals there at his
request. And instead of going through copies, we went through originals. He said you know, wouldn't it be great if these were
typed up and transcribed. I said fine. Then he said you know, I would like my staff to transcribe these so we will all have a
written copy of it. Your handwriting is not very good. Even on the original my handwriting is not always very good. To tell
you the truth, I was a little apprehensive. I felt that -- I was concerned about getting them back. But it wasn't my call and the
attorneys from Arnold & Porter said that's satisfactory with us, please return them in a prompt fashion. He said I promise I will
do so. He has never returned them. For awhile I know attorneys from Arnold & Porter were periodically calling him but they
have just given up. He has never returned them. I don't even know if they exist. I don't know if they are in an office drawer
somewhere or if he destroyed them. I have never seen them back.
Q When did you put together this original document?
A All of this work was done in 1988 and 1989. I might add, just for completeness, that serendipity influences things. Why a
person does what they do, how they get involved. As I told you before, I did not contact Arnold & Porter; they contacted me.
Part of the serendipity of my involvement is that I was between projects. I just completed my second book, Learning to Heal,
the one that I had received tenure and promotion to associate professor for. I hadn't quite gotten into the new book that became,
the new project that became the Time to Heal. So I had a window of opportunity to do this study that I would not have had
had Murray Garnick called me a year earlier or a year later. That's the serendipity. This entire study from which my opinions
today are based was done in 1988, 1989.
Q There are some notations that I can read because I'm going to ask you about and if you can't read them, please let me know.
On that, for the record, this set that I gave Dr. Ludmerer is Bates numbered A as in apple, P as in Peter, 5 024 0566 to 0638.
On that first page, 0566, I seems to me that out in the left-hand margin near the top is the date 2/16/91.
A That's correct.
Q So my question is, if you were doing this in '88 and '89, why do I keep running across that date?
A The reason that you run across different dates is that I consulted this at different times.
Q So that's a notation of a day of consultation?
A Right, because I did the project in 1988 and 1999 (sic) but then as you know there was a deposition in 1990, trial testimony in
1991, and at that time 1 would go back and review the notes and sometimes on a second reading or third reading in preparation
for a deposition or for trial testimony something would catch my eye for some reason. The fact you find February, '91 I suspect
it has to do with the Kotler trial, I was reviewing my copy, one of these things for the Kotler trial and something caught my eye
and I just made a point that this caught my eye now as opposed to when I did it before.
Q So the date is more of what caught my eye as opposed to an additional section of notes written on that date?
A That is correct. The basic notes that you see were done in 1988 and 1989. But as I thumb through this myself I see a number
of February, 1991 and that had to do with my review of the notes in preparation for the Kotler trial.
Q Would you tell me again what the notes generally had to do with?
A Are you talking about the notes underneath the article?
Q First of all there will always be an author's name, I take it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A That's correct.
Q And the name of an article?
A Correct. You will see, to the degree these poor qualities let us see, there is a complete citation, you have authors, you have
titles of article, primary lung cancer, 18 autopsy cases, I'm reading from number 2, NEJM, that's New England Journal of
Medicine, volume 203, pages 473 to 477, September 4, 1930.
Q 30 maybe?
A 30. Again I have something under it that is a clinical review, it discusses some of the clinical behavior. You will see the next
point under it etiology not discussed, which was an important observation. And I did that at the time of original reading for each
of those. Two years later, three years later with the Kotler trial I went back and looked at some of this to refresh myself then for
whatever reason something caught my mind in February of '91 and those are the February, '91 marks that you see in the left.
Q To the best of your memory do most of the notes have to do with a summary of the article or what you thought were the
important points in the article?
A That is correct. That I can go even stronger and say that they entirely have to do with the summation of what was in the article
and what was it about, that type of thing, yes. Was it a clinical study, was it a review, was it controlled, was it not controlled,
what did they find, what did they conclude. But I would say exclusively there is a summation of what the article was about.
If I can just add a general historical point as you are thumbing through. I looked at in each of these cases the entire article as
an entirety because accuracy, fairness and comprehensiveness and not taking things out of context are important. A person can
be ambivalent in an article on anything. You can take one quotation, but if it is not put in context that would suggest that the
person has a certain view; but you can take another quotation from the same article and it would give a different interpretation. I
read the entire article and had summations about the overall thrust as opposed to what the non-trained individual, the individual
not trained in history would do. It is easy if you are biased or if you are not trained in history, you have to pick and choose
selectively. These comments referred to the entire article and the entire articles were read.
Q On the last page which is Bates numbered 0638, at the bottom half of that page there is the date again, 216/91, then it looks
to me like a table. Can you explain what that bottom half of that page is, if you remember?
A I'm going to try. I can't guarantee. A, this was 11 years ago, and B the copy is poor. I can only speculate what I was doing
there. I would rather not. I'm sorry, I just don't remember that.
Q That's fine.
A Clearly I was putting something together in the context of refreshing myself on the subject and organizing my thoughts for
the preparation for the testimony I was going to give in the Kotler case. But beyond that, I'm really not able to say what I
was trying to do.
Q But that table was written in February of'91 rather than as part of your original survey?
A That is correct, because you see a date 2/16/01. I was reviewing these meager copies that we had and doing some type of
thinking about the subject in preparation for Kotler and that table had something to do with that but I can't tell you anything
more at this time. That's about as far as I can go.
Q That's fine. I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Deposition Exhibit Ludmerer 8. This is another document that
your attorneys sent us as reference materials.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Correct.
Q For the record, the Bates number is AP5 024 0639 to 0669. Can you identify what this document is?
A Yes, I can.
Q Would you please?
A Yes. This was the bibliography to the original report prepared and written and filed by Dr. Jeffrey Harris in the original
Cipollone case. He wrote an expert report, this is a bibliography to that report.
Q And were there articles in this bibliography that you had not read for your original study?
A I actually reviewed this prior to undertaking my own original study, in terms of the sequence of events. This is the first
thing that I did.
Q My fault for labeling them backwards.
A That's hard to know, even for me it is hard to know. The copies are so poor. This gets back to the conversation we had
before lunch. You asked what I think is a very important question. I'm a doctor, I believe that lung cancer -- I believe that
lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. We have known it for close to four decades. Cigarette smoking is a great public
health menace. I tell my patients not to smoke if they don't smoke, I tell them to stop if they do, etc., etc., etc.. You asked how
does that viewpoint lend yourself to being a witness for the defense. And it was really this document that led me to realize
that I'm an advocate for public health, I'm also an advocate for the integrity of history and not changing the facts of history to
support your political or social view of the present. So I read the Harris report which looks like a very proper, academic report,
it is lengthy, it is well typed, highly footnoted. But reading the text itself from my general knowledge both as a historian of
medicine and as a physician, there were many statements in there that were frankly wrong, and many of them had footnotes.
So I compared his statements with the original sources, and to my surprise and disappointment I found that he had in many
cases actually misrepresented the articles here. He would claim in his report that the article -- that the author had made a certain
statement. You read the article, that statement had not been made. He fabricated it. He committed fraud. It was distressing to
me as I described before.
And I was ready not to accept this assignment until I read that report and wrestled with the issue that I described to you before
of boy, I wish everyone in the world would stop smoking tomorrow. On the other hand, I'm an advocate for the integrity of
history, not changing it. That's when I consulted the Dean and my department chairman, a few people like that and how I got
into the case. But historically it preceded my own research. This was my careful, obviously careful study of the Harris report
because I not only looked at his quotations but compared his quotations with the sources.
When I found he was misrepresenting them, that was disturbing to me and that led to my willingness to speak as an advocate of
history in these issues after consulting some of the university leadership. This came first and then, Deposition Exhibit 8 came
first, that was part of the history, the Harris report, that's when I said to Murray Garnick, I will undertake the study. First I
did the secondary reading as we described, then I entered my own primary reading which I did in the systematic way that I
described to you. This was actually the first thing that I did.
Q Deposition Exhibit 8 in chronology comes before Deposition Exhibit 7?
A That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q There are lots of notes in the margins on Deposition Exhibit number 8. Are those your notes or are those someone else's notes?
A Those are mine.
Q And generally what were you commenting on in those notes? Because again I cannot read most of this.
A I can't do much better than you can with many of these. Again for the same reason, but in principal I can -- they there are
two important points. Number 1, I did the same thing in general that I did subsequently where I would read an article and I
would have some sort of summation, whether it was about what they did, how they came down. In addition to that there were
a number of important examples where as I mentioned before I found that Dr. Harris misrepresented what was in these articles
and there were comments to that effect that he says that Dr. Smith said this when in fact if you look at the article he took it
out of context where he says something else.
Q You made a comment to that effect?
A I made a comment to those effects on this bibliography where that occurred. He has a lot of sources here. It is not that every
article is misrepresented, it is that maybe six or eight or 10 key articles from that from the period are misrepresented, and I
made comments. But the copy is so poor I can't -- I'm having the same difficulty everyone else has, reading it. Maybe Mark
Edell will be kind enough to return the originals so I will be able to read this better.
Q The next exhibit I'm going to pass you is Exhibit number 9, Ludmerer 9, and again this --
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Off the record for a tape change. The time is 1:11 PM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record. The time is 1:18 PM.
MR. WOODS: This is David Woods. Because the Court has what I understand is a pretty strict rule on what objections I can
make versus not make, I didn't want to say anything earlier, but when Ms. Moltzen reserves her rights to potentially reopen the
deposition in the event she is successful in extracting these long lost notes from Mr. Edell, I didn't want my silence to indicate
acquiescence to her having any such rights. In the event she actually is able to get those original notes out of Mr. Edell, we
can take it from there. That's all I want to say.
Q I think we left off as I handed you Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 9, and again this was something that I received from your
attorneys as reference materials. The Bates number is AP5 024 0997 to 1056. Again, they are very difficult to read but I do
believe that the title on them is Paradigm. Could you tell me what this document is?
A You are correct, the title is Paradigm. This is a figurative chapter of the original project done toward the end of the project.
Quite frankly, Ms. Moltzen, I don't remember if it was the last thing I did or one of the last things I did, but it does very much
have to do with the issue of methods of history that we talked about before, doing it properly, bringing a context to what you are
doing, the historical framework and understanding of how medicine and science evolved that a trained historian of medicine
develops in the process of acquiring that training.
Particularly when I got to the literature of the fifties and sixties, it occurred to me that much of the debate at that time had a
Kuhnian explanation. By Kuhnian I'm referring to the greatest historian, philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn, K-u-h-n, who
wrote seminal works on paradigm shifts, scientific revolution, this sort of thing. When one world view replaces another. And
it struck me that we were experiencing such a paradigm shift in the investigations of lung cancer in the fifties and sixties. The
epidemiology, the old epidemiology was that of infectious diseases. We have a new discipline being created, epidemiology
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
of chronic diseases with new canons of truth, new ways to show causality; instead of having to show specific causes, you are
talking risk factors. Instead of having to have laboratory or experimental confirmation that something is a toxin, you can arrive
at such conclusions indirectly through epidemiological studies if certain criteria are met. It was one world review emerging and
challenging the traditional view that you have to demonstrate it in the laboratory, that there are specific causes of disease, etc.
So to understand that point better, I did some work in the area of scientific revolutions, paradigm shifts, and that is the theme
of Exhibit 9, and indeed that's what I maintain today. The debate at that time had much to do with the creation of a new field,
new canons of proof, no definitions of causality, new definitions of risk, a newer view had to replace a traditional world view.
This literally helped me understand that phenomena.
Q Was this set up along the same lines as Exhibits Number 7 and 8 where you read the literature, and then for each one that you
list here you will have the name of the article or the book and the author and then you will have some comments summarizing
what it says. Or is this done in a different method?
A I would say this is actually an amalgam. I generated a bibliography called Paradigm, or something to that effect, which is a
bibliography of secondary sources, and its analogies with the earlier bibliography --
Q I don't mean to interrupt. This may help. I'm going to hand you what has been labeled as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 10
and it is called Paradigm. It looks like a bibliography. I apologize if that was not a helpful interruption.
A Actually it was a helpful interruption. I appreciate you doing that. This is a study of secondary literature. I would make the
same comments about it that I did about the earlier secondary bibliography. I think this is very thorough, I think it is very
comprehensive and representative on literature dealing with this issue of paradigm as it existed in April of 1989 when I did
this. I do not claim this to be exhaustive and completely inclusive as I would claim for my primary search when I went to the
Index Medicus. This is pretty good. And as a historian of medicine who keeps up with the field, you know what some of the
important sources are to begin with, you pick up sources, you see what their bibliographies are, literature searches, you talk
with friends, and you put together a representative bibliography. And that is Exhibit 10. In Exhibit 9 I did not approach it in
the same fashion that I did the original sources.
Q Exhibit 7?
A Exhibit 7, to use that as an example. Exhibit 7 I look at every article and commented on them. On Exhibit 10 I looked
at everything here. On the other hand, not surprisingly, some of the books or articles proved to be more useful than others.
Some of them stimulated ideas and syntheses and interpretations in my mind, and that's really what this is. When I would
read something from Lilianfeld or from whoever it may be, that would stimulate an idea or teach me something or help me
understand something, I kept these notes of it.
But it is not a systematic or comprehensive discussion of what Reference Number 1 said, what Reference Number 2 said. This
was a -- more accurately can be described as a working document that helped me understand the subject.
Q As a document, though, you did consider this and use this in coming up with your initial conclusions?
A That is correct. But, as I say, in distinction to the primary sources with Exhibit 7 being an example where after looking at each
article and making comments on each article, I did not necessarily write down comments of everything on this bibliography. If
something was helpful or taught me something or helped pull something together, I would. But there were other things that I
didn't learn anything that I didn't already know or weren't as helpful as I hoped it might be, and I didn't feel the need to write
this specific comment on here. By “here” I mean Exhibit 9.
Q How did you go about selecting these 56 items?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Well, as I mentioned before, there is an art as well as a science, but by staying up with the literature, by having been a
professionally trained historian of medicine, I knew Thomas Kuhn and some of the articles or books on this theme of scientific
revolution, paradigm shift, that sort of thing. I did a bibliography search and I learned of other articles, more recent articles that
were interpreting those decades in exactly the same fashion. Susser, for example, Number 52, Epidemiology in the United States
after World War II. The evolution of technique. Terrorists. Number 53 what he is calling the second epidemiological revolution.
So I did a literature search, there was already an emerging literature developing at this point that a scientific revolution or
paradigm shift was in fact occurring.
Other literature searches helped, sometimes references for -- you would read something and there would be references to
something in a bibliography or citations and you would pick that up. Consult historical colleagues, “Anything on the paradigm
issue or scientific revolution that I should know of that I haven't?” It is an art.
Q I can see where most of these fit into the definition of secondary sources that you were talking about. I do have -- would you
look at Number 9, please, Jerome Cornfield. He is writing in 1951 and he is applying it to cancer of the lung, breast and cervix.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q Isn't that a primary source?
A I would say that is a correct characterization. Actually, as I look at this, there are -- this list includes primary and secondary
sources, because what I would find is that some of the articles that I would be finding on my own themselves would talk about
this conflict in world view. Traditionally medical science demanded experimental view, but we knew epidemiologists feel there
are other ways to do this. Some of the sources from the fifties and sixties contributed to this view of a paradigm shift. That's
what got me thinking of it in the first place when I read some of the articles form the fifties and sixties and they would use
words such as paradigm shift, new ways of proof. Some of the challenges and discussions that were going on at the time about
how does one really demonstrate a cause, what type of criteria do you need? So I appreciate your making that point. I think that
it would be more accurate to characterize this bibliography as consisting of both primary and secondary sources.
Q And also to characterize this bibliography as not being exhaustive?
A I would not claim that it is exhaustive. I would claim that it is sufficient, but I would not claim it is exhaustive, that every
article or book on the subject of paradigm or scientific revolution is there. I would claim that it is sufficient and thorough and
comprehensive.
Q Sufficient for what purpose?
A Sufficient for the purpose of developing and being able to defend the viewpoint that a revolution was going on within
epidemiology itself, what Susser called the epidemiological revolution, new standards of causation, new ways of demonstrating
proof. Basically to understand the evolution of the epidemiology of chronic diseases as a new discipline, how that grew, how
that became institutionalized, sufficient to tell a responsible story.
Q What is the time period of that second epidemiological revolution?
A Basically at the threat of the tobacco controversy. Largely out of the tobacco controversy, to a secondary degree out of the
Framingham study. It was largely embedded in the tobacco controversy. So the time period would be roughly 1950 to the mid
sixties.
Q I'm going to hand you what has been labeled as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit Number 11. Can you identify that document
for me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Yes.
Q What is it?
A Item 11 is entitled Supplemental Bibliography.
Q While you are looking that over, for the record I will say that the Bates number on this is AP5 024 1062. The second page
is 1063. The third and last page cannot be read. I'm sorry, go ahead.
A I do not remember precisely at what point this was put together. If I were to hazard a guess --
Q Did you put it together?
A Yes, I did. It would have been at one of two points. I think it is most likely that this was put together in late 1990 or early
1991, in preparation for my first trial appearance at the Kotler case. I did my work, as I mentioned to you before, in '88 and
'89, but now a couple of years later there is a trial, you find a few new things, you find you forgot to put a few things in. A
supplementary bibliography was put together for the sake of thoroughness and complete revelation to the opposing side of
everything that I had consulted. I believe it was done at that time.
Q To put these in a chronological order then, Deposition Exhibit 8 comes first, that's the Harris bibliography?
A That's correct.
Q Then Deposition Exhibit Number 7, which is the 1930 to 1950 portion of your materials, in time comes next, is that correct?
A Actually, that is not correct. There would be the original bibliography of secondary sources that would come next. This is a
generalization that I did, most of my work on what historians call context first, then I jumped into the primary sources. That
would have been second, then this would have been afterwards.
Q Does the Paradigm then, Exhibit 9, come before the exhibit we are working on now, Exhibit 11, the supplementary
bibliography that you think might have been written in '91?
A I'm sorry, I didn't hear that question. Could you repeat it please?
Q The paradigm work, does that come before the supplemental?
Yes. Paradigm was part of what I call the original crutch, I think in '88, 1989. That, the supplemental bibliography, was the
additional sources put together I believe before the Kotler trial that either I discovered in preparation for that or that just for
some reason didn't get included in one of the earlier bibliographies. By the way, between here and there, there is a similar
bibliography, 1950 to '59, 1960 to '64 which is 1988, '89.
Q And this Exhibit Number 11, I take it that again it is a mixture of primary and secondary, is that correct?
A I can't see it. May I see it, please? That is correct.
Q I'm handing you what has been marked as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 12. Can you identify that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Exhibit 12 is entitled Additional Bibliography, and there are 24 items on it. Most of the sources as I look through quickly
are secondary sources, but actually it is a mixture of primary and secondary sources. Actually, as I look through it probably it
is a mixture, a combination of secondary and primary sources. This was put together for completeness sake in this more recent
year of my involvement. My opinions basically come from the '98, '99 study.
Q You mean'88, '89?
A Yes, '88. What did I say?
Q I think you said'98,'99.
A '88, '89. As I think I mentioned, six years went by with no contact at all, then the last four or five years there has been a
flurry of cases and occasional deposition or trial that I have been involved with. This is just a supplemental bibliography of
things that I encountered in that more recent preparation for completeness or may have forgotten to put on one of the earlier
bibliographies. The objective was complete disclosure to the plaintiff of everything that I have seen. I haven't gone through
and checked. I would suspect that some of the things here are in those earlier bibliographies. But just to be sure everything
was listed we put together a supplemental bibliography, we called it Additional Bibliography, November 2001, so you would
have a record of everything that I have consulted.
(Deposition Exhibit No. 13 was marked for identification.)
Q I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 13 and it is part one of the 1964 report of the
advisory committee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service entitled Smoking and Health. On Page 19, heading
Chapter 3, this particular chapter is called Criteria for Judgment. “In making critical appraisals of data and interpretations and
in formulating” --
A What line are you on?
Q The very top. “In making critical appraisals of data and interpretations and in formulating its own conclusions, the Surgeon
General's advisory committee on smoking and health, ..., made decisions or judgments at three levels.” And it looks like they
look at the validity of a publication or report and the elements they used for the competence of the training of the investigator,
degree of freedom from bias, design and scope of the investigation, adequacy of facilities and resources, and adequacy of
controls. Did you make any value judgments when you were reading and reviewing the various studies?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I don't know that I formally went through in a systematic way and gave each paper a numerical score or that sort of thing. On
the other hand, I do think it is important to point out that part of reading the literature is to read it critically. In that sense I did.
I did take into account not only who wrote things, the Nobel laureate said something, the leader in the field, you take that, one
tends to take that more seriously than if a post-doc in an unimportant lab said something. The emphasis is part of critical review
of everything. But I did notice the type of study that it was. Was there data or was it speculation? Was it a controlled study or an
uncontrolled study? Is this a formal epidemiological, well-controlled, retrospective study with good controls, such as we saw
after 1950, or is this an uncontrolled study. I got 100 patients, 80 of them, 80 percent smoke, maybe smoking is the cause.
I would distinguish between that and a letter to the editor where someone would say I have no data, but maybe this is going on
or maybe that is going on. So I do think it would be fair to say that in the formation of my opinions I looked not only at what was
said but who said it, how it said it, what was the evidence to substantiate that, how did other people react to it and so forth, yes.
Q Did source of funding go into your judgment?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Not at all.
Q Why not?
A In science what matters is ideas and proof and argument, and not who happened to fund it, not whether it is National Institute
of Health or whether it is Memorial Sloan-Kettering or a private foundation or whatever. It is the ideas that count. Many projects
also -- again, I'm glad you asked that question because it illustrates some of the complexities of the history and the untidiness of
history. This whole issue of funding also depends on chronology. If you are looking before World War II, there was very little
funding of any sort, and people often did studies on their own, they did work at night and they would go back to the hospital
and do retrospective reviews, they would have small grants. This era of larger funding is really post World War II phenomena.
The issue of funding becomes additionally complex in that you find many studies that have multiple sources of funding, private
and public. But basically ideas count and I did not do -- not sources of money. Science is a marketplace of ideas, you have
to be able to demonstrate and prove and persuade others and ultimately over the long run that is what is important, not who
your funder happened to be.
Q Do you believe the source of funding can ever influence scientific independence?
A You know, I don't know. It wouldn't surprise me if you can find an occasional instance when that happened. I would submit
that that would be an aberration. Because one of the last things scientists wants to do is to be exposed as a fraud. It would
destroy a scientist's reputation if it could be shown that funding sources influenced one's viewpoint. Now we are all biased,
all of us have our biases and prejudices. But I'm talking about fabrication, changing data, changing meaning, this sort of thing
that goes beyond the bias that each one of us carries in our day-to-day world. The scientist who can be shown to be unfair,
dishonest, is a person who has lost a career. We have aberrations in the history of science where that has happened, but those
are considered aberrations.
Q Do you remember if any of the primary literature that you reviewed was published as a result of tobacco industry funded
projects?
A Yes, I do. Now I do want to underscore, as I did before, that I did not do a systematic review of funding sources in my
study of the papers. I looked carefully at the papers and what they said and what the type of paper was, is this a clinical study,
a pathological study, epidemiological study, experimental study of some sort, was it controlled, does the data seem to be or
are the conclusions validated. All of those sorts of things I looked at. It is very common, as I said before, for investigators,
particularly after 1950, to have multiple sources of funding because that's when the private foundations like American Cancer,
American Heart are as starting to grow, that's when the National Institutes of Health is also taking off.
And I also noticed that some of the papers were funded by the tobacco industry, either I think it is the TIRC or individual
companies, and I can recall -- I didn't systematically study it, but there were papers that had conclusions that were critical of
the tobacco industry that were supported by either TIRC money or supported by one of the companies.
For example, one of the confirmations that the carcinogenic agent, benzoapyrene, exists in cigarette smoke, which was published
was done by a scientist working at, I believe the American Tobacco Company. One of the published confirmations of the skin
painting experiments was published I remember by Dr. Bock who was employed by one of the tobacco companies. I observed
this anecdotally. I didn't systematically see it. I don't have a graph that I can give you. I did see studies that had observations
or conclusions that helped build the case against cigarette smoking that in some way were funded by either a tobacco company
or the TIRC. Most of the papers, of course, had other sources of funding. American Heart, American Lung, National Institutes
of Health, so forth, that's where the majority of it came from.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q You said you remember some TIRC and industry funded projects that where the result was against smoking or that came
out saying that smoking did cause cancer. Do you remember if there were any studies that came out promoting the idea that
it was still an open question?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Well there were a number of studies and a number of papers and essays and articles in the fifties and sixties that did express
their skepticism of the evidence. Less the observations themselves, more the interpretations and what conclusions can be drawn
from epidemiological data in the absence of the traditional experimental laboratory type of confirmation that medical science at
that time was accustomed to. So there were plenty of those in the fifties and sixties. They decreased with time because you have
a building consensus, a growing consensus. In the 1950's a heck of a lot of skepticism about the idea that lung cancer might be
caused by cigarette smoking, then you start seeing the building of the consensus in the early pronouncements by public health
agencies and you start to witness a turn in sentiment within the scientific community and it grows year by year. I like to use
the term a growing consensus, an emerging consensus. On the other hand you continued to see skepticism toward that view by
responsible scientists through the early sixties, through the Surgeon General's report. To my knowledge in the great majority
of these cases, these were independent scientists. These were not tobacco company scientists. They tended to be laboratory
workers, Memorial Sloan-Kettering, Yale, National Institutes of Health, many of them were statisticians. These were the types
of individuals who in the fifties and sixties were still expressing their reservations about the hypothesis; not about the data, but
about the meaning or interpretations that could be concluded from it.
Q I want to clarify my question and your answer. My question was, did you see articles funded by the tobacco industry that
discussed -- that supported the open controversy? And you said there were plenty of articles like that. But I had limited it to
tobacco industry articles. Were you limiting it to it in your answer also?
A No. Again I have not at any point studied ideas in relation to funding sources. And as I said before, in science what matters
is idea and proof and evidence and persuasion ultimately and not who the funder happens to be.
If one is looking at those who expressed their doubts about being able to draw causal conclusions from existing evidence
in the fifties and sixties, the great majority of those people to my knowledge had no relationship to the tobacco industry.
I'm making that point. These are people, as I said they tended to be people of the traditional paradigm that you needed to
have laboratory confirmation or experimental conversation. They were laboratory workers, not epidemiologists. They were
suspicious, intellectually what does this mean. It doesn't meet the traditional standards. And the ones who immediately come to
mind were funded by major private cancer institutions such as Memorial Sloan-Kettering, they were medical schools such as
Yale, many of them with the National Cancer Institute. They were the laboratory workers and they were government funded.
Q Was all of the primary literature that you reviewed published in peer reviewed journals?
A I believe that is a requirement to be listed in Index Medicus so I believe the answer to that is yes. There is something in
medicine that we call throw-aways, things are published in them, you get it because you are a doctor, and there is stuff in it.
Everything I reviewed is from the Index Medicus; and if not 100 percent peer reviewed, it was 99.9 percent peer reviewed.
Q I was originally going to ask you if all of the primary literature you reviewed was on the subject of smoking and health but
now that you have explained the paradigm to me I already know the answer to that. Is it not true that all of the primary literature
that you reviewed for your study was not on the subject of smoking and health?
A It really relates to smoking and disease because these are original studies that were helped building a new field, the field
of epidemiology of chronic diseases. That was central to solving the lung cancer questions. So I would say it does relate to
the issue of smoking and health.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q But all of those articles do not discuss smoking and health, is that correct?
A Which articles are you referring to?
Q In the work you did entitled Paradigm?
A Do have you that Paradigm bibliography? That would help me more. I believe it is correct to say that some of the literature
that I consulted in this issue of understanding the second epidemiological revolution is a more general secondary literature to
help me understand scientific revolutions and paradigm that help me understand the events of smoking and health but don't
necessarily discuss smoking and health per se. For example, I list Thomas Kuhn in his classic book, the Structure of Scientific
Revolutions. If a person is going to talk about scientific revolutions, if a person is going to talk about paradigm changes, if a
person is going to talk about the establishment of a new field or new ways of demonstrating causation, you got to understand
Thomas Kuhn and his work in scientific revolutions. But the issue of cigarette smoking and public health is not something that
Kuhn discusses in the book. So both types of items are on this bibliography. Some items specifically come out of the smoking
health controversy. When you see participants in the study talking of these terms, we got a new paradigm, we got to persuade
others about it. That comes from the primary literature. But if you were reading Thomas Kuhn, if you are reading the literature
on scientific revolutions itself, that is necessary in my opinion to understanding the paradigm shift that was occurring. But you
are correct it doesn't necessarily talk about tobacco or lung cancer per se. It gets back to principles of history, putting things in
context, understanding the context of the events more fully that you are studying. So both types of things are here.
Q I asked you this for the secondary literature, now I'm going to ask it for the primary literature. Did you review any internal
tobacco industry documents in your review of the primary literature?
A No, I didn't. And this has to do with issues of setting boundaries. Now that you mention this, this is something that I would
also like to be an addendum to my response to your earlier question of how historians do work. One of the things you have to do
is be able to put boundaries around a project, where you begin at a point, where you end at a point, why something is included,
why something might not be included, otherwise you are doing research for life and not writing anything. The study I did is,
one chapter of it obviously is a very complex case and complex series of events. I studied things as a historian of medicine,
the evolution or scientific understanding of the causes of lung cancer that culminated with the consensus that grew in '64 with
the Surgeon General's report, the last step of the process.
I did not go into other areas, company behavior, company signs, what companies knew, what they didn't know, how they acted.
It was not necessary for what I did. I have not reviewed company documents. In the same way I haven't studied public opinion
or public perceptions. That was not part of the project that I did.
Q Did you believe that the internal documents of the industry were not important to the context?
A I think that for the project that I did, the state of scientific knowledge of the causes of lung cancer and how we investigated
that and how we came to conclusions that we did, I maintain that the acceptable currency is the published scientific literature.
This is pretty standard in the history of medicine. Insofar as company scientists may have published, and that was part of what I
looked at as I indicated to you before, on the other hand reviewing company attitudes, company responses, company behaviors,
I understand the relevance of those issues to these cases but I do not feel that they were pertinent to the role that I played in
this. I have not done that.
Q Did you review the articles in a publication put out quarterly by the Tobacco Institute called Tobacco and Health?
A No, I did not.
Q Are you familiar with the term TIRC?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A I have heard the term. I don't know much about it.
Q What do you know about it?
A I know that the mounting scientific information, building a case that cigarette smoking might be the cause of lung cancer, I say
“might be” because we are talking '53, but the tobacco industry concerned about this issue, it is my understanding that in response
they formed an organization called the TIRC. I always forget what those initials stand for, Tobacco Institute Research Council
or something. I don't know to what degree they were involved with supporting research. I know that there was an industry
organization that funded certain research. I don't remember to what -- I don't know to what degree TIRC was a supportive
research, to what degree it was part of the public relations campaign that you were alluding to before with some of the documents,
or it did both. I really don't know much about it. I have not studied it, I have no intention to study it. It is again out of my area.
Q Then you cannot tell me how many of the articles that you reviewed were published as a result of funding by TIRC?
A That is correct. I cannot tell you exactly. But I can't say that about any funding source. I mean as we sit here today ideas, as I
said before, what matters in science ultimately is the quality of ideas and evidence and not the funding sources. I cannot tell you
how many of the articles were supported by the National Cancer Institute, how many by the National Institutes of Health, how
many by the Public Health Service, how many by the American Cancer Society, how many by the American Heart Association,
how many by local foundations, how many by an individual tobacco company, how many by the TIRC. I am unable to speak
to that. I can say just impressionistically that the majority of published sources were published from funds that did not involve
TIRC or tobacco money or tobacco interest. I can also tell you anecdotally that I would occasionally encounter a published
study that had been funded by the TIRC. I can't tell you how many that that would happen. Some of them had conclusions that
were actually on the side that cigarette smoking is dangerous. There were those.
In my opinion the two most important that I remember as we sit here today were the Bock article which was a confirmation of
skin painting and one of the confirmations that benzoapyrene exists in cigarette smoke.
Q As I understand the manner in which you reached your conclusions, you selected primary and secondary sources, and then
read those sources and made notes about those sources. What else, what other techniques did you use in your analysis when
you got to that point, the notes?
A Well historians are limited by available evidence. When you get beyond primary sources and get beyond secondary sources
there really isn't much else for a historian to look at. I think I was complete and comprehensive in looking at pertinent sources
that addressed this. I think what is especially important was my review of primary sources, because I was exhaustive and the
published peer review scientific literature which shows on the one hand an evolving consensus but also shows the debates
that were occurring at the time, debates that we had forgotten about because that was 40, 50 years today. We all know today
that epidemiology works, this is the role of history. I think the exhaustive 100 percent examination of primary sources was
indispensable to the opinions that I formed. What does a historian do? Make a good conscious effort to look at everything you
can realistically look at. You try to be comprehensive. You try to be representative and look at all sides of the story, look at
opposing views, not only what ideas were put out there but how people responded to them. You look at secondary sources to
put things in context and help explain these events that you are learning from the primary sources; and in a good conscious,
good faith way you try to put it together. That's exactly what I did in my work.
Q Did you discuss your findings and conclusions with any other historians?
A I remember having occasional conversations at the time, we are going back close to 15 years ago. But I had conversation
-- one of the fun things about scholarship is the opportunity is to talk and discuss your ideas. I had conversations both with
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
historians as well as with physicians who lived through the period. Does this make sense to you. So I had conversations with
a variety of people.
Q Other than the notes that you made on your various primary and secondary source listings, did you make any other kinds
of notes or outlines or reports or comments?
A No, I did not.
Q Looking back at it from hindsight, what else could you have done in reaching your conclusions?
A In hindsight I don't think there is anything else that I could have done reaching my conclusions for the project that I was
studying. I believe that I studied this more thoroughly, more comprehensively, more representatively, more systematically than
anyone in the world had done. I don't think that there is anything else I could have done. Now I could have changed careers. I
could have said instead of focusing on my interested medical education I'm going to change subjects and start exploring other
aspects of this. You mentioned a number of them in your earlier questions, but I wasn't really interested in this. This was a project
that came at that interval between finishing one book in medical education, getting started in another book in medical education.
That's where my heart and passion is. That's where I would estimate 95 to 97 percent of my time today is and I went back to it.
Q Have you ever written any article with respect to your study?
A I have not done so.
Q Why not?
A Two reasons. Number 1, from the very beginning one of the conditions that I insisted on with Arnold & Porter in terms of
whether I would undertake this was the complete freedom, including the freedom to publish. So there were never any restrictions.
On the other hand, I don't know how it is for you, but for me writing is hard work, and the additional amount of time that
would have been involved just to sit down and write a paper would have been substantial. And though I did this research in a
very responsible and exhaustive fashion, I didn't learn anything new. The common wisdom that I had always heard even before
beginning this is you got some early studies in the twenties and thirties and forties suggesting smoking might cause lung cancer,
you got a watershed year of 1950, then you got this becoming perhaps the most intensely investigated scientific issue in the
world, various controversies going on at the root of which is the creation of a new field of the epidemiology of chronic diseases,
it culminates with the last step of the Surgeon General's report which helped bring clinical epidemiology to maturity, which
helped erase any residual doubt that there might have been in the scientific community that could be used as a convenient data
or understanding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, the '64 Surgeon General's report. That all was common knowledge
in the history of medicine. All the secondary sources that I read had essentially similar explanations. Had I found something
different, that would have been worth writing about. But the fact is I didn't want to be the 21st person to confirm the skin
painting experiment. I didn't think it was a valuable use of my time so I wasn't really inclined to do that.
In addition, as I was finishing what I call the first stage, the late eighties, early nineties, those continued to appear important
papers by respected historians, most notably John Burnham and Allan Brandt who I know is an expert for you, that made
essentially the same points, I thought they were excellent papers. I saw little to be gained from me doing all the work to write
down John Burnham and Allan Brandt and many others have said it very well. I wasn't adding anything to it. Now I had found
a new book to work on, I wanted to get back to work on that. I can guarantee you though, had I found something different that
had in some way contradicted the common wisdom, then I would have taken the effort to have written. But since everything
I found was confirmatory -- I like doing new things. I don't get much joy being the 19th person to confirm something that is
already known and already been written about. So I went back to my own work. That's where my efforts have been since then.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q On Page 2 of your report, the section is headed Overview of Opinions. And the first paragraph is, “I expect to explain the
principles of historical analysis. Specifically I expect to testify about the historical analysis of developments in scientific and
medical knowledge.” Is there anything you want to add about the principles of historical analysis that you haven't testified to
this morning and this afternoon?
A Let me just reflect on that out loud to make sure I haven't omitted anything. We have done a pretty thorough job as we
have gone. We've talked about the importance of having a context, we have talked about the importance of being accurate
and fair in how you represent material, that was my criticism you recall of Dr. Harris's report. You have importance of being
comprehensive, looking at all sides of the issue, not just one point of view, but the responses to it and what other issues there
were, what sort of rehashing was evoked, that type of thing. You have the importance of not using hindsight. People at the time
made judgments based on what is known then, not on what is subsequently known and that thing, we have discussed that. We
have discussed the importance of understanding how science and medicine do not evolve in straight lines from ignorance to
truth and all the messiness of that, how the consensus can be wrong, how seemingly have a rational idea and can ultimately
turn out to be correct. How good work can be overlooked for honest reasons but ignored and then rediscovered, things of that
sort. We talked about the importance of putting borders on project, otherwise you never get anything done. For me the border
was the scientific understanding of the causes of lung cancer, not issues of company behavior, public opinion, so forth. So I'm
saying this out loud just as an aid to myself but I think we've covered it.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record for a tape change. The time is 2:16 PM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 2:31 PM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, on Page 2 of your report, the second paragraph, under “Overview opinions” states, “I also expect to testify
about the state of medical knowledge of smoking cigarettes, disease, and a possible relationship between cigarette smoking and
disease in the United States from the early 1900 to January, 1964.”
A couple of questions. Here you have limited this opinion strictly to the United States, correct?
A Correct.
Q Smoking and disease in the United States. Again when you say state of medical knowledge, that's not popular knowledge,
that's the medical and scientific community, is that correct?
A That is correct. I'm using medical and scientific interchangeably, both of which are completely different from community
or popular so that is a correct statement.
Q Or media knowledge?
A Correct.
Q And again, you use the word disease so we are not just speaking of lung cancer, we are talking about many, many diseases
that might be associated with smoking, is that correct?
A That's correct. As you can see from my bibliography, the focus of my research, the focus of my opinions is on lung cancer.
On the other hand one get a sense of other associations and other diseases. So I think it fair to use the term “disease.”
Q This statement also starts, in the early 1900's, it goes to January, 1964.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Correct.
Q Do you consider yourself qualified to give an expert opinion with respect to the state of the medical knowledge of smoking
cigarettes, disease, and a possible relationship between cigarette smoking and disease in the United States after January, 1964?
A Not as an expert. I have not studied that and I am not prepared to speak about events and the scientific study after January, '64.
Q This relates to the term “state of medical knowledge.” Wasn't the state of medical knowledge--6
A Excuse me, where are you?
Q That same sentence, the second paragraph. “The state of medical knowledge.” Wasn't the state of medical knowledge in this
country the same in December, 1963, as it was in January, 1964 after the Surgeon General's report was released?
A I would not agree with that statement, because of the extraordinary power and impact of the Surgeon General's report itself
which in my estimation made a major intellectual contribution to our understanding of this issue, particularly its annunciation
of the five criteria. I believe the Surgeon General's report, although it was based on existing work, that is true, I believe it
made a new intellectual contribution of its own. It was more than just a summation. I consider it one of the great scientific
documents of the 20th century.
Q But as far as the state of medical knowledge, it was based on existing medical knowledge, is that correct?
A It was based on existing data and studies. But the issue always in science is not just data but how you interpret the data and
what conclusions you can draw from it. So it is correct that the Surgeon General's report evaluated existing studies, including
unpublished studies, so from that perspective the Surgeon General's committee had access to information that the general
scientific community might have, but the question is what sense do you make of this. And it was brilliant in terms of how
it interpreted the data, the definition of the five criteria of causality, how one can use epidemiological tools particularly with
coherency to draw conclusions about causality and the absence of direct laboratory evidence that the scientific community for
centuries traditionally been accustomed to. In my mind that is a pretty important conceptual revolution. It is not new data. It's
a conceptual revolution and I think in my opinion is the final step in the evolution of our current recognition that cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer. It helped create a new field, the field of chronic epidemiology, epidemiology of chronic diseases.
All of that ties in with each other. In my estimate it is an original contribution, an incredibly important contribution, and to
make the statement that things in December of '63 were the same as in January of '64, I do not believe that is a correct statement
because of the importance of the Surgeon General's first report.
Q Let me reword it then. What I meant to say was to take the term you use here, that you just testified that there was no new
data. The state of medical knowledge, the data that was available in December, 1963, the medical data that was available, was
no different than the medical data that was available the day after the Surgeon General's report was released, is that true?
A If you are looking at the basic data itself, I think that is correct. If you are looking at ways of thinking and interpreting data,
ways of making sense of the world, that did change.
Q You said some of the Surgeon General's, some of the articles that they used, some of the studies they reviewed were
unpublished. Do you know what percentage of the studies that the Surgeon General considers in the 1964 report were
unpublished?
A The Surgeon General, as I recall, doesn't say specifically so I don't know what percentage that would be. But it does make
a point of two things that I think are pertinent to that. Number 1, it points out how much new published information appeared
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
in the intervening four or five years. How much new material there was for it to evaluate and to consider, how the case had
grown stronger even from Surgeon General Burney's 1959 statement. So the amount of published information is larger and
more impressive in '64 even than it had been a few years before then. In addition to that, the Surgeon General points out the
inspiring cooperation it received from all sorts of scientists and workers who shared unpublished information or we have this
article going to press or this sort of thing with them. It doesn't give an amount of that but it does make a point of praising the
scientific community in general for sharing with them the latest that may not have yet made press.
Q When you say intervening four or five years, you are talking about the years between the January, '64 Surgeon General's
report and Surgeon General Burney's 1959 statement on smoking and lung cancer?
A That is correct. I am saying that the scientific case that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer grew stronger from 1959 through
January, 1964 and that medical sentiment -- and the Surgeon General comments on this too, that one reason they did the report
was that as much sentiment as there may have been in 1959, that there has been a decided shift in the intervening four or five
years as new information has come in and new data has come in and that medical sentiment has shifted yet even further from
1959 to 1964. That is correct.
Q The next sentence in that section starts, “Beginning in 1950,” it says, “Beginning in 1950, medical and scientific articles
began appearing in the leading scientific and medical journals, suggesting a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung
cancer.” And then I want you to skip to the next page now, Page 3. The heading is “Statements of opinions and basis.” Your
first sentence there is, “I have concluded based upon my review of the literature that there was no credible evidence linking
cigarette smoking to lung cancer or any life-threatening disease before 1950.” Is that still your opinion as we sit here today?
A Yes, it is. I think I would elaborate in a way that will shorten the summation. It is hard to do. But the two specific points
are number 1, there were concerns of the health hazards of cigarette smoking expressed before 1950. I do not want to give the
impression that I am unaware of those. That is very much part of this story. On the other hand, the amount and quality of data
in the 1930's and forties was really pretty minimal. It was speculative, uncontrolled studies, letters to the editors, experimental
studies that couldn't be replicated by other individuals.
Participants in this, in these events look at 1950 as a watershed year. That's not my term, that's Sir Richard Doll's term, how the
evidence that began appearing in 1950 was so much more impressive and disturbing than the types of evidence that had been
there before, if you are looking at cigarette smoking and lung cancer. I'm paraphrasing Sir Richard Doll, but he says reports
about cigarette smoking and lung cancer go back for awhile but it wasn't until 1950 with the publication of the various reports
that for the first time a sufficient amount of high quality information obtained in a sufficiently responsible way was assembled
to persuade more than a handful of people that cigarette smoking was a real possibility as the cause of lung cancer, something
of that sort. I would agree with that phraseology.
If you examine the Surgeon General's report, the Surgeon General essentially says the same thing in 1964 report, that earlier
suggestions and studies go back, but 1950 is a watershed year. So I do maintain the importance of 1950. And then the types of
hazards that were associated with cigarette smoking, the other part of your question, before 1950, Buerger's Disease, tobacco
amblyopia, the suggestion had been made that cigarette smoking might cause lung cancer but you have to put things in context.
It was not an idea that evoked much of a response if you were looking at the thirties and the forties. Textbooks didn't mention
it, review articles didn't mention it. If people mentioned it at all, often they said we have heard this idea but there is no data, it
is speculative. One of the pioneers, one of the leaders the prospectus study says as late as 1947 he considered it to be nonsense.
So those would be the two changes or the two events; the linkage of cigarette smoking with other illnesses before 1950 but
the focus of lung cancer really emerging with 1950 and those studies as well with other serious diseases, then the importance
of 1950 as a watershed year.
Not the first time anyone made the suggestion or made the claim, but when using Dr. Doll's words, when you have a sufficient
amount of responsibly obtained and credible evidence being brought forth to persuade the entire scientific community, not
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
just a handful of those at the margin that cigarette smoking might be responsible for a material amount of significant disease.
Something like that. I'm paraphrasing Dr. Doll. But I would agree with that new prediction.
Q Well what Dr. Doll then is saying is that more impressive, more disturbing and more persuasive medical and scientific articles
began appearing in 1950 but that's not what you say here. You say beginning in 1950 medical and scientific articles began
appearing. Would you agree that before 1950, medical and scientific articles began appearing in leading scientific and medical
journals suggesting a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A I'm saying that to be accurate one has to be comprehensive, and you have to look at the quality of the article and the response
to them. I would adhere to this view and it is very consistent with Dr. Doll. The suggestion that smoking causes lung cancer is
not a new suggestion. But the quality of evidence was very poor and if you look at the scientific community, there are not many
people who are persuaded by that. If you look at the reviews of the subject of lung cancer as late as 1947, 1948, '49, you see
the cause of lung cancer being listed as unknown, you don't see in the textbooks relations with cigarette smoking being drawn.
That's what changes after 1950. Not the idea, but the fact that now we are getting some well done studies, the evidence it is not
just someone writing a letter to the editor or doing an uncontrolled study but that the first of the better done epidemiology studies
that led to the second revolution in epidemiology, the quality of the data, the amount of the data, and that's why so many people,
including Dr. Doll, and several of the surgeon generals look at 1950 and use the term watershed year. I agree with that. But of
course it is correct to point out and important to point out that the idea is not a new one. It is not that no one had ever made that
suggestion before, the suggestion that lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking does go back for a few decades. No one had
data. It was speculative for the most part, and that was the problem. It also violated common sense based on existing paradigms.
Those are the things that changed in 1950, why in 1950 you have a whole new ear and understanding of these relationships.
Q Did you read an article by Alton Ochsner, O-C-H-S-N-E-R, and Michael DeBakey, D-E, capital B-A-K-E-Y, called “The
symposium on cancer analysis of 79 collected cases and presentation of seven personal cases in surgery, gynecology and
obstetrics, written in 1939?
A Yes, I did.
Q Is it still your opinion that that particular article did not suggest a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A That article suggested a link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer and in fact it attracted a lot of attention. The problem
is that it had no data. There were no controls. Scientists -- and again this is why one has to be comprehensive if you are to
be a responsible historian. If you look at Menne and Anderson writing in JAMA, for example, in 1941, they talk about that
essentially what we have is speculation but not data. The Ochsner and DeBakey articles of 1939 and 1941 were uncontrolled.
They actually studied the subject and retracted that view. They did a controlled study, which they did not do in 1939 and 1941.
They were unable to demonstrate a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and between 1947 and 1948 wrote
seven or eight public retractions of that concept. So my personal view that their inability to demonstrate the relationship that
they hypothesized in 1939 was one of the major reasons why there was still in the western world skepticism toward that concept
in the late forties. They advanced the idea, they studied it, they had negative results, they concluded they were wrong, they
retracted their conclusion. Now, of course, later on they came on board. But I think the '48 study needs retraction has to be
added to the '39. So there is a lot of staccato. This --
Q Would you agree that the article was published before 1950?
A Yes, of course.
Q Would you agree that it appeared in a leading scientific and medical journal?
A Of course.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Would you agree that it suggested a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A Yes, I would.
Q Have you -- are you familiar with the article by
A. Arkin, A-R-K-I-N, and D.H. Wagner, W-A-G-N-E-R, entitled “Primary Carcinoma of the Lung,” published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association in 1936?
A Yes, I am.
Q Was this article published before 1936?
A It was published --
Q Before 1950?
A Yes, it was.
Q Is the Journal of the American Medical Association a leading scientific and medical journal?
A I consider it to be so.
Q And did the article suggest a possible link between cancer smoking and lung cancer?
A It offered that as a speculation, but again getting back to principles of doing history, it is important to assess the quality,
the validity. It was important. It was an important suggestion. Subsequently proved to be correct. But that paper was not a
controlled study. It was not an epidemiological study. It was another of the handful of studies that appeared in the thirties and
forties where you had some well-intentioned physicians, use often chest surgeons who had their own series of patients but did
not have controls. And they would say 80 percent of our patients with lung cancer smoke but they didn't have any controls.
Smoking had already become a very widespread habit in the United States. Maybe 70, 80 percent of the general population
smoked. It was not considered -- without the controls it was not considered persuasive by people at the time. I think that context
has to be added and that explains the opinion of the Surgeon General and Dr. Doll and others. The suggestion has been made,
there are clinical studies, but it wasn't until 1950 that you have a sufficient body of quality data and representative data obtained
in a responsible way.
An uncontrolled study is not a responsible epidemiology study. That's why they call 1950 the watershed year. They are calling
it a watershed because of the quality of work that came out and the degree of concern that this working both in the scientific
community. No one, them or I, is saying that no one made the suggestion before. You are providing some excellent examples
of people who in earlier years threw in that suggestion.
I would cite again Dr. Menne Anderson in 1941 also writing in the American Journal of Medical Association who used the
words, “This is pure speculative nonsense. We need data. And without controls and epidemiological studies, no conclusions
could be considered verifiable.”
Q But your opinion as it stands now is incorrect without all of those qualifications, correct?
A Which opinion are you referring to?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Beginning in 1950 medical and scientific articles began appearing --
A What page are you on?
Q I'm on Page 2, the head of the section is called “Overview of opinions.” It's the third paragraph. It starts, “Beginning in 1950.”
A Well, I think that's a correct statement, beginning in 1950 you got an outpouring of important, well-done, well-conducted
studies that shocked the scientific community and brought even more attention to the issue.
Q Outpouring is not the word you use. You used the word “begin.” “Medical articles begin appearing.” Not an outpouring
begins appearing. Just medical and scientific articles.
A Well, I think that as nice of a person as you obviously are that I think you are doing a little bit of quibbling over years. They
began appearing then. I'm adding for elaboration of a short document that the number of articles begin to soar. But I think it
is correct, 1950, the amount and the nature of the evidence changes, and that's the point that I make here and that's the point
that I will continue to make.
Q But you would agree that before 1950 the medical and scientific articles had begun appearing in leading scientific and medical
journals, suggesting the possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer without any qualifications?
A I would very much agree with the statement that the suggestion that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer had been made
before 1950. I'm pointing out that the evidence to document that statement was pretty scantly. I'm pointing out that an historian
has to look at things in context how people respond to the ideas. Not many people bought into that view. But yes, you can
find that statement there.
But what I'm doing is at the one hand acknowledging the accuracy of that statement but at the same time trying to be
representative and point out that you have to be comprehensive and look at all of the data and see how people responded to
it, and the degree of concern that was evoked by the early suggestions was minimal compared with the degree of concern that
came in the watershed year of 1950. As I said before, Ochsner and DeBakey's failure to demonstrate the relationship that they
postulated in 1939 and 1941 in my opinion contributed to the relative lack of concern before 1950.
Q Are you aware of an article by Raymond Pearl, P-E-A-R-L, entitled “Tobacco Smoking and Longevity” in the publication
Science in 1938?
A Correct. That's another notable part of the pre-1950 literature. He was --
Q Does that article suggest a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A My recollection is that it talks about cigarette smoking and decreased longevity. Without seeing the article I don't know if
it says anything -- I don't remember if it says anything specifically about longevity. Pearl is actually one of my people that I
admire. He was an eminent biologist. He played a role in my first book on the eugenics movement in American society. I admire
Raymond Pearl. He was a biometrician. But again, from the standpoint of responsible history, one needs to be comprehensive
and look at the entirety of the data to get a sense of what was going on rather than to pick and choose selectively. This can
easily be done by picking the examples that you are. Pearl was criticized for very statistical reasons at the time. Dr. Doll himself
in his recollections of the smoking controversy discusses how Pearl was considered a marginal figure, that there were flaws
with his argument, people tended to discount it. In retrospect we know that he was right. But at the time it did not evoke a
considerable amount of concern. But it was there. It is notable and it should be commented on. It was very much a part of the
printed pre-1950 literature.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q What about the article by Frederick Hoffman, H-O-F-F-M-A-N entitled “Cancer and Smoking Habits,” in the Annals of
Surgery in 1931, was that article published before 1950?
A Yes, it was.
Q Was it in a leading scientific and medical journal?
A Yes, it was.
Q And did it suggest a possible link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A I remember that Hoffman had an article. Do you happen to have a copy of the article to show me? Because I do not remember
that article as well as I do the others to see the exact wording. Were there controls? I really don't think so. Was he talking
about lung cancer, was he talking about cancer of the mouth and pipe smoking. I just don't remember. Sometimes these things
are confused because the literature relating pipe smoking and oral cancer is struggling and cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
I'm looking at cigarette smoking and lung cancer and those are the sorts of articles you need to look at. I would have to see
the Hoffman.
Q No, I don't have it with me. How about F.E. Tylecote, T-Y-L-E-C-O-T-E, his article is “Cancer of the lung,” published in
Lancet in 1927. Was that article published before 1950?
A Yes, it was, and as I said, there were a number of articles in the twenties and thirties and forties that made the suggestion. I
would have to see that particular article. I recall Dr. Doll's description of it being correct, the article is that it lacks data, is not
done in a responsible way. I would have to again see what he had in the way of controls. The allegation and assertion is being
made during this period. What is lacking is much in the way of evidence or controls or experimental studies to back up that
assertion at a time that lots of people smoke are smoking and not getting sick. So again the response that that article evoked
was small relative to the response that occurred to the 1950 articles. But yes, it was there, of course it was.
Q In the next sentence, we are still on Page 2 of that fourth paragraph, “There were varying views within the scientific community
regarding these studies.” I'm just curious, besides published medical and scientific articles, what else do members of the medical
and scientific community refer to or consider or rely on when they are forming their views and beliefs about an issue?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A You are referring to -- can you show me where you are referring?
Q We are on Page 2, on the fourth paragraph.
A Beginning in 1950?
Q I'm sorry, third paragraph. We discussed that first sentence. Now we are on the second sentence of that paragraph when
you talk about varying views within the scientific community regarding the studies. Besides the studies, I'm just asking you
a general question, besides scientific studies, published articles, what do members of the scientific and medical community
rely on, consider, what are some other tools they use when they are coming up with their views or beliefs on a medical or
scientific issue?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Well, the major source of information as you suggest is the literature itself, as we have been talking about all day long. The
scientific literature is the currency. I think, wearing my medical hat now, not just the historical hat, people talk about articles.
It is not just that something comes out. Again, you have to put yourself in the reality of the real world at the time things happen
and not some abstract idealized notion.
The fact that an article is written even in a prestigious journal doesn't necessarily mean that it is correct, doesn't necessarily
mean that it is read. If it is read, someone may read it six months later and not immediately because it gets stuck in the pile. All
sorts of practical things that make sense in a common sense happen in a way that scientists operate.
In addition, science is a social phenomena. Scientists are not individual actors working by themselves. Part of the fun of it is
that you are talking with others, you are conversing, you are interchanging, you are exchanging views; so if you do have a
notable article come out, you discuss it, you have a journal club, you have seminars, someone presents it or maybe you are
having lunch, did you see Dr. Smith's article in last week's New England Journal of Medicine. You did? What do you think
about it. There is a lot of this that goes on.
Sociologists have talked about opinion setters in science. It is not if you got 500,000 physicians, it is not that every physician
reads the article immediately but the view of certain opinion setters, the leading people in the field, the chairs and that sort of
thing influences others. There is a permutation process. I could go on. But these are examples of part of the informal process
of scientific dialog.
Q I believe it is the next paragraph, it starts, “I expect to testify how the findings of these studies were addressed by public health
officials. One response considered by the public health community was the reduction in tar and nicotine yields as a possible
means of reducing the risks associated with cigarettes.”
When did the public health community consider reducing tar and nicotine yields? What years?
A I will acknowledge to you that of all the sentences in this summary review, this is the one that, this particular sentence is the
one that I have been least involved with or thought the least about. Given that qualification, I know that Dr. Wynder himself
published in the mid fifties on the issue of developing filters and hoping that that might obviate the cancer problem. In addition,
this is discussed not at great length, but it is discussed in the first Surgeon General's report where they talk about the possibility
of adding additives to cigarettes that in some way might counteract the apparent carcinogen. In the fifties I would say with Dr.
Wynder, I don't remember if it was the mid fifties or late fifties, I would tend to say the mid fifties he wrote about this in some
of his published statements, and this concept was pursued in the Surgeon General's report of '64.
Q How about the public health -- public health community's response to the reduction of nicotine yields, what years are we
talking about the public health community acting?
A I'm glad you asked that because nicotine is not something that I have really looked into. My knowledge of nicotine is that
little was known about it. The Surgeon General report in 1964 considers cigarette smoking to be a habit not to be addictive. The
Surgeon General's report was less concerned about the biological consequences of nicotine than today we are. Quite frankly
if this had been sent to me for my editing and review today I would scratch that out. I appreciate you bringing that up. I'm
talking about reduction in tar. I'm only addressing lung cancer, not issues of addiction and physiological stuff like that. Let's
delete those two words. We will make a note that should I ever be asked to have an expert statement like that in the future,
those two will not be there.
Q The two words being “tar” and “nicotine”?
A The two words being “and nicotine”.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Were there any other responses by the public health community other than the creation of the first Surgeon General's advisory
committee and the public health community's reduction in tar yields as a possible means of reducing risks?
A Yes, there were.
Q What were some of those?
A The chief response was the growing view, beginning in 1954, that it is better not to smoke at all. And you see various health
organizations start taking positions in the mid to late fifties on this issue. Each of them set in their own way, some said it more
strongly, some said it less strongly. You see the growing consensus that we have inherited today that cigarette smoking is the
cause of lung cancer, better off not to smoke. The first use of the term primary prevention that I'm aware of from the American
Public Health Association was 1954. Somewhere around '56 or '57, and you probably know these organizations better than I,
but various medical organizations in the United States and in other countries began taking positions to the effect that cigarette
smoking is a health danger. Often they would revise an earlier opinion and come out with a later opinion stronger than the
earlier opinion, which to my perspective is evidence of this growing consensus, new information coming and the rising tide.
The best example is probably the public health surgeon -- the Public Health Service. Surgeon General Burney in 1957 signed
that excessive cigarette smoking is -- or he may have even said may be one of the causes in lung cancer toward a stronger
statement in 1959 when he says that cigarette smoking is the principal cause of lung cancer. You see these types of statements
from the Public Health Service, from other public health organizations beginning in the fifties and this recognition that and
growing acceptance by the cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and a material amount of other disease, it's catching on, it is
growing, year by year it grows stronger. I would say that was an even louder response than the idea of looking for a safer smoke.
Q The last paragraph on Page 2 starts, “I understand,” “I understand that I may be asked to offer opinions regarding the opinions
and testimony expressed by other witnesses in the case. I receive the right to supplement this report based on my continuing
review of academic literature and on the opinions expressed by other experts in this case.” We are speaking as of today. Have
you reviewed the opinions and testimony expressed by any other witnesses in this case?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I haven't -- if by testimony you mean depositions and that type to thing?
Q I think that would be the main example that I would cite.
A To my recollection I have not reviewed depositions of witnesses for either defense or plaintiff in this case.
Q Have you reviewed any academic literature since January 30, 2002, that's when you signed the report, not listed on the
reference material supplied to the United States?
A No, I haven't.
Q Have you reviewed the opinions expressed by other experts in this case? And my example to you would be by reading their
expert reports?
A I have read the expert reports of Allan Brandt and Robert Proctor.
Q Have you read the report of Peter English?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Has the review of these deposition -- of these expert reports changed any of the opinions in your original report?
A No, they have not.
Q Based on any work that you have done since January 30, 2002, have you supplemented this report at all?
A No, I have not.
Q Turning to Page 3 of your report, that first sentence, “I have concluded, based upon my review of literature, that there was no
credible scientific evidence linking cigarette smoke to lung cancer or any life-threatening disease before 1950.” What is your
definition of credible scientific evidence?
A Evidence means just the evidence, as opposed to speculation and hypothesis. If you are looking at clinical studies, you need
controls. To have a series of studies without controls is not really a bonafide epidemiological study even by the old fashioned
standards, retrospective standards and standards that existed at that time. This was common very frequently in the thirties and
forties.
One of my favorite examples is the one I mentioned to you before, Menne and Anderson, in which they acknowledged that
the suggestion had been made many times and you listed yourself before a number of people who had suggested that cigarette
smoking caused lung cancer, but just on the basis of speculation, hey, I have got 80 patients that I have operated on, most of
them smoke, there is more smoking in the world today than there was, maybe it is cigarette smoking. But without controls,
without proper study, such conclusions, you don't really have evidence, you have speculation. So I'm distinguishing between
hypothesizing and speculation and that type of thing versus real evidence that you get from a well-controlled, well done study.
And credible, I'm also using that as a shorthand for reproducibility.
One of the important aspects in all of scientific work is not in merely making an observation, but in doing it in such a way that
other people can follow your techniques and do the same thing and reproduce it. So there were also some laboratory studies,
primitive laboratory studies in the twenties and thirties. And the person whose name is most frequently associated with that is
Roffo from South America but no one could confirm what he did. And that led his work to be discounted at the time. People
tried to confirm his homographic studies and skin painting studies. They were all unsuccessful. And he was also, as Dr. Doll
points out, very vague in experimental details that he provided. So people thought that he had not done what he asserted that
he had done.
So these, so reproducibility in evidence as opposed to speculation are really the things that I'm referring to here. As I said before
in my own view, Dr. Ochsner's inability to demonstrate a relationship in the 1940's I personally believe was instrumental in the
skepticism toward the idea that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer that persisted through 1950 and he retracted that idea that
has to be added to the discussion. And all of this changes of course with using Dr. Doll's term, the watershed years of 1950.
Q Exhibit 7 which is your -- the articles, the studies that you read and they were written or published between 1930 and 1950,
contained 279 items.
A Right.
Q Is it your testimony that none of those 279 pieces of primary literature have any credible scientific evidence linking cigarette
smoking to lung cancer?
A I'm saying that it is my testimony that, using 1950 as an arbitrary turning date, it would be more accurate to say that the cause
of lung cancer is unknown. I think that would be a more accurate way of saying that. I think this statement that the cause of
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
lung cancer is at present unknown is in every review of the subject, published review of the subject of lung cancer between
1930 and 1945.
Q I'm sorry, you are in the wrong place. The sentence that I just said doesn't say anything about lung cancer and unknown. It
says no credible scientific evidence linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer.
A Well there is another question. Maybe it should be read back because I want to make sure we are on the same wave length.
(The following question was read back:
Q Is it your testimony that none of those 279 pieces of primary literature have any credible scientific evidence linking cigarette
smoking to lung cancer?)
A What I'm saying is that the evidence was weak and not taken very seriously. And historians have to look at the response to
studies, not just the studies themselves. Someone makes a claim, how did the rest of the scientific community react to the claim.
What I'm saying is that despite the suggestions that were made by the several people that you mentioned, those suggestions
evoked relatively little concern prior to 1950. The common teaching prior to 1950 was that the cause among cancer is unknown.
Someone will go on to say that a number of factors have been suggested as possible causes, they would often list 15 factors,
including cigarette smoking, but they would go on to say that we really have no evidence to substantiate any of these at the
moment. The cause of lung cancer is unknown. This would be the tone of the literature and of the textbooks through the late
forties. It is the watershed year of 1950 in which that claim evokes much greater attention and much greater concern.
Q On your Exhibit 7 you have listed 279 pieces of primary literature you read. My question is, is it your testimony, your opinion,
that in none of these 2-- we will forget about the 12 articles that I had earlier. Now we have 279 that you have written down;
that in none of those is there any credible scientific evidence linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer?
A Well I would say there was very little, little credible scientific evidence. Certainly the suggestion had been made, but what is
lacking is on the clinical side, controls. What is lacking on the experimental side is reproducibility because the investigator who
claimed that he had been able to induce skin cancer with cigarette fragments and identify benzoapyrene no one could confirm
that work and he was discounted. That is what I am saying. Also, putting things in context, very few of these articles before
1950 really deal with the issue of causation. And again this gets back to the historian's responsibility of looking at things in
the context of the time, not with our present understanding. That's an no-no in history. Scientists in all fields address questions
that they consider answerable with the techniques at the time. The great majority of studies before 1950 are not studies of the
causes of lung cancer. Those are clinical studies of various aspects of the presentation and management of the disease; is the
increase in lung cancer that we are seeing perceived or real, how does lung cancer behave, what are the cell types, where does
it go, what organs does it metastasize to, how does it metastasize, how does one make the diagnosis, how does one treat it, etc.,
etc. That really is the flavor of this information.
It would be an error on my part in this discussion not to bring that point to your attention if you are looking at the pre-1950
literature. It is easy to look at the handful of papers that do go into the issue of cause. That is a very tiny amount of the literature
on lung cancer before 1950 because the tools were primitive. As the mart change compared with the post 1950 period where
the issue of causation, not clinical behavior and treatment of lung cancer becomes the focus of concern.
Q What percent of these 279 articles talk about not causation, but links between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A It depends on how you talk about links. I would say the typical review, the typical article might be our experience with lung
cancer. Here is our patient -- here is our population of patients and we have seen maybe three patients with lung cancer and here
is how it compares with the general experience, here is how we believe the diagnosis should be made, how is how it should
be treated, here is how it spreads.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
In those reviews many papers would have a discussion of etiology. If you consider the one paragraph discussion of etiology to
be a discussion of cause, then the number gets higher. If, on the other hand, you read that paragraph and say the cause of lung
cancer is currently unknown, here is a few things that have been suggested as possibilities but we don't have any data, if you
consider that a discussion of lung cancer and cigarette smoking, then the percentage would be higher. If you would discount
that type of paragraph in a larger article, then very few of the papers really dealt with the issue of cause in the way the papers
that you cited today do.
Q We are not talking about cause. We are talking about linking, linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer. Haven't hit the
discussion about causation yet. Would you say at least 10 percent, at least 28 of these articles?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I haven't counted them or read them since 1988. But as a guesstimate, I would say less than ten percent. You are cherry
picking. You are picking the very best articles over a several decade period. The typical article in here would say, as I said
before, the cause of lung cancer is unknown, a number of factors have been suggested as possible causes but we don't have
evidence to support any of these at the moment. The cause of lung cancer is unknown. If you really wish to understand the tenor
of the period, what people at the time are saying, that's a pretty accurate reflection.
Q I'm trying to understand the tenor of your word here which is no. If I'm cherry-picking, I'm sorry, but it is in your opinion.
You are saying there is no credible scientific evidence linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer before 1950 and this is your
1930 to 1950, and all I'm asking you is, therefore you are saying that in these 279 articles you are telling us there is no credible
evidence linking, linking cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Well, I would say that qualitatively the essence of what I have been saying is correct.
Q How about quantitatively?
A And close to quantitatively. If I were writing this today I'm sure I would -- I had this discussion with Mr. Woods last night,
I would put little credible scientific evidence rather than no credible scientific evidence. And actually as part of my testimony
as I said before, that concern about this issue goes back awhile. But data is needed and that is what was lacking, plus ability
is needed, that is what was lacking. It is not just a question of Dr. Tylecote thinking that writing a letter to Lancet do people
believe this. I agree with the phraseology of Dr. Doll. As I said before he says that the suggestion that cigarette smoking causes
lung cancer goes back to the twenties and thirties and forties. But it is not until 1950 that a sufficient amount of good scientific
information is collected in a responsible way that persuades more than a mere handful of people to think that cigarette smoking
is the cause of lung cancer and other material disease. I agree with Dr. Doll and that is my testimony. I personally do not like
the word no in here because it leads to a sense of absolutism which I'm really not trying to suggest. And I would change it
to little rather than no.
Q Page 3, the second sentence in that paragraph, beginning--16
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record for a tape change. The time is 3:29 PM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 3:36 PM.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A May I make a brief statement qualification? I believe this was contained in the conversation we had prior to the break, but just
to make sure, I would like to say on that paragraph, again documents get sent to you, you read them quickly, you sign them. If I
were writing this today I would not use the word no, I would use the word little. And my main point is not to argue over no versus
little. My main point is remains the same, to contrast the quantity and quality of scientific evidence and the degree of concern
evoked in the rest of the scientific community before 1950 and after 1950. 1950 is a watershed. That's really the point that I'm
making. Not to deny that there were serious individuals who had genuine concerns that smoking might cause lung cancer before
1950. 1 don't want that wording to cause my main point to be lost. I don't think it was, but I wanted to make that clarification.
Q At the bottom of that same paragraph, the last sentence says, “Rather the issue of whether smoking caused disease was the
subject of debate, with reputable scientists on both sides.” What were the two sides?
A The issue was not the data that was being accumulated from the epidemiological studies. The issue was the interpretation
of the data, whether these new types of studies and the inferences that could be drawn from them were sufficient to allow
conclusions about cause and effect to be made. Everyone that I'm aware of was worried about the data. I don't know of anyone
who was cavalier toward it in the scientific community. The question was are these statistical associations or is there a true
cause and effect relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. It was the interpretation of the data that generated
most of the discussion. Other studies of course were being conducted, pathological studies and studies of skin painting studies
and constituents of smoke and other things. But the lack of an animal model, the lack of an experimental model, the lack of
the ability to show in the traditional fashion that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer the same way that if you give someone
measles who hasn't had it they are going to contract measles, and you are contracting them by coax postulates, those traditional
standards hadn't been met. That was really the nature of the debate. Given what conclusions we can draw from these new
epidemiological studies, by “new” I mean chronic diseases. Epidemiology is do we have a statistical association or do we have
true cause and effect.
Q Were there just two sides to that debate then or were there three, that with one group saying smoking causes disease, the
other group you call them here both sides, saying smoking does not cause disease, and a third group saying we don't know yet
whether smoking causes disease or not?
A Actually it depends on kind of how deep into the story you want to go. But if one wants to get subtle, there were groups,
there were various sub groups. There were some people and some people became convinced early on, by early on, early mid
fifties, that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. There are others who said we are worried but we really don't know. There
were others who said that, as you are saying now, that we can draw -- we are worried but in the absence of an animal model
or traditional postulates of causation being shown we are unable to draw that conclusion. It actually gets more complex still
because even particularly -- now again let me make an aside. We are talking about a rapid dynamic here from skepticism in 1950
to a new consensus by 1964, the creation of the new field, the epidemiology of chronic diseases. From a historical perspective
a lot happened quickly. And year by year the tone changes and new studies come out. So what you say about 1952 is not the
same as '55 or'58 or'61. So all of these qualifications have to be put into it. But particularly in the fifties, less so in the sixties,
but particularly in the fifties you have other levels of debate, much of which had to do with debates among the epidemiologists
themselves, not over just over the issue of whether cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, but how strong a cause it was. Was
it a major problem or a minor problem relative to pollution or environmental exposure or something of this sort.
There was some epidemiologists, the majority of epidemiologists were saying that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and
it is a major cause and they of course were at the front of the bandwagon. But there were epidemiologists who were saying,
“I think cigarette smoking contributes to lung cancer but it is a minor cause relative to occupational exposure or pollution or
that sort of thing. From the early and mid fifties you have additional levels of debates that are going on. So it is more complex
if you pursue it.
Q Do we have a group, maybe we don't, that says smoking does not cause cancer, lung cancer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Who are you talking about?
Q Well here I think in your statement here I think you are talking about between 1950 and 1964, and you talk about a consensus
within the medical and scientific community, and then you say that there is reputable scientists on both sides. So we have
talked about those reputable scientists on the side that say cigarette smoking does cause lung cancer, then you talked about the
reputable scientists who say it may, but you don't have the proof so we are not going to say one way or the other. I'm asking,
is there another group of reputable scientists between '50 and '64 who are saying doesn't cause it?
A If there are, Ms. Moltzen, I don't know of any. The debate had to do with what conclusions could be drawn from the
epidemiological studies, what inferences were justifiable. I don't know of any responsible scientists who were saying that
cigarette smoking is safe. I don't know of any responsible scientists of this period who were saying that I'm not worried. Everyone
I know of is saying, “Hey, we have got something to worry about.” The question was do these new standards prove it or in fact
is this a false correlation and smoking is not guilty of the charges that have been put to it. I think they would phrase it like that.
I don't know of individuals who are saying the whole subject is baloney, cigarette smoking is safe. I'm sure you can find people
on the fringes, but I'm unaware of that view that responsible scientific community. It was more over is the statistical association
merely that or are we able to conclude cause and effect. That is a more accurate representation.
Q The Surgeon General made a statement in here that I was going to ask you about. It is on Page 32 of his report.
A I think that's right here.
Q It is. It is under cardiovascular disease, the very top section. We are not talking about lung cancer here but it is more a
statement of -- what he says here is the committee -- goes down to about the fourth line, “The committee considers it more
prudent from the public health viewpoint to assume that the established association has causative meaning than to suspend
judgment until no uncertainty remains.” Do you believe that that, from a public health viewpoint, that that is a prudent way to
look at the evidence that was out there between '50 and '64?
A If you are talking about cardiovascular disease as indeed they are talking about, I agree with that statement, believe it is a
responsible statement. Medicine differs from science because as a physician or as a public health advocate you don't not have
the luxury of waiting for all of that information. You have someone who is sick who is in front of you now and you have to
make a decision. You may not know if this drug or that drug is the best or if you need any drug at all, but the patient is ill, is
suffering, you don't have time to wait. So there are differences in the practice of medicine from science where you go off and
you do an experiment, you wait for the data to come in.
And similarly, in public health, there may be sufficient worry where it may be prudent to make a recommendation rather than
wade through all of the data. That's precisely the situation that occurred with coronary artery disease. It was ironic because the
prospective studies as you know showed that cigarette smoking was related to or in some cases causally with a range of disease,
not just lung cancer. The whole thing began with lung cancer. One of the surprises that occurred and people were surprised
is the range of illnesses that are being associated with it. Now, some of the associations were very loose statistically and had
other biological explanations. An excellent one in the Surgeon General's report is liver disease because so many people drink
and smoke. So statistical association, the small statistical association they saw had other explanations. Coronary artery disease
posed a real problem because the toll on the nation's health that appeared to be the result from coronary artery disease was much
more than for lung cancer. They began to study lung cancer, they are finding all this morbidity and mortality from coronary
artery disease. The problem was the specificity was not as great. The chances of developing coronary artery disease, if I recall
correctly, were about, it was 1.7 to 1, the nonsmoker versus the smoker for coronary artery disease versus 10 to 20 to 1 for lung
cancer. The specificity was not as high. There are other factors that we were linking played a role in coronary artery disease,
lipid levels, things of that sort.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
On the other hand, if you just calculate the number of smokers who had coronary artery disease, it was several fold the number
who developed lung cancer and that was a very disturbing finding and that led to the wording that you were pointing out over
here and in my opinion that was very responsible.
Q Is that a responsible attitude, if we get away from coronary heart disease, let's talk about another chronic disease where there
are some established associations, maybe lung cancer in the fifties. Is it still responsible to say that it is more prudent from
the public health viewpoint to assume that the established association has causative meaning than to suspend judgment until
no uncertainty remains?
A I'm not an expert in public health and in recommendations and degree of certainty that is needed so I'm really not the proper
person to give an expert response, but I'm not trying to avoid it either. And I would say a couple of things. One, is that the
degree to which you decide to act prudently is going to reflect the amount and power of the evidence, and the amount and
power of the evidence was growing year by year. There was much more evidence in 1957 than in '53 or '54. There was more
evidence in '62 than in '57. One has to be, in my judgment, very specific. At some point public health officials or physicians will
make recommendations in a state of uncertainty. But you have to have enough evidence to justify that. Then the second point
to bring out is just how fragile this whole area of public health recommendations is because should you have a mammogram or
not, should you have hormonal supplement. All of these things are coming out. You have epidemiological data suggesting one
form of behavior, then they are contradicted by another. Just extraordinary confusion among the public and among the medical
profession, the public health officials what to do. Add on to the fact that you are not -- you are talking about people's lives
and life styles. There are economic implications with certain things. To change recommendations frequently you can do ill by
having a recommendation or changing it as well as do good. It is a very difficult issue in my judgment in that the whole public
health field and recommendations that we give the public. But again, I'm speaking as a reasonably well-informed citizen, not
as an expert in public health and what recommendations to give.
Q In that same paragraph you use the word “debate.” Rather the issue of whether smoking caused disease--8
A Which paragraph are you in?
Q We are --
A Are we still on cardiovascular diseases?
Q Let's go back to your expert report.
A My expert report.
Q Page 3, paragraph starting -- the first paragraph. You talk in there about, the last sentence, “Rather the issue of whether
smoking caused disease was the subject of debate with reputable scientists on both sides.”
Do you have any opinion on whether the tobacco industry shaped that debate by using its financial and public relations resources?
A I have no information to that effect. Candidly I would be surprised, just knowing how independent scientists are, knowing
how many of the people of smokers who themselves at the start of the study then stopped smoking when they analyzed their
own data, knowing that the worse thing that can happen to a scientist is to be shown to be acting in some sort of fraudulent or
biased way. We all have our biases, but it is one thing to have a point of view, it is another thing to fabricate data, to invent data,
to suppress data. Scientists are awfully independent people. We know that people like Dr. Wynder and Dr. Graham and Dr.
Doll and Hill and Hammond are a very independent group. So I have no direct information on that, but I would be surprised.
I'm always open to learn new things, but I would be surprised.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q At Page 3, the first paragraph, and it starts with the fourth line down, “At no time between 1950 and January, 1964 -- when the
Surgeon General's advisory committee report was released -- was there a consensus within the medical and scientific community
that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, heart disease, or other life-threatening diseases.” Who makes up the medical and
scientific community in the United States?
A Well, in general all those who are qualified investigators you are talking about. Medical school faculty, people at teaching
hospitals, you are talking about in some cases people who might be private companies, pharmaceutical companies, for example,
you are talking about private as well as public research organizations, major private cancer research organizations, for example
being Memorial Sloan-Kettering, publicly the National Cancer Institute. You take the whole thing together. The faculty and
the people who are doing research and the post-doctoral fellows and so forth. It is a loose definition. So I would be inclusive,
not exclusive.
Q What do you mean by the term “consensus”?
A I'm glad you ask that. Because basically I mean textbook teaching where you have individuals of divergent backgrounds and
perspectives and temperaments and intellectual perspectives all of who agree; textbook teaching, where you have -- where there
is no debate, no serious debate on the particular issue, where it becomes textbook teaching, conventional. And again, I want to
stress among individuals from all perspectives and traditions, not just a consensus within that, epidemiologists, for example,
but being able to persuade the laboratory workers that their science is a valid one, that type of thing.
Q In December, 1963, was it textbook teaching that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, heart disease and other life-
threatening diseases?
A As I said before, this is certainly one of the most intensely investigated issues in all of bio-medicine. An enormous amount
of information is coming out, new analytical techniques are coming out, new ways to analyze the data are coming out.
Epidemiology of chronic disease is growing as a field and it could do statistical calculations, for example, in 1959 that it could
not in '56 or'52. Year by year things are changing.
What I would say if you are talking December, 1963, is that you got a near consensus. If you compare the overall sentiment
in 1963 within the medical community that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, it is stronger than it was even a few years
ago, even a few years before that. The Surgeon General, by the way, points out how even from 1959 to the appearance of the
report there was a decided change in sentiment within the scientific community. So it is not people lined up evenly in one side.
You have a growing consensus that starts with 1950 and each year becomes stronger. If you are looking at December, 1963,
most people are on board.
What I have discovered in my research acting as a responsible historian, looking at all of the information, is that you have
pockets of responsible disagreement even through 1963, disagreement that later went away, and that's why I would not say you
had a consensus in 1963. I think the most important disagreement came from laboratory scientists who were troubled by the
ambiguity of the experimental evidence and inability to have an animal model. The most vocal such groups came from the most
-- some of the most important places in American and world wide medicine. In particular the National Cancer Institute and
Memorial Sloan-Kettering. Those were not people on tobacco company's payroll. Those were people who had a different world
view. Even in '61, '62, is '63, laboratory workers from those institutions were publishing paper were worried, but in the absence
of biological data we are unwilling to conclude that there is a causal relationship. Then some of the statistical criticisms of Dr.
Fisher and Berkson were still unanswered. So those were the main pockets of doubt.
Now this is much different from 1962, '61, '60. Each year you have the growing consensus. But in my judgment it took the
Surgeon General's report to really clench things, to persuade the remaining residue of laboratory workers that this method of
analysis was valid and so forth. That's why I considered it such an important document.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q Wasn't Berkson's opinion pretty marginal?
A I would disagree with that. That's an incorrect statement. Number 1, Berkson was considered to be the most important
biostatistician in the United States, so he was very highly regarded at the time. Number 2, if you read his objections you find
that there is a great, in my opinion, a great deal of credibility to them, if you actually read them.
One of the most important articles for me in formulating my views was an article entitled “Those Who Were Wrong.” And I
forget the author of the article, but it would be in the bibliography. It this an eminent epidemiologist who actually went back
and read the statistical criticisms of Dr. Berkson and said, “You know, they really” -- and Dr. Fisher, they really make sense,
the only thing wrong with these criticisms is that scientific fact ultimately showed that they were on the wrong side, but the
logic and the power is very powerful even today. The author says in this paper, “If I had been there in the late fifties and
early sixties and read Dr. Berkson's papers I'm not sure what side of the debate I would have come down on.” And finally I
think it is important regarding Dr. Berkson that the Surgeon General's report itself addressed his objections. I believe that is
extraordinarily important both to the legitimacy of Dr. Berkson as an individual as well as in answering residual doubts, creating
a consensus and so forth. But the Surgeon General addressed his criticisms. Essentially the report said Dr. Berkson is right in his
criticisms. There are certain biases in these studies and analyses that are there, but the magnitude is much less than he claims.
So even with these biases, the conclusion that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer we believe is a valid conclusion. The fact
that the Surgeon General report addresses Dr. Berkson on those criticism in my opinion is evidence that he was a serious man
taken seriously by his contemporaries.
Q Do you know if Dr. Berkson, if any of his research was funded by the tobacco industry?
A I have no information on that one way or the other. But I don't think it would make any difference to me if it were.
(Deposition Exhibit No. 14 was marked for identification.)
Q I'm going to hand you what has been marked as Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 14. It is a report by BAT Co Scientists, visit
to United States and Canada, in April and May of 1958. And the Bates number is 105408490 to 8499. And the second page
lists many of the places that they visited including medical schools, also tobacco companies. On the third page, which is headed
up Page 2, there is an introduction, and then the second section is called “Causation of lung cancer.” These BAT Co scientists
say, “With one exception, (H.S.N. Greene,) G-R-E-E-N-E, the individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung
cancer. If by ‘causation’ we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an
indispensable link. In the United States only Berkson, apparently, is now prepared to doubt the statistical evidence and his
reasoning is nowhere thought to be sound.” Do you disagree with their opinion of Dr. Berkson?
A Yes, I do, very much. I have actually seen this document before because in a previous deposition it has been presented to me.
And aside from the usual qualifications that a responsible historian would have about any document, who wrote it and what were
the circumstances and who was it for and how was it received and what were the reactions to it and that whole litany of things
that you see about documents. The fact is that though that statement is there, it is an incorrect statement. It is wrong. Dr. Berkson
was the leading medical statistician in this country. He was widely recognized around the world for his contributions. As I
indicated before, he was so notable that there is a section in the Surgeon General's report that specifically addresses objections
that he raised and they said, “You are right, it is just that the magnitude doesn't change the results.” I have seen no one refer to
Dr. Berkson disparagingly other than in this document and I would disagree with their characterization of him.
Q Is it possible to take the word “consensus” and turn it into numbers so that you could say after January, 1964 a majority
of the scientific and medical community -- medical community agreed that cigarette smoking causes cancer, heart disease or
other life-threatening diseases?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Could you please repeat that? Probably the day but there is something --
Q I'm trying to understand if I can put the word “consensus,” which you have described in very conceptual terms, into numbers
so that if we lined up the scientific and medical community and we said only 49 percent of them believed there was a -- believed
that there was a connection, that is not a consensus. How big quantitatively do you have to get before you get a consensus?
A I'm speaking personally on that because philosophers and historians can debate these issues and they get theoretical. But I
think from a pragmatic standpoint, it is a judgment call. Like anything in history, like anything in science, just as the Surgeon
General acknowledges that conclusions about causation ultimately are judgment calls and science and scholarships and history
are making judgment calls, and I think it would be an error to try to equate it with a certain percentage of the popular vote.
Now I would say two additional things. You got to have an awfully high percentage. You are not talking 70/30, 80/20. You are
talking virtually everyone. But there are qualitative aspects that help one recognize a consensus. Do you have ongoing debate
or does the debate end. Are people who continue to advocate a certain view, is that a mainstream view or have they become
marginalized. There are qualitative aspects to that. And also it is very important to keep in mind, particularly when you are in
the 70/30, 80/20, 90/10, this is how we are going from the early fifties to mid fifties to late fifties to early sixties, each year
the number grows. You also have to look at who is on your team. It is not numbers alone but it is the intellectual stature of
the person, of the people who are speaking. If any one of us were to have Michael Jordan as a partner I will bet that team of
two would beat the rest of us combined in basketball. And I think that is one reason that these, what I'm calling residual doubt
amidst a growing majority and emerging consensus was a real one in the early sixties. Who did it come from? No one was
intellectually more important in these debates than Ronald Fisher, who is the greatest scientific mind of all and whose work
was the basis of epidemiology of chronic diseases. The fact that Fisher and other biostatisticians continued to express their
reservations was important beyond numbers. It is like giving me Michael Jordan on my team. Fisher was one of the dominant
biologists of the 20th century. The fact that the leading laboratory workers at the National Cancer Institute and NIH did not yet
accept the new paradigm that you can accept -- that you can make causal inferences from epidemiological studies. The quality
of some of this group of residual doubters counted as well. So it is not numbers alone. And you find -- if you pick and choose
selectively and just tell the story of one discovery leading to another and the growing consensus, you get one view. If you look
at the literature exhaustively and comprehensively as I do, you essentially get the same picture, but you also realize that not
everyone went along yet with the growing consensus, and these were leading responsible people that was legitimate and it took
the Surgeon General's report to get everyone on board.
Q Has the debate ended today?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Which debate?
Q You said one of the things you have to look at when you are deciding about consensus is the quality of the people; and did
the debate end?
A I think the evidence clearly points to the appearance of the 1964 Surgeon General's report and an extraordinary intellectual
contribution that it made as we talked about before, the five criteria and how one uses this information. Not the information
per se, but how you use it and draw inferences and conclusions from it. I think, Number 1, it is accurate to say that our current
consensus, that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, emerges from that. Number 2, I haven't studied things since 1964, but I
do know that the epidemiology of chronic disease emerges a new discipline from this debate and has become an important part
of biomedicine. Even if you are a laboratory worker today, you recognize that there is an alternative mode of showing causation
besides demonstrating it in an experimental way which laboratory workers of the fifties and sixties had to learn to accept. So I
don't know of anyone today, if you are talking 2002, who would say that this is not an alternative paradigm.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Now, you can find responsible scientists, we got them in my own university, who will tell their patients not to smoke, who
will talk about the hazards of cigarette smoking and both the personal and public health menace it is. When they get with their
laboratory groups in seminars and say and we still have holes in the biological evidence, we need more work. But that's a
different sort of thing. They accept the epidemiological data. I certainly accept it.
Q I believe the statement you use eventually in here is in the aftermath. I apologize if I'm quoting that wrong, but --
A You are probably quoting it correctly.
Q I want to know but -- I got it now, Page 6 of your report. The sentence, it is the second paragraph, “In 1964 the advisory
committee.” If we go down to the seventh line there is a sentence in there that starts, “Even though a consensus about causation
developed in the aftermath of the 1964 report.” I don't mean to be nitpicky, I really want to know what you mean about that
term. Give me -- what is aftermath? What are we talking about?
A I appreciate your asking it. I appreciate the tenor of the conversation we have been having all day long where we can discuss
things. It is very possible if I were writing this today I might use slightly different words. Let me just explain my views to you
which is really what you need. Number 1, I maintain that our current consensus that cigarette smoking causes lung disease and
other diseases as well, that the final step in the process that gave that consensus was the 1964 Surgeon General's report. It didn't
come out of the blue. There is a growing consensus year by year.
But this consensus, this lack of debate, this acceptance even by laboratory scientists, you know that is, Surgeon General is right,
there are other ways to prove causation, that dates the '64 Surgeon General's report we have inherited since then. That is the
first and most important point that I'm making.
The second point that I wish to make in this, and this is where things get tricky because history is messy and untidy and also it
is hard to say things in a seven page report. This has very much to do with the issue of scientific revolutions and paradigms.
In my opinion the most important contribution of the Surgeon General's report, '64, great document that that is, is not merely in
demonstrating that cigarette smoking causes lung disease and other diseases as well, but in bringing about the maturation of a
new field and acceptance of this new field by the rest of the biomedical community, epidemiology of chronic diseases, because
these same techniques have now been used to study many other problems as well and have become an important part of medical
research. In my opinion that general contribution is even greater than the specific observation that cigarette smoking causes
lung cancer, as important as that is. This gets us back to context, this gets us back to how historians think about problems, this
gets us back to scientific revolutions. Is everyone going to change their mind immediately? And the answer is probably not.
People who have studied scientific revolutions, again we go back to my paradigm bibliography, have pointed out that when
you have one world view arising to challenge or replace another, ultimately it is less that residual doubters are persuaded, it
is that they die off or retire. There is that element to it.
Consider someone who is 50 years old in 1950, an eminent laboratory worker at the top of his field, internationally renown, who
has been brought up with the old paradigm that you need laboratory confirmation, who has heard all of the arguments. Such an
individual who in December, '63, may not have bought into clinical epidemiology, might not in '64, he is set in his ways. Is such
a person irresponsible? What I'm really trying to say there, and can't do it very well in the short number of pages, is that if you
were looking at doubters, you have to look at who they were, when they spoke and how they framed it. For example, the best
example that I know of is Dr. Brownlee from the University of Chicago. By coincidence I discovered his review of the Surgeon
General's report that was published in 1965 in the Journal of American Statistical Association. This is a statistician speaking,
not a laboratory person. And he was critical of the report basically because he felt that for all of the information that has been
assembled without direct biological confirmation you cannot draw conclusions about causality. Now this is 1965. It is not 2002.
He was very cautious in his wording. He was acknowledging that he was worried about the evidence, he was not saying that
cigarette smoking is safe, but he is saying by traditional canons the case has not been proved. Scientists are independent.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
I know the Surgeon General came up with these new criteria and people are trying to say there are ways to prove things without
direct biological experimental confirmation. I just don' go along with that. And I'm unwilling to say that a person like that is
acting irresponsibly. That is really what I'm saying. Even though I would also say you got the consensus. Most people jumped
on board. The laboratory workers who in the sixties were saying you can't do it epidemiologically, they quieted down, it enters
the textbooks. I'm making that qualification that for the Brownlee type of person.
Q For the people who do decide to jump aboard though, I'm Midwestern through and through, very practical, born and bred in
Minnesota, so it just seems to me that just because I get the Surgeon General's report in the mail, when you use aftermath, you
do not necessarily mean within the next couple of days I go eureka and suddenly the consensus has -- there is a total consensus?
A That's correct. Aftermath is hard to quantify in a precise way and here I'm relying on secondary reading that I have done
rather than primary reading. But we are talking weeks, months, someone may be on vacation when the Surgeon General's report
comes out. As I discussed before in response to one of your questions, a lot of consensus building or consensus deconstruction
occurs not from the paper itself but the informal conversations, opinions of-- opinion makers, Dr. Smith the Surgeon General's
report came out, do you really believe it, do you buy into it. I do. Then the students or the other people say I might as well. We
are talking about a process that on the one hand did not occur the next day immediately but nonetheless move relatively quickly.
You find epidemiology being accepted as a discipline in medical schools, and departments being created and textbooks being
written and new organizations being formed and a lot of evidence of this sort of the acceptance of a field. You find that the
published articles that would dispute the causation hypothesis that you find from reputable people even in the '61, '62, '63, they
stop appearing, I think that's notable. So it is hard --
I think you are exactly right that it is hard to give a precise time frame to it. We are talking something pretty quickly. Of course as
you know better than I, the report led to the legislation requiring warning labels. A lot of things happening suggesting that things
had changed. Epidemiologists who lived through the period talk about how even by the mid sixties the field of epidemiology
was much more secure than it had been even a few years before. One can go on and on with these sorts of examples. But it
was pretty quick.
Q Do you have an opinion on when there was a consensus within the medical and scientific community that cigarette smoking
was linked to coronary heart disease?
A I believe from secondary sources that the Surgeon General's report was accepted as a whole so that it drew causal conclusions
about cigarette smoking and bronchitis, as far as I'm aware from secondary sources, as well as personal experience in medical
school, I'm just recalling anecdotally that was accepted that the concerns of coronary artery disease were real, so forth. I'm
unaware of anyone -- I'm not saying it didn't happen, I'm just saying I'm unaware of someone saying I accept this conclusion
of the Surgeon General's report but not that conclusion. If it happened, I'm not aware of it.
Q Are you familiar with the Frank Statement?
A Yes, I am.
Q If I use that term.
(Deposition Exhibit No. 15 was marked for identification.)
Q I'm handing you what has been marked as Ludmerer Exhibit 15. The Bates number on that one is CTR PUBLIC STMT
000010. The Frank Statement was published in what year, do you remember?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Yes, I do. That would be sometime in January of 1954.
Q The first paragraph says, “Recent reports on experiments with mice have given wide publicity to a theory that cigarette
smoking is in some way linked with lung cancer in human beings.” Do you know what experiments TIRC is talking about here?
A Yes, I do. They are referring to the Wynder Graham skin painting experiments which were published late 1953, November,
December, '53, somewhere in that ball park.
Q And then the third paragraph is, “At the same time, we feel it is in the public interest to call attention to the fact that eminent
doctors and research scientists have publicly questioned the claimed significance of these experiments.” Who were a couple of
those eminent doctors and research scientists, if you know?
A I think the best place to start would be Dr. Wynder and Graham themselves who made a point in the paper that their positive
experiments in mice was not proof that cigarette smoking in the way human beings smoke cigarettes caused lung cancer in
humans. It was obviously consistent with that claim but they themselves explicitly in the papers say their major reason for doing
it was to see if they could identify something in cigarette smoking that might be carcinogenic and then you would have a tool
for other studies. They also themselves made the claim that though consistent with the hypothesis, this is not a proof of that.
So the authors of the studies themselves are a very good place to begin.
Q Then in the next paragraph there are some points that are numbered 1, 2, 3 and 4. And number 4 says, “Statistics purporting
to link cigarette smoking with the disease could apply with equal force to any one of many other aspects of modem life.” Do
you know what other aspects of modem life are being alluded to here?
A Yes. Now, again we are looking January, 1954 so we have to put it in the context of the time. A lot of the possibilities that
would come up in the thirties and forties had already been excluded. You will remember from some of my earlier comments
that I pointed out how a typical review article of the thirties or forties might have 15 or 20 possibilities, now we are down to
a handful. The major ones were if we are talking January, '54 --
Q I believe you are right.
A Because of the appearance of this, that included occupational exposure, environmental pollution, tarring of the roads, exhaust
fumes, radiation, the whole fall-out issue. But the same type of statistical correlation between the tarring of the roads, between
the pollution of the atmosphere, between exhaust fumes occurred as it did with cigarette smoking. So it is my understanding
that those handful of associations are what were meant by that statement. By the way, that's a smaller list than of the thirties
and forties. But in the context of January, 1954, in my judgment it is a reasonable list.
Q Why is the list smaller than in the thirties and forties?
A Because there was -- because in science, evidence counts. And people are now really investigating the issue more intensely
and with more refined techniques and methodologies. The influence of pandemic of 1819 that some people thought was a
cause of lung cancer, there was no evidence to document that. Could lung cancer arise from previous infection of the lung,
you have an abscess, Tuberculosis, there was no evidence of that. When I was a medical student in the 1970's, even then I
recall hearing house officers and attending physicians speak of this phenomena that they called scar carcinoma, the idea of the
lung cancer coming out of the scar. Trauma had been ruled out. There are things that from our perspective looked silly, but
again the historian analyzes things at the time. In the thirties, it is in my bibliography, it really astounded me, there were seven,
eight, 10 papers suggesting tomato juice was the cause of lung cancer. No one had any evidence to document that. So in this
period you have 15, 20, maybe even 25 possibilities bandied about. But now people -- not only are more people investigating
the cause of lung cancer --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q When you use the word now, you mean January, 1954?
A January '54, and since 1950 it really became a hot issue. Epidemiological techniques are being refined, developed and refined,
some of these earlier ideas are not finding evidence to verify them. So the 15 to 20, 25 possible causes that you hear about in
the thirties are now narrowed down to half a dozen or so by January, 1954. We should add genetics. Genetics is not a statistical
association but 1954 the gene is identified, genetics is developing as a science. In 1954 stomach cancer was shown to have a
genetic cause. Some people thought that ultimate answer for lung cancer might be a genetic one. Of course we also should put
other. There was no guarantee at the time that any of these possibilities would ultimately be shown to be the factor. We were
down to maybe half a dozen or so if you are talking January of '54. Most of which have this type of statistical association.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record for a tape change. The time is 4:33 PM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 4:44 PM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, on Page 4 of your report --
A Of my report?
Q Your report, this is the last sentence, it is going to go on to Page 5. It says, “Between the mid 1950's and early 1960's
researchers were unable to identify any agent or combination of agents in tobacco smoke that could account for its alleged
cancer-causing activity.” Did researchers identify any kind of hazardous -- at that point many time, I'm sorry, any kind of
hazardous chemicals in tobacco smoke?
A Yes, they did.
Q What kind of chemicals?
A The most important single observation was the detection of benzoapyrene, an organic polycyclical chemical. The first
conclusive demonstration of that was 1954 that subsequently was confined many times. As I indicated confirmation and
replication were of part of the scientific process. Other polycyclics were subsequently identified and then ultimately lots of
other different types of chemicals as well. The single most important discovery I believe was the discovery of benzoapyrene in
1954. It was confined according to the Surgeon General 19 times in the intervening decade by 1964.
Q And what date was it widely concluded that the amount of benzoapyrene in tobacco smoke was simply too small to have
a cancer causing effect?
A Almost from the beginning.
Q That was again I'm sorry, did you say a --
A The first discovery was 1964 of the presence of benzoapyrene.
Q '64?
A Excuse me, '54 was the first discovery. Now when did people start noticing that you got a problem with dosage? I'm not
entirely sure when the first one was but I know as early as '56 or '57 Dr. Wynder himself discussed this problem of dosage and
this became a recurrent theme in the literature. As we sit here today I recall an article from Lancet in 1962 that discussed the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
same problem. Benzoapyrene is there and by now other known carcinogens as well. But the dose is too low to account for the
observed carcinogenic properties of cigarette smoke. This is also a thing I'm sure you are aware in Surgeon General's report
itself, in the report it calls this, a quote, puzzling anomaly. That's the Surgeon General's term, not Ludmerer's term. They would
have expected theoretically 40 times the amount of benzoapyrene than investigators were able to demonstrate if benzoapyrene
were the cause of the carcinogenic potential they were seeing in cigarette smoke. That's what the discussion was about.
Q Up to the Surgeon General's report then in 1964, had any agent or combination of agents and in tobacco smoke that could
account for its cancer causing activity, was any agent identified?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A The problem as I understand it through the Surgeon General's report was that no single agent or combination of what by
then was a large number of known agents, was sufficient to account for the carcinogenic potential. And this was troubling -- a
troubling piece of evidence. They thought it would be easy, benzoapyrene, here you have the high dosages, and that's the cause.
It led to a discussion of promoters and co-carcinogens and things of that sort. But it was largely the theoretical level. If you
look at the 1964 Surgeon General's report is dominant observation is what the Surgeon General calls a puzzling anomaly. Lots
of carcinogens demonstrated be present in cigarette smoke but such low dosages that we are unable to relate the carcinogenic
properties to those chemicals. So either there is something else that we are not -- it didn't keep them from accepting -- you don't
have to know the mechanism to know that something causes a problem. You don't have to know about vitamins to know that
citrus fruit will prevent scurvy and if you develop scurvy you can give citrus fruit. In terms of the biological reaction. It was
troubling. They thought they had identified the carcinogen but it turned out with further inquiry they really hadn't at 1964.
And I would like to volunteer this. I know in depositions witnesses should say less rather than little, but just in terms of the
theme we have been taking of words I would say differently and so forth if I proofread it a little more carefully of that sort.
Q What page should I turn to?
A Turn to Page 5. First sentence of that page, “The inability to identify this unknown agent was also considered strong evidence
against the causation hypothesis in the 1950's and the early 1960's.” Literally that's true. And I defend that but quite frankly
I would phrase it differently and talk about, say something to the effect that the inability to identify this unknown agent was
disturbing in terms of proving the causation, the hypothesis, something of that sort. There are a few places in this report as we
talked about already where words are a little more dogmatic or axiomatic than I really intend them to be, and I would like to
correct the wording of that now.
Q This is on Page 6 --
A Of my report?
Q Of your report. It is that first paragraph where you are discussing the disagreement in the statistical community. You talk
about Fisher in England and Berkson at the Mayo Clinic, and then the second to the last sentence, “These are only a few of the
many scientists at the time who questioned whether the scientific evidence of that time established that smoking caused lung
cancer.” Can you give me the names of two other scientists in addition to Berkson and Fisher who questioned that?
A Who questioned whether cigarette smoking caused lung cancer?
Q I think it is who questioned whether the scientific evidence at that time established that smoking caused lung cancer.
A Well, there are lots of such individuals. Though, as I said before, we've got a very rapid dynamic so people who may
have expressed skepticism in 1956 may have jumped on board by 1960. So there is a dynamic. By the way, American Lung
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Association, one of the major public health associations, I think it was the Lung Association, refused to accept causality in
1956. But in 1960 it did. So again you have this evolving dynamic. But in terms of the scientists themselves, in addition to Drs.
Fisher and Berkson, you got several different types of people. In my opinion the most important were the eminent laboratory
workers who just were of the world view they need laboratory confirmation. Examples would include Dr. Frank Corsfeld who
was in charge of things at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. Dr. Stanley Greenam who was charge of the private cancer institute in
Philadelphia, who would include Dr. Rod Heller who is director of the National Cancer Institute, it would include Stewart and
Shear who respectively were the most important pathologists and the most important experimental cancer researcher at the
National Cancer Institute. But laboratory types of people.
In addition to that, there were lots of people on the front lines who had yet to be persuaded. By that I'm talking pulmonary
physicians, lung surgeons and so forth who are part of a general community who ultimately came on board in terms of the final
consensus but through the sixties are continuing to write articles expressing their disbelief at the causal hypothesis. These were
all groups of people in addition to the statisticians like Berkson and Fisher.
Q Now, in that last sentence on Page 6, first paragraph,--4
A I also would like to make an important qualification in my answer to the last question in that sentence. I said it before but I
think it is so important that I would like to say it again. From 1950 with the initial retrospective studies through the Surgeon
General's report, you got one of the most dynamic rapidly changing and developing areas in all of medicine and you have what
I like to call a growing consensus or evolving consensus or emerging consensus. I am not saying that people were suspending
judgment during this period or that you have people equally lined up on both sides waiting the final dictate from the Surgeon
Generals. It wasn't like that at all. Each year more evidence is accumulated, new statistical techniques are devised, new studies
are published, there is an ongoing dialog among all investigators that was invigorating and stimulated further research.
You find year by year more and more physicians and scientists being converted to the view that cigarette smoking causes lung
cancer, and I agree with the Surgeon General's characterization in his report that even from the '59 public health statement
through '64 there was an additional turn of sentiment and more people from the scientific community who came on board. What
I'm saying is that you didn't yet have that full consensus and that you had responsible people even in the sixties who had not
yet come on board. I'm not trying to suggest the suspension of belief or people lining up on both sides or anything of that sort.
I don't wish my views to be misinterpreted.
Q Page 6, second paragraph, “These areas of disagreement continued in scientific circles up through and even beyond the
Surgeon General's advisory committee report of 1964.” Now, am I right to assume that you did not read primary literature
after January of 1964?
A That is correct.
Q So this opinion is based more on secondary literature?
A Well, it is based on -- actually that opinion comes from primary sources that I found. I didn't systematically review, but you
read something, you look at the bibliography and the references and that leads you to other things. And what I found were things
such as Professor Brownlee's negative review of the Surgeon General's report that appeared in the Journal of the American
Statistical Association in 1965. I would call that a primary source. And I use that in the context we said before. I'm not saying
there wasn't a consensus. I'm not saying that the public debate didn't quiet down. But am I willing to say that someone who
may not have gone along with the Surgeon General's report, particularly someone later in their career, particularly someone
who had a different paradigm, am I willing to speak in a derogatory fashion about that person? I'm not. That's what I'm really
trying to say here.
Q All I'm trying to figure out is how far your actual literature review went. For instance, that article you mentioned just now --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A That was 1965.
Q That was probably the last piece of primary literature that you read?
A That's correct.
Q Will I find that in one of the bibliographies?
A Yes. And I found that by accident. By accident I mean you read an article, including secondary sources, I look at the sources,
so I found that and I couldn't tell you where offhand, but this worked out 13, 14, 15 years ago, but I found it in a bibliography
of a secondary source and I went and looked at the original.
Q Are there many other articles between January of 1964 and January, 1965, that you have reviewed included in your references
and are part of your opinions?
A Not many. That may even be the only one. It is notable because it illustrates so many important points. But I did stop my
primary study of the literature with January, 1964. It was serendipity that I learned of the Brownlee. It taught me a lot but I did
not systematically go beyond 1964, I'm not testifying beyond 1964.
Q This is on Page 6 and it is that second paragraph. Several questions about terminology so I will just jump in. It is that paragraph
that starts, “In 1964 the advisory committee made the judgment,” then ends with, “embraced the report.” That's about three
sentences. Again you are talking about the consensus. Again I just want to make sure we are still talking about the consensus
among the scientific and medical community, correct?
A That's correct. And again, on this question of wording and tone, the real point that I am making has to do with this issue of
legitimate disagreement, paradigm shift, scientific revolution, to get the 100 percent of people on board rather than the 98 or
99 percent. The last one or two percent usually has to die off or retire as opposed to being persuaded. It doesn't mean they are
being dishonest or acting in an unethical fashion or some sort. There are people like Dr. Brownlee who had a different paradigm
could not accept the new paradigm. That's really a point that I'm making. I am maintaining that our consensus came with the
Surgeon General's report. I'm not moving that back.
Q Is it true, though, that the consensus was growing ever since, during the fifties and the early sixties?
A Well, as I have been attempting to say all day, we got a watershed, that's Dr. Doll's tern, in 1950, and from that point forward
the scientific community was very worried that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. Now, there is a lot of disbelief initially
and even the authors of the retrospective studies were very careful and would not conclude cause and effect relationship. That
really changes in the mid fifties as you know with prospective studies. As I have been saying all day, this is a dynamic.
There was a substantial body of information available to the Surgeon General in 1964 that his predecessor, Dr. Burney, didn't
have in 1959. New work is continuing to be done. New methods are continuing to be developed and applied. New proofs are
continuing to be demonstrated. So every year you find the scientific community more concerned. And I have been using the
term growing consensus, evolving consensus, to describe the phenomena that the Surgeon General describes it. Even from '59 to
'64 there was a decided term sentiment in the scientific community with even more people accepting the causation hypothesis.
So it is a very rapid dynamic. Each year in response to evidence and argument more and more people are jumping on board, and
that continues through the Surgeon General's report which is the terminal event in this chain that goes back for a considerable
period of time.
Q A couple other terms you have used throughout the day are retroactive and prospective.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
A Retrospective.
Q Retrospective and prospective studies. Can you for a layman just define what those are?
A Yes. Retrospective means looking backwards. Prospective means looking forward. The retrospective clinical studies, typically
you would get some patients with lung cancer and then do chart reviews and try to get a control group that is as close to the
patient, group of patients as you have and control for as many variables that you think of to see what factors might be different
between those who develop lung cancer and healthy population that did not. Initial epidemiological studies that were published,
they continue to be published, but beginning in 1950, were retrospective studies.
Prospective studies means going forward. The prospective studies began being published in the 1950's. They were continued
beyond that time. They didn't stop then. They began in the fifties and continued. There you have a large population of patients,
you divided them between those who smoked and those who didn't smoke, and you followed forward over time with what
happened to them. For various technical and mathematical reasons the intellectual power of the prospective studies is much
greater than those of retrospective studies, so they were very instrumental in changing opinion on this issue.
Q Do you know what the public position of the tobacco industry about causation was when the Surgeon General's report was
released?
A No, I don't. I have not studied the tobacco industries position on these issues at all. It is out of my area and I haven't studied
it and have no intention to do so. That's a different expert, you can ask him about that.
Q We are near the end of Page 6, that second paragraph, and I'm going to read whole section because if I just read the sentence
I have a question about it is out of context. “Merely because a consensus had developed does not mean that people cannot
legitimately disagree. Many of the dissenting scientists disagreed with the judgment of the 1964 report because they did not
accept that epidemiology could prove causality. They held out for a higher standard of proof, one requiring experimental proof
of causation.” It is a general question about the term higher standard of proof. What are the various levels of scientific proof?
A Well, that depends on what your world view is. Again, you are dealing with basic theoretical and philosophical issues. The
traditional standard of proof has been the experimental model. So if I want to demonstrate that lack of insulin causes diabetes, I
have to get people or dogs and take out the pancreas and show that it produces diabetes. Then even better if I give them insulin,
they do well. An experimental demonstration.
In the area of toxicology, and pharmacology which is fairly closely related to cancer, if you are talking about an agent that causes
disease, this was a traditional standard, if you got a poison you have to be able to show with animals that it is a poison. Humans,
you can do it with humans too, although that is not ethical in most cases. This laboratory demonstration and an experiment that
arsenic makes you sick or that an overdose of a certain medication makes you sick, this was the traditional method of showing
causation that dominated medicines from the dawn of the modem era with anatomy, vesalius (ph) and so forth. It was also the
dominant paradigm in old infectious disease, epidemiology and public health, where you -- the so-called true separate form of
epidemiology because you would use coax postulates. If you got -- if someone were ill with an infection you can culture the
organism and show that it is there. So this laboratory model applied to infection in the epidemiology of infectious diseases as
opposed to -- as well. Now chronic disease has come along in the middle of the century and started receiving the focus after
World War II. And the problem that medical science faced was that the tools of the infections disease epidemiology or the old
epidemiology as a generalization were not suitable, were not powerful enough to show cause and effect for cancer and other
chronic diseases, and the laboratory people were having a hard time too because cancer was a tough nut to crack. Keep in
mind the context of the time. We are talking forties and fifties. We are not talking electron microscopes and inframerics and
geno projects. We are talking test tubes and beakers. And in fact DNA wasn't even identified structurally until '53 or '54. So
the experimentalists were not having the same -- any more luck with chronic diseases either. But the traditional standard of
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
proof that applied both for causation did involve this ability to show in an experimental fashion that this agent causes disease.
You could do it with infections, coax postulates. You could do it in a laboratory by giving an animal a toxin. And that was
unsuccessful with lung cancer and other chronic diseases as well.
So as a result, we have the creation of a new discipline, the epidemiology of chronic diseases. One of the authors that I cite in my
bibliography calls this the second epidemiological revolution. Infectious disease epidemiology being the first. You start doing
not only retrospective studies but very well designed retrospective studies in terms of patient selection and randomization and
controls and variables that you look at. And even more important development is the development of the prospective studies
and not only their conduct but the statistical analysis that is done and what use of the data that you make, and then how one
can make inferences about causality in the absence of direct experimental proof. This was the great contribution of the Surgeon
General's report in my opinion with this five criteria for causality, some of which was statistical. Coherence was important.
The fact that the biological evidence was consistent with the hypothesis strengthened the epidemiological evidence; and many
people, including Dr. Wynder, considered coherence to most important of the five criteria.
A new discipline is created which allows medical science to draw conclusions about causality even in the absence of direct
experimental proof. It is inferential. There is more uncertainty. We will still draw conclusions. And that's what happened. You
have a new world view arising to co-exist with the whole view. You have the development of the epidemiology of chronic
diseases as a new field in biomedicine. It is spread in medical schools and teaching and training programs and so forth. It is a
respected discipline today. This is the period that it is being created.
These are the concepts that I'm referring to here, how people, particularly the older generation who have grown up with
traditional paradigm, that you need experimental evidence. Some of them were reluctant to accept the new paradigm that even
without direct experimental data you could draw conclusions about causality. What happens over the 1950 to 1964 period is
that even most of the laboratory workers were converted to the new view. Even most of the statisticians were converted to the
new view. And the remaining few might have been 60, 65, 70 years old in 1964 who still may have been responsibly skeptical,
retired and died. And the use of words depends on the context. If you were talking the views of traditional laboratory workers
in the 1950's and 1960's, they would say you need a higher standard of proof, you need an experimental documentation and
verification.
If I were writing this today very candidly I would attempt not to be provocative. I would say they held out for the traditional
standard of proof. As I sit here today I prefer that word to a higher standard of proof. The fact that it is different doesn't mean
it is higher. But you have a new standard and I would change that word if we were -- if I were editing it today.
Q You mentioned a couple of times the second epidemiological revolution. What was the time period of the first epidemiological
revolution?
A Well in general people they are talking about epidemiology for infectious diseases so you are going back to the 18th,
19th century, particularly late 19th century after development of bacteriology and germ theory of disease because now
epidemiologists can really track infections diseases with contacts and culture and so forth. Probably late 19th century would
be a good time to look at that aspect of it.
Then you got the mid 20th century and infectious diseases certainly don't go away but they are less important in terms of the toll
they are taking on Western society. You got these chronic diseases. The intellectual tools of infectious disease epidemiology
were unsatisfactory and incapable of solving the problems of chronic diseases, so a new field was created. As I said before,
in my judgment that's the most important and most exciting consequence of this investigation into lung cancer. To show that
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases is a heck of an important contribution. I'm even equally if not more
impressed by a new field that can be applied to other problems, high blood pressure, cholesterol, etc.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
Q I'm going to give you an example of a study that -- and I don't have a medical background so I apologize if I'm using the
wrong terminology -- but it is one I have seen a lot and I find real interesting. I believe it is a map of London, I believe we are
in the 18th or 19th century, I believe it is map of all of the wells in a certain area of London that had a high cholera epidemic,
and it shows -- let's say there is eight wells, a series of dots where people have gotten cholera. Whoever did this study realized
they were centered around one particular well; closed down the well, the cholera epidemic went down drastically.
A That was Dr. Snow.
Q Is that an epidemiological study or an experimental, or are there some other divisions that we haven't been talking about today?
A You know, I believe in simplicity, especially late in the day. I call that an outstanding and extraordinarily important
epidemiological study. The infectious disease epidemiology wasn't fully matured yet because this is before the germ theory of
disease so he wasn't able to culture the organism as later epidemiologists might have been able to do.
The concept that I think is relevant here is that chronic diseases behave differently from acute diseases, and particularly
infectious diseases, that's why the type of diagram that Dr. Snow successfully did for cholera didn't work in lung cancer. In the
world view of all scientists, including epidemiologists in the mid century, you are custom of thinking of a single cause. Now we
think of relative risk. That's one of the contributions of the new epidemiology. And the concept of disease causation that was
traditionally accepted, if something causes a disease it happens right away or within a reasonably measurable period of time.
These are among the reasons why initially there was so much skepticism towards cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer.
It didn't fit the paradigm of the day. If it really is cigarette smoking, why is it that people who start smoking don't get lung
cancer. The concept of a latency, of latency, the concept of a lag period had yet to be developed. It was developed, but it had
yet to be developed, at least as skepticism. Another way that the chronic -- that the tools of the earlier year were not satisfactory
for the problems of chronic disease is the fact that -- with acute illnesses in general everyone gets sick. If you have never had
measles and you are exposed to someone with measles, you get it. If you are exposed to someone with venereal disease you will
probably get it. You contract it. If you fall off the fourth floor of a building you are probably going to hurt yourself. If you take
this toxin or that poison, you are going to get sick. The only question is what the dosage is. Everything happens immediately.
The latency period, the lag period were puzzling and mysterious to the people of the mid century who had grown up on the
traditional acute disease model. In addition, the fact that with acute diseases you were at great risk. With lung cancer you were
at little risk. This was disturbing to people at the time in terms of initial acceptance.
There were 18,000 -- in 1930 there were approximately 3,000 deaths from lung cancer. In 1950 there were approximately 18,000
deaths from lung cancer. Even with the 1950 figures, I don't know if there are 50 million smokers in the U.S., but roughly three
or four smokers out of 10,000 developed lung cancer and died from it. That did not make sense with the traditional view where
if you are exposed to a toxin it is going to cause it. So all of these things had to be worked out and were worked out.
And the second revolution in epidemiology was central to developing these concepts. But those concepts didn't exist at the time.
We know them now, it makes sense to us now, but they all had to be figured out and demonstrated and proved and argued and
this sort of thing and that was the fifties and sixties.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record. The time is 5:22 PM.
(The deposition stood in recess at 5:22 p.m. to reconvene on August 8, 2002, at 8:30 a.m.)
AUGUST 8, 2002 - VOLUME II OF KENNETH LUDMERER
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Today's date is August 8, 2002. The time is 8:42 AM. This is the continuation of the deposition of
Kenneth Ludmerer. Please proceed.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428170...
MS. MOLTZEN: I would like all of us to introduce ourselves for this tape this morning too
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76
