In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Original Image of 2000 WL 35717504 (PDF)
2000 WL 35717504 (W.Va.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of West Virginia.
Ohio County
In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases).
No. 00-C-6000.
October 25, 2000.
Deposition of Lacy K. Ford
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Ohio County, West Virginia
Name of Expert: Lacy K. Ford, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances of Counsel.
Appearing on behalf of the Plaintiffs: Jerry Hudson Evans, Esquire
Ness, Motley, Loadholt, Richardson & Poole
28 Bridgeside Boulevard
Mt. Pleasant, South Carolina 29465
(843) 216-9000
E-Mail: Jevans@nmlep.com -and- Scott. Long, Esquire (Via Telephone)
Hendrickson & Long
214 Capitol Street
Charleston, West Virginia 25301.
Appearing on behalf of Defendant Lorillard Tobacco Company: J. Willliam Newbold, Esquire
Thompson Coburn
One Mercantile Center
St. Louis, Missouri 63101
(314) 552-6000
E-Mail: Wnewbold@thompsoncoburn.com -and- Paul V. Morrison, II, Esquire
Farrell, Farrell & Farrell, L.C.
914 Fifth Avenue
Suite 300
Huntington, West Virginia 25772-6457
(304) 522-9100
E-Mail: Pvm@farrel13.com.
Appearing on behalf of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Anchor Tobacco Company: Marilyn R. Forbes, Attorney At
Law
Wonible Carlyle Sandridge & Rice 150 Fayetteville Street Mall
Suite 2100
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Raleigh, North Carolina 27602
(919) 755-2122
E-Mail: Mforbes@west.com -and- Edward C. Schmidt, Esquire
Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
500 Grant Street
31st Floor
Pittsburg, Pennsylvania 15219
(412) 391-3939 E-Mail: Ecschmid@jonesday.com -and- Corey Polumbo, Esquire (Via Telephone)
Bowles, Rice, McDavid, Graff Love
600 Quarrier Street
Charleston, West Virginia 25325-1386.
Appearing on behalf of Philip Morris Companies, Inc., and Philip Morris Incorporated: David B. Thomas, Esquire
Allen Guthrie & McHugh
1300 Bank One Center
Charleston, West Virginia 25333
(304) 345-7250
E-Mail: Dbthomas@kagwy.com -and- Christopher J. Michie, Esquire
Dechert Price & Rhoads
Princeton Pike Corporate Center
P.O. Box 5218
Princeton, New Jersey 08543-5218
(609) 620-3225.
Appearing on behalf of the Defendant Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation: W. Henry Jernigan, Jr., Esquire (Via
Telephone)
Jackson & Kelly, PLLC
1600 Laidley Tower
P.O. Box 553
Charleston, West Virginia 25322
(304) 340-1214 - and - Mary Jo Middelhoff, Attorney At Law (Via Telephone)
Dinsmore & Shohl
1900 Chemed Center
255 East Fifth Street
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(513) 977-8622
E-Mail: Middelho@dinslaw.com.
Also Present: Eugene Frazier, Paralegal
Ness, Motley, Loadholt, Richardson & Poole.
1201 West Peachtree Street, Suite 3500
Atlanta, Georgia
Wanda L. Robinson, CRR, CCR No. B-1973
LACY K. FORD, having been first duly sworn, Was examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
BY-MR.EVANS:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Ford. We've met before. Let me introduce myself. I'm Jerry Evans from Ness, Motley. In Charleston,
South Carolina.
A. Good morning, Mr. Evans.
Q. We have met before. I've actually taken your deposition before, and, as you'll recall, I'm going to be asking you questions.
If yo don't understand my question, please let me know. I'll be glad to clarify. If you need to take a break at all, please let me
know and we'll be glad to accommodate you.
Are you feeling in good health this morning as we sit here?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Under any impairments at all that might affect your ability to testify?
A. No.
Q. Dr. Ford, the plaintiffs in this case were provided with a copy of your CV and I would like to mark that, ask the court
reporter to mark that as
MR. NEWBOLD: Mr. Evans -- my name is Bill Newbold. I represent Lorillard Company I have with me today a curriculum
vitae for Dr. Ford, which I believe may by more up to date than the one you have in your hand and is in response to your
deposition notice.
MS. FORBES: They may be the same.
A. Mr. Evans, they may be identical as well, Mr. Evans. I'm not sure I've updated since you got that copy or not.
MR. EVANS: If you will indulge me for a moment just to compare these two documents.
I'm going to ask the court reporter to mark the curriculum vitae that counsel for defense has just handed me as Exhibit No. 1.
(WHEREUPON, Exhibit-1 was marked for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, I'm going to ask you just to look at that a moment and confirm this is a current up-to-date curriculum
vitae?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. I notice under award and fellowships, which is listed on Page 2, it says National Endowment for the Humanities Research
Fellowship 2000, 2001.
Can you tell me what that research fellowship involves?
A. Yes, I can. It's a research fellowship from the national endowment for the humanities in their research scholar category. It's
a grant from them that allows me to pursue research, my scholarship this year and it funds that. Well, it awarded me $30,000
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
of funding and with them I'm able to be on research leave from the university in order to work on my current scholarly project,
which is a book I've been working on for a while.
Q. Was this fellowship grant tied to a particular topic, particular subject matter?
A. Yes. I had to present a research proposal and outline in some detail the project I was working on, yes.
Q. Is that a book you're currently working on?
A. It's a manuscript in progress, under book contract, to be precise. I wish I could say it was a book but at this point it's not a book.
Q. Does it have a title yet?
A. It has a working title. It's called Making Southern Conservatism: Political Thought in the Jacksonian South.
Q. I believe -- I'm sorry.
A. That's the tentative title.
Q. I believe you have that listed under books as a work in progress?
A. That's right.
Q. So that is the same work you're talking about?
A. Yes, that is.
Q. So as I understand it, you are not teaching classes at the University of South Carolina this semester; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. When did you most recently teach classes?
A. I taught in summer session, summer session one, at USC. That ended in early July.
Q. What classes did you teach?
A. I taught two sections of South Carolina history class. The precise number is History J640.
Q. Were you also teaching in the spring semester of the last school year?
A. Yes, I was.
Q. And what class or classes were you teaching there?
A. I taught history 410, which is South Carolina History Since 1865 and History 403, which is the United States from 1828
to 1860.
Q. Does the class in South Carolina History Since 1865 go up to the present day?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Yes, it does.
Q. In any of your teaching, do you cover the topic of tobacco and health in any way?
A. Yes. In my teaching, certainly in some of the classes I teach tobacco is a major part of the story, or significant part of the
story would be a better characterization of it, and certainly when I teach the South Carolina Since 1865 course there's generally
some brief discussion of tobacco, which was a significant crash crop in South Carolina in the 1950's and '60s, and remains so
to the present, to a much lesser extent, and of course the impact and the number of things it had on that as a crop, including
the issues related to tobacco and health.
Now, to give you the full context of this, that's a very small portion of that course. But it does come up in that course.
Q. About how much of the class time would be spent discussing issues of tobacco?
A. Issues of tobacco as a whole might run as much as the equivalent of one whole class period. It wouldn't be one whole class
period but it might run the equivalent, and issues of tobacco and health would be much less -- would be less than one class
period. Less than half of one class period, to be sure.
Q, And how many class periods in a semester course?
A. Fourteen -- we have 14 weeks. If it's Monday, Wednesday, Friday class, it's 42 class periods of 58 minutes, and 28 Tuesday,
Thursday, class periods of 75 minutes.
Q. Can you give me a specific example of the topics you would cover that relate to tobacco and health in your classes?
MR. NEWBOLD: I object to the form of the question. Your earlier question was limited to tobacco, I believe.
MS. FORBES: And I assume for purposes of this deposition, Jerry, that an objection for one stands as an objection for all
defendants?
MR. EVANS: That's fine.
If the court reporter could repeat the question.
(The record was read by the reporter.
A. The context for that would probably be in talking about South Carolina Since 1950 and some of the forces that have changed
the state in that period. One of the things we talk about is the -- really, the decline of tobacco growing is a factor in South
Carolina; and in that context, when we're talking about some of the reasons for that decline and really the change of the economy
totally, I certainly point out that the -- that lead me into some probably fairly brief discussion of the cigarette smoking and
health issue in relation to that.
Q. What is your discussion of the cigarette and health issue? How is that tied to the tobacco production?
A. In some ways it's probably -- in the way that teaching works, it's simply tied to it as a way of introducing the subject as
you move from one subject to the other.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Also, certainly as fewer Americans have smoked from 1950 -- smaller, a lower percentage of Americans have smoked from
1950 down to the present, certainly that means that the quantity of tobacco purchased or the demand for tobacco really has not
made it possible for all of the farmers in South Carolina who used to grow it.
So that's one way it's tied to it, but than certainly usually lead to some certainly brief discussion of tobacco and health generally.
Also, to be just a little more inclusive, it also comes up probably briefly in my survey class. We talk about the introduction of
tobacco as a cash crop in Virginia and Maryland, and I usually talk a little bit about King James, his position on tobacco and
link that up with some of the present-day issues of smoking and health.
Again, fairly briefly but in a way that historians do to try- to link something in the past to something that students today are
probably more interested in, more aware of, and to try to show some relevance.
So those would be the ways it's done.
Q. How would you link the comments of King James -- I believe you said?
A. Yes.
Q. -- and tobacco with current discussion of tobacco and health?
A. Well, one of the things that I've done is balked about how King James' comments about the health hazard of smoking were
paraphrased in the surgeon general's report and used in the school texts in the 20th Century, sometimes appear in newspaper
articles, and just -- as I use it in that class as opposed to I might use it in a different context. It's just to show people that history
is an ongoing process, it has a continuing relevance, and teaching freshmen that you can never be -- you know, things may have
-- that seem to sometimes college freshman to be ancient history or not as relevant may have more impact on the world in which
they live in some ways and they would have thought it of more relevance.
Q. You said you might talk about issues of tobacco and health when talking about the level of tobacco production. Have I
characterized that correctly?
A. To be precise, I think it's probably the number of -- either the number of farms in South Carolina or the total percentage of
agricultural output that tobacco accounts for, one of those two things.
Q. Have you done any studies to link information on smoking and health and its effect on the total number of farms in. South
Carolina?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you done any studies to link a decline in the number of -- let me back up, rephrase that.
Q. Have you done any studies to link the decline in smoking levels among the population, which I believe you referred to
earlier, with information on smoking and health?
A. Well, yes, I think the research that I did for this case and for the testimony that I give generally is related in a general way to
that phenomenon. And so I think my research certainly does show a relationship between those phenomenon, yes. I wouldn't say
that that's completely explanatory of that phenomenon, but it's certainly a factor, and it's something that I've seen in my research.
To the extent that that information came out in public documents, I've paid attention to it, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. And do you use any of the research you've done for this case or for any of your litigation work in your classroom teaching?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. Mr. Evans, I want to give you as accurate an answer as I can. Frankly, when I'm standing up there teaching, a lot of times I'm
drawing on things that I know and I'm not thinking to compartmentalize exactly where they came from. But I would say yes in
a very small way. For example, the point about King James and the recurrence of quotations from King James is something I
have used in the classroom that did grow out of research that I've done for tobacco litigation.
I wouldn't want to represent to you that that -- that there is a large quantity of material that falls into that category, but, yes,
there is some certainly.
Q. I'd like you to take just a look at the list of publications books, articles and essays listed on your CV, and ask you if you can
identify any publication on this list that addresses the topic of tobacco.
A. Well, yes, and to -- certainly to some degree, even a small degree, yes.
There is in my book Origins of Southern Radicalism: South Carolina UpCountry 1800-1860, a paragraph or two about South
Carolina's failed attempt to become a tobacco growing region in the 1790's.
Q. And I'll let you continue on the list, but as far as this book, Origins of Southern Radicalism, did that paragraph or two touch
on issues of tobacco and health in any way?
A. No, it did not.
In looking further down the list, I believe we're into -- no. We're still on articles and essays. The essay entitled “Toward a
Divided Union”, which appeared in Reviews in American History.
It's about the middle of Page 4 if you're looking for it.
Q. I see it. Thank you.
A. That's an essay review of two books. One of those two books was a book about Orange County, North Carolina, and that
was -- that area was where the Deak family lived. Some portion of that book is devoted to the early origins of plug tobacco and
cigarettes in North Carolina and some few comments of mine about that book probably address that issue.
Q. I'm sorry, this was a review of a book rather than a book you wrote; is that correct?
A. That's correct. It's in my syllabus under Articles and Essays, because it was an essay review. That means -- and from an
historian standpoint it's more than the sort of 1,000 word or less book reviews that we normally write and it has a title and it's
called “Toward a Divided Union.”
Q. In the review that you wrote, did you add the reference to tobacco that --
A. Yes, I did add those issues briefly in that review.
Q. In that review, did you touch at all on the issues of tobacco and health?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. I think in the briefest sense, that coffin nails is probably mentioned as an expression in that review. Touch, just briefest touch.
Q. Can you give me the context of where you touched on coffin nails?
A. I would have to go back and look at it. I remember that phrase, and that's about all from hat.
If you move down to the book review section, about the middle of Page 6, Unification of a Slave State -- “Review of Rachel
Klein” -- the title of the book is Unification of a Slave State: The Rise of the Planter Class in the South Carolina Backcountry
1760-1808.
Q. Again, what was the context of the reference?
A. The context of that -- that book also covers somewhat more extensively than my paragraph South Carolina's effort to become
a tobacco growing state in the 1790's and there may be -- I don't recall for sure, that book review was written years ago now
almost. I may have said something about that. Again, it would have been directed at the production of tobacco as opposed to
tobacco and health.
Those are the items that I see in looking over.
Q. Thank you.
Well, let me ask one more question. In the book you're working on, The Making of Southern Conservatism, do you envision
there will be any discussion at all of tobacco?
A. There may be a brief discussion of tobacco growing in Kentucky but it would be quite brief.
Q. And do you envision that it would touch on tobacco and health in any way?
A. I do not envision that it would.
Q. Dr. Ford, have you brought any documents with you to the deposition today?
MR. NEWBOLD: We brought the following documents, which I'll hand across the table to you, in response to your deposition
notice.
MR. EVANS: Thank you.
I should mention, of course, earlier, Dr. Ford, I was handed an updated copy of your CV.
MS. FORBES: And also, Jerry, for completeness of the record, we've also given you before we started you the reliance list,
which is in response to your request today.
MR. EVANS: Yes, thank you.
A. Is there a question pending for me to answer?
MR. NEWBOLD: I answered it for you. He asked whether or not you brought any documents, and I have responded you have,
and I have massed the documents across the table.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
(By Mr. Evans) What I'm now going to do, Dr. Ford, is hand these documents to you and ask on the record to describe the three
or four -- three documents that have just been provided to me.
A. Well, even though there are three paper clips, I think there may be only two types of documents here.
One, which are photocopies off of note pad, are my notes that I have taken for this case. They are essentially notes I have taken
from depositions of the named plaintiffs or other -- the witnesses who gave deposition testimony that might relate to my area
of testimony, and these are my brief notes that I've taken from those depositions.
I haven't counted the pages but that's what both of those two are.
And these pages are my billing record for this case. And the CV you already have.
(Discussion ensued off the record.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, what is your understanding of the nature of this case that you're testifying in today?
A. Well, my understanding of it obviously is a lay or nonexpert understanding of the overall case. It's been described to me
as a medical monitoring case, where the plaintiffs are asking for medical monitoring for testing and certain procedures to be
conducted in an attempt to ascertain diseases that are attributed by the medical community to smoking.
Q. Have you seen the complaint filed in this case?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Have you seen any other legal pleadings in connection with this case?
A. In addition to the depositions I've read, there was -- I saw plaintiffs' answers to some interrogatories. That's the only other
legal type document that I have seen related to this case.
Q. You mentioned reviewing some depositions. Can you recall which depositions you saw?
A. Yes. Well, they're the ones I have provided you the notes. Certainly two maned plaintiffs, May Sibo and Christa Blankenship.
I may not off the top of my head get the name of all the others. Carolyn Sibo, who was the daughter-in-law of May Sibo; Linda
Light, who was a relative of Christa Blankenship.
MS. FORBES: Actually, Jerry, on Page 79 of the reliance list, we put the list of the depositions that Dr. Ford has been through.
MR. EVANS: Thank you.
MS. FORBES: The very back.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, let me just quickly confirm this list, that you did in fact see these depositions.
Do you recall seeing the deposition of Paul F. King?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And who was he?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Paul F. King was an education -- sort of health education official in the State of Tennessee.
Q. Do you recall seeing the deposition of J. Dean Lee?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And who was he?
A. Again, off the top of my head, I can't identify those people with great specificity, but he was another person who I would
generally rally recall as part of the public health and education community in Tennessee.
MR. NEWBOLD: May I see that just for a second.
A. Excuse me. West Virginia. Sorry. I meant to say West Virginia, not Tennessee.
Q. Your reference to Mr. King also, did you mean to say West Virginia?
A. I did.
Q. I'm just, again, I'm just asking you basically what you recall about the identity of these people.
Do you recall seeing the deposition of Daniel Christy?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And who was he?
A. Again, he was another, I believe, state official in West Virginia. He was in health and health education field.
Q. Do you recall seeing the deposition of Linda Kay Light?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And who is she?
A. She was a relative of Christa Blankenship.
Q. Do you recall seeing the deposition of Trula J. Raynes?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And who was she?
A. Again, she was a friend or relative of one of the named plaintiffs. I would have to probably check my notes to see exactly.
Q. David Light, do you recall his deposition?
A. Yes, I do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Who is he?
A. Friend or relative of Christa Blankenship.
Q. Carolyn Sibo?
A. Carolyn Sibo, I believe, was the daughter-in-law of May Sibo.
Q. Amy Beth Klein?
A. She, again, was a relative, I believe, of May Sibo
Q. Donna Faye Justice?
A. Again, a friend or relative of one of the two named plaintiffs.
Q. And Basil Clark Klein?
A. Again, a relative, I believe, of May Sibo.
Q. Have you reviewed -- first of all, is that a complete list of the depositions you reviewed in this case?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Have you reviewed the expert reports of any of the defendants experts other than yourself?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you reviewed the expert reports of any of the plaintiffs' experts?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Returning to the depositions of the two named plaintiffs, May Sebo and Christa Blankenship -- if you'd like to refer to your
notes at any time in this, please do.
A. I would like to do that if you're going to ask me questions, because I rely on those notes rather than memory for information
about this.
Q. Can you tell me in general what, if any, information you gained from reading these depositions as information you're relying
on for your opinions?
A. I think there's probably a two-part answer to that question, and one is that, yes, there is information in these depositions that,
taken in conjunction with all the other research I've done, I think certainly tends to confirm my conclusions.
It's naturally just a very, very small part and it's not that influential, but I think you do see in these depositions some material
that confirms my testimony.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Probably my -- the other way in which this deposition testimony is useful to me in reaching my opinions for this is it does,
as you follow, learn something about the lives of the named plaintiffs and the communities in which they live, they lived in.
It suggests to me sources that I might review to discover what information about cigarette smoking and health, about what
matters were common knowledge in those communities, and that is probably a larger contribution to my testimony that comes
from these depositions, but it's just to sort of head me in a certain direction and then it's the material that I collect that serves
as the foundation for my opinions.
Q. What sources of information did you go to as a result of your reading of these depositions?
A. I believe in looking at these, for example, hat I looked at the Williamson Daily News and Welsh Daily News as a result of
May Sebo's deposition. Certainly to some extent looked at the Charleston Daily Mail. These are all West Virginia newspapers,
for the record. As a result of the Christa Blankenship deposition, probably re-reviewed some Good Housekeeping material as
a result of that deposition as well.
Also, as a result of reading these depositions I've looked at some -- it wouldn't be solely as a result of reading these depositions
but partially as a result of reading it -- I looked at some labor union publications' that were circulated in the state of West
Virginia during the lifetime of these two plaintiffs and other
Q. Is that because you learned that they had been exposed to these labor publications?
A. I think that what I learned from the depositions is that family members were also union members.
MR. EVANS: To clarify the record, I'm going to ask the court reporter to mark this as an exhibit, as a single exhibit.
(WHEREUPON, Exhibit-2 was marked for identification.)
MR. NEWBOLD: For the record, can we get the number of pages in that exhibit?
MR. EVANS: I've asked the court reporter to mark as Exhibit No. 2, 13 photocopies of handwritten notes that Dr. Ford has
previously described.
MR. NEWBOLD: Two exhibits, one for each plaintiff or
MR. EVANS: I marked them as one single exhibit.
MR. NEWBOLD: One single exhibit which contains his notes for May Sebo and Christa Blankenship?
MR. EVANS: That's correct.
MR. NEWBOLD: Containing in total 13 pages?
MR. EVANS: That's correct. Thank you.
I'd like the court reporter next to mark the disclosure statement we've been provided in this case, and this will be Exhibit No. 3.
(WHEREUPON, Exhibit-3 was marked for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, I've asked the court reporter to mark as Exhibit No. 3 a document entitled Expert Witness Disclosure
of Lacy K. Ford and I'd like you to look at that and confirm this is the expert disclosure you've provided in this case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Did you draft this document?
A. This document, I believe, was drafted by defense counsel. I was given an opportunity to read it and to suggest any changes
or alterations in it, and after having done so, it was revised by defense counsel.
Q. Do you know who in particular drafted it?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you know what law firm?
A. Well, the Womble law firm and Marilyn Forbes, who is at the table today, is certainly my contact in dealing with this
disclosure. At least that's the best of my recollection.
Q. You said you had an opportunity to make edits. Do you recall making any edits to the first draft you were presented?
A. It is my recollection that I did, but that they were minor and more of a clerical than a substantive nature. That's my recollection.
Q. Dr. Ford, you've testified in other cases before and I've seen other disclosure statements. Let me ask you if there is anything
that you added to this document or made changes in this document that is particular to this West Virginia case?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form. You mean different than the other cases?
MR. EVANS: Yes, I do. Thank you.
A. Mr. Evans, I am sure there are some differences in this disclosure than others that I have done. Without looking over them
and going line by line, I'd like for you to understand that any that I identify might not be that exhaustive of those differences.
However. I certainly believe that the chief difference might be on Page 3 in the listing of newspapers because we have -- I've
certainly included some West Virginia newspapers there that you probably wouldn't have necessarily found on previous expert
disclosures.
I couldn't identify any other changes without sitting down with the other disclosures and just go through them sentence-by-
sentence. That's the best answer I can give.
Q. Let me ask you to focus your attention then to the last paragraph on Page 2 that begins, “Dr. Ford is also expected to testify...”
Do you see that paragraph?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. I would like you to look carefully at that paragraph and tell me if there is anything in that paragraph that you changed or
made particular to the West Virginia case?
A. The short answer, Mr. Evans, is that I'm not sure I can answer your question. Certainly the things that I've stated here are
things that I would be prepared to testify about in this case. If there is -- I couldn't really answer your question, again, without
looking at past disclosures to tell you if there's anything that is somewhat different because I just don't have a clear enough -- I
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
don't have a precise enough, detail enough recollection of all previous disclosures, where something might be worded slightly
differently, but those are certainly things that are in this disclosure and strike me they would be similar items in other disclosures
for other cases.
Q. Let me ask you about a couple of the phrases you use in this disclosure statement. In the first paragraph, under where it
says, “Subject matter of expert testimony,” you use the phrase “the general public,” when you say “information disseminated
to the general public.”
How would you define general public in this context?
A. To the general public I think is certainly a phrase commonly used by historians and other scholars to mean citizens, average
people, people without necessarily expert knowledge or some special type of information at their disposal. It's people in all
walks of life, information that was widely distributed to a mass audience, not a selected or expert audience in any particular way.
Q. When you say the general public, are you referring to the population of the country as a whole?
A. Yes. I would say people of the United States certainly for purposes of this statement.
Q. Do you make any distinction between different areas of the country when you're discussing the general public?
A. I think my phrase there, “the general public,” is designed to embrace, really, people in all regions. Certainly some of the
work that I have done in reaching these conclusions is focused on particular areas and particular regions, and I've seen some
evidence of comparisons in that regard. So it would, for example, certainly refer to the general public in West Virginia as well
as the general public in the United States.
Q. On Page 2, again in that last paragraph that I referred you to before, you use the phrase “the ordinary consumer.” And I'd
like you to define that for me, please.
MR. NEWBOLD: Could you direct us?
MR. EVANS: Yes. It's the last paragraph on Page 2, and about the fourth line down.
Q. You're talking about “information disseminated.” “The ordinary consumer with knowledge common to the community.”
A. The typical consumer, the average consumer. Again, consumer, simply with the general knowledge of the community, not
necessarily some expert knowledge.
Q. Consumers of what?
A. Well, I think in -- again, there's sort of a two-part answer. I think the scope of this research was to consider American
consumers. Clearly tobacco products are -- this would include certainly consumers of tobacco product, as well as those who
chose not to consume tobacco product.
Q. So ordinary consumers means people who consume cigarettes but also people who don't consume cigarettes?
A. Yes.
Q. Is there any distinction in your mind in the way you have used the phrase “general public” in the first paragraph we referred
to and the phrase “the ordinary consumer” in the last paragraph we referred to?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. There's certainly a very high degree of overlap in those two categories. There might be some people who are included in
the general public who are not certainly of legal purchasing age. So you might -- you might have to allow for that fact. But
I think there is a large overlap. I wouldn't want to say that they're just absolutely identical categories, but there's a very high
degree of overlap between those two phrases.
Q. When you say legal purchase age, are you referring to the purchase of cigarettes?
A. Cigarettes and possibly some other product and simply the fact that one of the things I've looked at is education material
which was used in schools, and regardless of what product you're talking about the people being educated in those schools
are not purchasers. They may be consumers of clothing and food and other things, but generally speaking they have limited
purchasing ability.
But I do think there is a large overlap between those two terms. I wouldn't want to say that they're absolutely identical.
Q. But just to take the one example you've given, are you saying that people not of legal purchasing age would not be included
in your description of ordinary consumers?
A No. In fact, I'm not saying that. Certainly given what I've said- here, this information was widely available to people of all
ages. So, no, I'm certainly not saying what you asked about in your question.
Q. So that takes care of that one example you gave. Any other possible distinction between general public and ordinary
consumer?
A. I can't think of one as I sit here today, but I wouldn't want to preclude the possibility that there is some very small distinction,
but there is what -- what I can, I think, comfortable tell you is that there is a very, very high degree of overlap and any distinction
would be quite small.
Q. I want to- refer to these same two paragraphs, which I'll call the first and the last, for ease of reference.
In the first paragraph you use the phrase “public awareness” when you say you're going to talk about the extent of public
awareness of risks associated with cigarette smoking. And let me ask you for a definition of “public awareness” in that context?
A. You're in the second paragraph on Page 1?
Q. That's correct.
A. Public - awareness, as I use the phrase here, refers to the -- to information, knowledge that is broadly distributed or broadly
disseminated among the population as a whole. It is knowledge and information that the average person, the typical citizen
has access to and is aware of, not expert information that's only available or most likely available only to experts or specialists
in some area.
Q. You said information that people have access to and are aware of. Now, aren't those two different things? Couldn't I have
access to information that I'm not generally aware of?
MS. FORBES.: Objection to the form.
A. Well, part of what I intended in giving the definition of public awareness was to say that it was information for which there
was -- that had been broadly disseminated, that was widely shared, and therefore it's not something that someone might have
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
access to but have to make extraordinary type of effort to ascertain. It is broadly disseminated, it's widely disseminated, it's out
there, it's in the community in which you live, and it is commonly known. And that is sort of my definition of public awareness.
I don't know whether that answers your question. That's what I was...
Q. I think it does, and this may clarify it some more.
In the last paragraph on Page 2, you use a slightly different phrase than public awareness, and you use the phrase “common
knowledge.”
MR. NEWBOLD: Could you direct us to that phrase, please?
MR. EVANS: Yes. Actually, I've turned it around. It's “knowledge common to the community” and I'm talking about the fourth
line, the end of the fourth line, “the ordinary consumer with knowledge common to the community.”
Q. Now, I'm asking you to tell me if there is any distinction between public awareness and knowledge common to the
community?
A. I think that I use those terms, public awareness and common knowledge, essentially interchangeably, since in order to
ascertain -- in ascertaining public awareness or common knowledge, you look at the things I described in my last answer, and
I think those are essentially interchangeable terms.
Q. Does common knowledge mean that a majority of people had this knowledge?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form of the question.
A. I don't think that common knowledge is something that can be one can ascertain through purely quantitative means. I think
quantitative measures can be useful in making judgments about public awareness or common knowledge, but I don't think that
they -- I think you have to look at the entire context of material in order to make a judgment.
Certainly in the things that I'm opining about in this case you have very high percentages of the population aware of the health
risk of smoking, far beyond a simple majority, and that those statistics are one piece of information that I use in reaching that
conclusion, but I think that you can't use -- necessarily use quantitative yardsticks without using all of the other qualitative --
considering the qualitative context, which is done in this research.
Q. You said the quantitative measures can be useful. What quantitative analysis have you performed on information on the
possible health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. Well, I think to answer your question specifically is that I am relying on polling and survey data and other quantitative
information. I don't want to represent to you that I have conducted a poll. But certainly relying on valid quantitative information
developed and surveys done by other entities, you do -- that does help you get -- that is a useful type of research to do in trying
to ascertain whether something was common knowledge, and I have in fact done that, but I would hasten to add that I don't
think you can do that kind of research in a vacuum and reach a decision about public awareness or common knowledge.
Q. In your list of reliance materials, there are several, and I'm being very general here, but there are many references to newspaper
articles, magazine articles, things such as that, correct?
A. Yes, there are.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Have you done any quantitative analysis for a particular newspaper article or magazine article to determine how widely
disseminated it was?
A. Yes, I have. In most cases, certainly with the magazines and many of the newspapers, attempted to ascertain what the
circulation of that magazine or newspaper was.
Q. Circ -- I'm sorry. Circulation nationwide or in West Virginia or both?
A. To the best of my recollection, any circulation figures I've consulted are nationwide. However, since there are some West
Virginia newspapers included here, and to the extent that you can get circulation figures for those newspapers, which usually
you can, those are going to be, by definition -- the readers of the Charleston, West Virginia newspapers are going to be mostly,
not exclusively, West Virginians. Wheeling might even be different since it's closer to Ohio, Pennsylvania, but when you get
circulation for those newspapers, you're talking about- primarily West Virginia readership.
Q. Let's take one where you considered the nationwide distribution. What would be an example of a magazine that you
considered the nationwide distribution?
A. Reader's Digest, for example, I consider nationwide distribution. The same for Life Magazine, the same for Time and
Newsweek.
Q. Let's take those examples and let's just take Time Magazine. Did you then also try and make an analysis of what the
distribution was in West Virginia?
A. I don't believe -- to the best of my recollection, I don't believe that that information was available in any sources that I
consulted.
Q. Would that information be available, do you know?
A. Well, the short answer to that is I don't know. We're always -- I'm always looking for that type of information and I don't
-- can't say that there -- I might not uncover some potential source for it that I haven't yet uncovered, but to date I haven't
uncovered a source that breaks down that information by state.
Q. Again, referring to the last paragraph on Page 2, and I'm reading from about the last three and a half lines, you state,
“The ordinary consumer with knowledge common to the community during this century would have been aware that cigarette
smoking could be hazardous to health.”
I want to focus on when you say “during this century” and ask you if you've made any determination of whether there was a
difference in the level of knowledge common to the community at various points in the century?
A. Again, I think that is a two-part answer, and that is, certainly the serious health hazards of smoking have been well-known
and well publicized in Virginia -- West Virginia, excuse me -- throughout this century. However clearly the nature of the
information and the focus of the information which is available to the public that underlines that knowledge has shifted and
evolved some over time. So, yes, there are differences, certainly, as time -- common knowledge is a cumulative thing and its
constantly being added to.
So, yes, there are certainly -- the information environments are different at different times, that's true, but based on my research
that information environment has always indicated that smoking was hazardous to health and could lead to serious illness and
early death.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. And you would say that would be true from the earliest part of the 20th Century?
A. That would be true from the earliest part of the 20th Century.
Q. You said that knowledge is cumulative. I take it from that that you mean that more examples of knowledge on the health
hazards of cigarette smoking have been added to available information; is that correct?
A. Yes, that's true. You go through periods of time where there's more -- the publicity is more focused on certain specific things
than others and that's certainly true.
One of the things that I think is interesting about the research into the health hazard of smoking is what a long-running story
this is, and that is one of the things that I think is extraordinary about the reason there is such extraordinary common knowledge
about it, is that it has been a significant issue for a long period of time.
Q. Are there times in this century where it has shown an increase or decrease in the level of information about smoking and
health?
MR. NEWBOLD: I'm going to object to the form. I don't mean to be obstructive but we're talking about this century. Are we
talking about the 20th Century or 21st Century?
MR. EVANS: Yes, we are at an interesting time. I'm talking about the 20th Century and we can get into another argument as
to whether we're in the last year of that or first.
MR. NEWBOLD: Can we assume the questions you asked before, when you say this century, you're talking about 1900 to 2000?
MR. EVANS: I am talking about that.
A. I will be happy to specify in all my answers to date I have meant from 1900 to the Year 2000.
MR. EVANS: I'm going to ask the reporter to restate my question.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
A. I'm not sure that I understand that question. Could you rephrase it for me?
Q. Well, you talked about the cumulative nature, and I understand that, let's say. Starting in 1900 we have a certain amount of
information and more is added to it over time. My question to you now, though, is are there particular periods of time during
the 20th century where we saw an increase in the amount of information that was coming out at that time?
A. Okay, I think I understand that question better.
Without saying that the amount of information, which I think is a harder thing to gauge in some ways, or when there is high
levels of information, gathering relative peaks among very high levels, it's a very difficult thing to do.
Certainly, for example, as in the beginning around 1950, as the major statistical or epidemiological studies focusing on cigarette
smoking and lung cancer were published first in the scientific community and then very quickly picked up and distributed
broadly and received by the general public, you know, that was certainly a time when there was an exceptional flurry of publicity
around that issue, and that would be an example, I think, of what you're asking about here, and there would probably be others,
but I think that's responsive to your question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. It is. That is an example.
Can you cite to a period of time where that waned or lessened?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
MS. FORBES: Object.
A. Well, I think the answer is no. I think publicity -- awareness of the health hazard related to lung cancer, of cigarette smoking
has really remained high and even risen slightly over the entire intervening period. So I think there has been no period of time
in which public awareness or common knowledge waned.
MR. NEWBOLD: Can we take a five-minute stretch. We've been going about an hour.
MR. EVANS:: That will be fine, take a little break.
(A recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, I'm still on the last paragraph of Page 2, where you list a number of bases for your testimony, and
I'm looking at the end of the second line, onto the third line of that paragraph.
You say, “Based on such things as polling and survey data, media coverage, cigarette smoking prevalence, popular cultural and
public and governmental reaction to this information.”
Have I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. I want to take apart some of these bases that you mention.
First of all, cigarette smoking prevalence, what does that tell you about knowledge common to the community?
A. Well, cigarette smoking prevalence is a portion of the total population that smokes cigarettes on a regular basis, and I think
that is a piece of information, when taken in conjunction with the other information that you can gather, is suggestive of how
really public -- falls into the category of one aspect of public reaction to health hazards of smoking. It would certainly not be
the only piece of information that would fall into that category but. I think that's one way that I think is relevant to my research.
Q. Well, then, do you consider the number of people who do smoke as part of the basis for your conclusions about the public
awareness?
A. Well, I mean, the figure on smoking prevalence is essentially a portion of the population that do smoke. So, I mean, that,
in essence -- that is the information that you have.
Q. I guess I'm asking you -- I don't quite understand from your answer what that tells. I understand you do look at figures,
percentage of the population that's smoking, and what does that tell you about the knowledge common to the community?
A. Well, I think that it can -- understanding that it is only one piece of this information, that has to be understood in a larger
context, the fact that since 1950 or so the proportion of the American population that smokes cigarettes has fallen roughly in
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
half, from something close to 50% to somewhere right around 25%, to use round numbers, is significant, I think, that the public
awareness of the health hazards of smoking is having an impact on the decision that people make about smoking or not to smoke.
Now, I don't think that information necessarily determines that decision, and I want to add that, but it is one factor, and I think
it is one piece of evidence that can be used in that regard.
Q. Well, you say it's not necessarily determinative of that factor. Are there other reasons that the smoking prevalence rate could
have fallen?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. In some ways I think an extensive analysis of that answer might well lie beyond the scope of my expertise. However, portions
of it do relate to my expertise. Certainly there are all kinds of reasons that people decide to smoke or not to smoke or to continue
smoking or to stop smoking, and, yes, there are other factors evolved according to the information that I have had access to,
including price, for one thing, that do have an impact on a percentage of Americans who smoke.
So, yes, there are other factors, I think.
Q. Have you been able, through your own analysis, to determine what aspect of the knowledge of the health risks has played
a part in falling smoking rates?
A. I think it's abundantly clear from the information that I've reviewed that the long-standing awareness of the American public
that cigarette smoking can cause serious disease and shorten life is a factor in the decline in the portion of the population that
smokes. I don't know that I could, based on my research, isolate it down to some particular aspect or part of that information.
Off the top of my head, I certainly don't believe that I can do that.
Q. Just sort of -- is it just common sense that as more information is out there, smoking rates would have fallen?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
MS. FORBES: Object.
A. No, again, I wouldn't say that. What I have done is -- I haven't just looked at smoking prevalence rates and say, oh, they fall
and that must be the result. There's certainly considerable discussion of this in the articles and magazines and newspapers and
other articles that I relied on that one of the certainly goals of the public health community is to reduce the incidence of smoking
in the entire population, and certainly it was their opinion that those educational efforts and the general level of information
was having some effect on smoking prevalence, and that is certainly one thing that I consider. But, as with anything, I try not
to consider it in a vacuum.
Q. Do you have any way of making a comparison between the amount of information that was out there and the amount that
smoking rates fell?
A. No. I don't think that really even I can imagine the expertise it would take to try to correlate those two things.
Q. And that's not an analysis you've undertaken?
A. Certainly not as you just described it in that question. Certainly -- I mean, I think in the qualitative sense, we're trying to
understand the information that's out there and how people receive that information and respond to it. That's something that
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
you consider. And you certainly run across information that says that people do chose not to smoke in part because of health
information.
You also, of course, see information that people do smoke even though they're perfectly aware of health information and believe
that smoking causes premature death but they do smoke anyway.
So you see all those types of information out there.
Q. Another one of your bases besides cigarette smoking prevalence, you mention popular culture.
What information or bits of popular culture information did you examine?
A. Popular culture includes things like movies and songs, humor, any aspect of culture that's really not elite culture, and certainly
I examine some of that. So that's the type -- that answers your question. That's the type of thing I was including in popular culture.
Q. What's an example of songs?
A. Certainly probably one of the best known ones is “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette” that was performed first by Tex
Williams and later by Phil Harris and was a No. 1 hit, I think, on several occasions for a substantial period of time. Some
other songs as well.
Q. What is it about that song, “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette”, that contributes to your opinion that the ordinary
consumer had knowledge of the health risks?
A. Well, I think it's the same thing, a recurring theme through my examination of popular culture. That people who are crafting
song lyrics or writing jokes or writing scripts for movies are trying to come up with lyrics and dialogue and jokes which the
general public, because that's who their audience is, is going to respond to, is going to resonate in some way. Inside jokes aren't
funny, is sort of a standing rule among comedians.
So the fact that references to things like nicotine feen or coffin nails are common in movie dialogue and song lyrics I think very
much confirms the notion these were concepts the public was very familiar with in this period of time.
Q. Well, what is it about that song, the title of that song, “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette”, that suggests go out and
smoke a cigarette? What about this has contributed to --
A. I don't have them in front of me and haven't memorized them, but if you go on through it, he talks about that we nicotine
slaves are all the same, and I think that's -- the whole thing is that you have to stop whatever you're doing to smoke a cigarette
is fairly powerful testimony that phrases like nicotine slave, nicotine feen, nicotine fit had long-standing phrases that identified
to people that quality and cigarette smoking was habit forming or addictive or made it difficult to quit.
There's also the concept of meeting St. Peter at the Golden Gate -- not Golden Gate. The golden gates, the pearly gates.
Q. Heaven, not San Francisco, right?
A. I'm sorry.
I think the fact that those lyrics are included and do resonate, and really the whole song is about whether this guy -- whatever
he's doing, all these things that he likes to do, playing poker going out on dates, are interrupted by his compulsion to smoke
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
cigarettes, and I think the whole -- it's not just really in that particular song just a specific phrase but the whole thrust of the
lyrics has to do with a sort of grip that cigarette smoking has on many smokers.
Q. I guess my question is, is a song like “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette,” is this presenting positive information about
a cigarette or negative information about a cigarette, or can you classify it that way?
A. Well, to a large extent I think, the way I look at it, from the standpoint of my research, is that in terms of what that song is
doing is that it is showing this was a very popular song. Unless the public was aware of the things it was describing, it would
have been a mystery to the public. Instead of it being a mystery, it was something they recognized right away as capturing
either the experience of many smokers or the perception of many nonsmokers and therefore it was talking about something
that was common knowledge.
In other words, it's not so much the message of that song but the fact that it resonated so strongly with the public indicates
that these were concepts, this was information the public was broadly familiar with at the time that song appeared and ran in
1947 and 1948.
Q. An understanding of the lyrics of a song, does that have anything to do with its popularity?
MS. FORBES: Object to the form.
A. With the understanding I'm an historian and not a music critic, I believe if you had heard that song, it would strike the average
person that it is in fact the lyrics and not the tune that makes that song popular.
Q. I'm not going to dwell on this all day but another example you gave were movies, another example of popular culture. What's
an example of movie information that you're relying on?
A. Well, one way in which movie information is used is how phrases like coffin nail and nicotine feen are used very casually as
part of the ongoing dialogue, and I think the use of those slang terms in dialogue clearly suggests that the authors of those movie
scripts and directors expected the public to know exactly what these actors were referring to and that would be reconstructing
meaningful dialogue to them that they would understand.
There is perhaps some small way in which movies, by repeating those phrases, made them even more well-known than they
were, but I think that that's very, very secondary to what to me is the main point, is that they are confirming of how widespread
the use of things like coffin nail and nicotine feen were.
Q. In your research, are you able to quantify how many members of the public heard a particular message in a movie?
MR. NEWBOLD: I'm sorry. I simply didn't hear the question. I'm not objecting.
MR. EVANS: I'll have the court reporter read it back.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
A. Again, I think that what I'm able to do generally is get some sort of qualitative sense of the popularity of some of the movies
that I've used. I don't know I've attempted to try to find out exactly what theater attendance or what some proxy for that, like
box office revenue might be, but certainly “From Here To Eternity,” which is one of the films, I believe, that's on the list, was
an Academy award winning film in 1952 or '53. A lot of big name stars in it, Frank Sinatra and others.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
These are not -- the films that I use and we've listed are generally, I can say, with some confidence, popular. They're not box
office failure, they're not abject failure. They're not art films. They are not films that are playing in just to very narrow audiences
either.
Q. But was it any part of your research to quantify how many members of the public saw these movies?
A. I did not try to quantify box office receipts in quite a literal sense, no.
Q. Did you do any analysis to determine what the receiver of a message in the movie understood it to mean?
A. As I understand that question, the answer would be no, and I certainly didn't attempt to conduct interviews of people who
may have seen the movie on their first run. However, I think the very success of these movies and the use of this type dialogue
would suggest that people well understood the slang phrases, for example.
Q. You mentioned that you didn't conduct interviews. Did you conduct any sort of interviews in coming up with your opinions
in this case?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
Q. Let me ask it a different way. In going through your reliance materials, would I come across any example of an interview
with a particular person?
A. If you're asking if there were interview that I have conducted --
Q. That is the question.
A. -- the answer to that question would be no.
Q. We've talked about popular culture and smoking prevalence. Let's talk about polling and survey data, which you've listed
as another one of your bases for your opinions.
Can you recall for me specific polling data that you're relying on for these opinions?
MR. NEWBOLD: I'm sorry, are you referring to a particular part of his disclosure?
MR. EVANS: Yes. I'm talking about, again, in the last paragraph on Page- 2 where he's listed a number of bases for his opinions,
polling and survey data, media coverage, cigarette smoking prevalence, et cetera.
MR. NEWBOLD: Thank you.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) On the subject of polling and survey data, Dr. Ford, can you tell me a specific poll that you are relying on
for your opinions in this case?
A. Well, I'm actually relying on a fairly large body of polling and survey data, and to the best of my ability -- I don't rule out
the possibility that I may have inadvertently not included something. I've tried to list that on this reliance list that's been made
available to you. I could try to go through it, but I think that barring some oversight on my part, the polling and survey data
that's on this list is the polling data that I'm relying on for my opinions, and that's quite a -- certainly not any one particular poll.
It's a rather broad range of polling data and some survey data as well from a variety of different sources.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Let's see if we can narrow it down a little bit.
What type of survey questions are you relying on?
MR. NEWBOLD: Objection to the form.
Q. If you can answer.
A. Well, again, I think a complete answer would be, would have to be a very long answer, in that I've tried to examine -- and
the polling data that was in the public domain, I've tried to examine almost any question that was related to cigarette smoking.
Certainly any question that was related to cigarette smoking and the health hazard that are associated with it, and there are lots of
different questions and lots of different polls, and it would be hard for me, certainly time consuming to try to reconstruct them all.
So I guess what I'm trying to say is I've tried to look at a number -- they're not any one or two types of questions I've looked
at. I've looked at a broad range of questions.
Q. Are these questions that ask the general public, and I'm going to try to use phrases that you used in your opinions, that asked
the general public what do you know about the health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. There are, as I said, a broad variety of questions. They ask the public what information it's aware of. They ask questions what
their beliefs are. They ask the public questions about whether they smoke, whether they've ever smoked, whether they've quit,
whether they've tried to quit. They've asked about harmfulness to health. They asked about specific disease. They ask about
the hazards of smoking compared to other products and habits.
There are just a whole variety of questions. Again, I'm reluctant to try to give you a comprehensive list because I feel pretty
sure I would omit something that I have in fact looked at in reviewing the polling data that I have --
Q. I understand that and I certainly appreciate I've been provided a list of things but I do want to see if there are any that you
can discuss with me that come to mind now.
The first example of a question you gave was “what information are you aware of?”
Now, can you cite for me polling information that asks members of the public what information about smoking and health
are you aware of?
A. I understand your question. One example in that category would be in 1957, when the American Cancer Society statistical
report that had been conducted or supervised by Dr. Cuyler Hammond or E. Daniel Horn, when results were made public, there
was a Gallop Poll that asked the public several questions and one of those questions about smoking and health was, have you
read or heard or are you aware, I forget the exact phrasing, of the recent American Cancer Society's study saying that smoking
is the cause of lung cancer, and 77% of all Americans, based on that survey, had heard of that -- heard or read of that specific
study, which was just out, and 82% of smokers were aware of that study. So that is one of the types of polling data that you
use, that I draw on in reaching my opinions.
Q. What about the second example, I think you gave, was “what do you believe about smoking and health?” Can you cite for
me polling data from which you got information on what people believed?
A. Well, there's certainly a broad range of polling data about asking people if they believe certain things about smoking and
health, and over a long period of time, in the very same, is my recollection, the very same set of polling questions that I just
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
referred to in 1957, one of the questions was to the public: “Do you personally believe cigarette smoking is the cause of lung
cancer?” And 50% of the population responded that they did in fact believe that it was the case, and I believe 24% did not.
Q. Do you recall what the other 26% --
A. They were categorized as either undecided or no opinion. I have to double-check.
Q. I believe you said that 77%, and I won't hold you to that exactly --
A. I'm pretty sure that's exactly right.
Q. -- that that was the number of respondents who read or heard about the particular study?
A. Yes.
Q. Was it the same year of polling that indicated that 50% of the people believed that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung
cancer?
A. Yes, that was the same year. I believe that's the same poll. In other words, I believe that was taken at exactly the same time.
Q. What does that information give you about discerning what common knowledge was at that time? Do you need to separate
the fact that 77% of the people might have heard something and 50% believed it, or -- I guess I'm asking, how do you deal
with those two variables?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form as compound.
MR. EVANS: it was a difficult question.
A. Do you want to reask it or try --
Q. I want you to try and answer it and then I'll clarify, if I need to
MR. NEWBOLD: My objection to form still stands.
A. Well, I think that I certainly included both of those questions, both of those types of questions in my analysis. I think for
the purpose of determining what was common knowledge, what the public was aware of, what I call the awareness question
or the question of, you know, have you read or heard, are you aware, are you familiar with this study, is certainly the most
directly and most important piece of evidence there because that in fact shows that not only is the public press, magazines,
newspapers, almost anything you can imagine, covering the results of the American Cancer Society's statistical study, but in
fact an overwhelming majority of Americans, 77%, 82% of smokers, are aware of that specific study, not just any of the studies
that have been coming out but of that specific study. And that to me, that question about public awareness is by far the most
important one in reaching a conclusion about common knowledge.
The other question, the question about, well, you have this knowledge, you have this information, what is your decision about
it? Do you accept it? Do you believe it? Is, again, I think not information that I would not be attuned to but I think it's not as --
it's not as directly related to common knowledge as the other question. But because it involves not only -- it involves not only
what you're aware of or what is knowledge but personal evaluation and personal decision about that information. But I do think
that if you certainly look at -- that's a high level actually of belief in 1957, and if you look at belief levels about lung cancer
and other illnesses over time, you see that they are continuing to rise, which I think that's strong information that not only is the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
public aware of this information but that there's nothing about the information -- maybe you've actually asked me a question
about this earlier. There's no ebb in it. It's cumulative and it continues to mount.
Q. I believe you said earlier that you did not yourself conduct any policy; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you have any special expertise in interpreting polling data?
A. I think that I have the -- I interpret polling data as historians normally would in the course of that research. I did in fact
audit on a graduate level courses on political statistics, which included understanding of some of the mechanics of polling and
polling data in the early 1990's at USC, and I have used statistics, some statistics in some of my own research.
Not only do I have a special expertise in it but I think I have the expertise that historians do as using that as one of their many
sources of data.
Q. Have you gone back to any of the polling data that you've listed on your reliance list and analyzed it from the standpoint
of its reliability?
A. Well, yes. One of the -- as I understand it, one of the things that I tried to do was to use polls that were done by reputable
polling organizations or entities that conducted polling. Somewhere, if not in the poll itself, somewhere in the public domain
there was an explanation of that methodology and tried to evaluate on the base of my knowledge as an historian and the fact
that these are polls that these entities are themselves presenting and describing and vouching for, that these are reliable polls.
So, yes, I think I have done that.
Q. Is there any way in which you -- well let's say it this way. Is there any way in which you would assist a jury member in
interpreting the data that is in a poll?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. I may have misunderstood that question. In trial when I get to testify, I don't got to offer any special assistance to the jurors.
In other words, my testimony is presented to the jury. I may have misunderstood that question.
Q. Well, your testimony regarding the results of a poll, for instance, what is the significance of reporting that in 1957 77% of
the poll respondents had heard of a particular study?
A. Oh, okay.
MS. FORBES: Object to the form.
A. I think I understand that.
Certainly I would put that in some perspective, that 77% awareness of a particular study, in comparative study, is a very high
level of awareness. And that might be something that as an historian who has reviewed a lot of polling data for this research or
something I would be aware of that other ordinary citizens might not be aware of how these numbers stack up in some sort of
comparative perspective. That is certainly one thing I have done in past testimony as a way of putting these in some perspective.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. You would say that it's a relatively high recognition rate based on other polling data that you've seen; is that what you said?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. The last thing I want to talk about in what I'm calling this list of bases for your opinions, you mention public and governmental
reaction to this information.
Do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. What about public and governmental reaction to smoking and health information do you rely on for your opinion?
A. Well, again, to give the most comprehensive answer, I think all the materials that I rely on are listed, but to give you more
specifically maybe some of the types or categories of things, in terms of public reaction, there are in the newspapers often
interviews with ordinary citizens conducted by a newspaper in the aftermath of a particular story, particular group of stories
about health hazards of smoking, to asking the public how that reacting to this information.
There are other things the public does. There are letters to the editor that they write, letters to advice columns they write,
letters to doctors' columns they write. There are newspaper editorials and commentary. There are polling data, which we've just
discussed some, is certainly one way of examining public reaction.
And there are others as well. Governmental reaction, again certainly have examined various positions the Government has taken,
studies they've supported, the role government has related to smoking and health information has certainly been something
that I have paid some attention to. The Government certainly collected a lot of information in certain periods and I've looked
at some of that.
Q. Let me ask you. If you can, in your list of materials, can you give me an example of an instance of interviews with the
public done by a reporter?
A. That may take me a minute but I'm sure I can do it.
Q. Okay.
A. One example would be -- it's on Page 44. About the middle of the page at one of the -- number of things dated the 15th of
January 1964. It says, “Article from the Charleston Daily Mail, Smokers Scared, Survey Shows.”
My recollection, based only on that headline is that that is a reporter from that newspaper doing a survey there in the state of
West Virginia, in Charleston, based on that reaction to the surgeon general's report.
There will be probably a number of other examples throughout this, but that's just one I can go to and with nothing but the
headline be confident I'm not misleading you.
Q. Do you recall what the interview subject said about the surgeon general report?
A. Again, in general terms, I think I can. There were a variety of responses, predominantly one which was they were worried
about the health hazards of smokers. Others said that, you know, they knew about them and weren't worried about them. Others
said, I'm a nonsmoker, it doesn't really affect me that much.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
So there was kind of a broad variety of co??tary. But what I learned from almost everyone was they were certainly aware of
that information and actually had been aware of it before the surgeon general's report. That surgeon general's report brought
some new urgency, and people were often also surveyed about the surgeon general's report, talked about taking appropriate
remedial action. People were often asked what do you think the action should be, and would give opinions on that subject as
well, to the health aspect of it.
Q. Are you relying on any opinions offered on what should be done as part of the basis of your opinions?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to form.
MS. FORBES: Object to form.
A. I'm not sure I understand that. Do you want to try to rephrase it?
MR. EVANS: Let me ask the court reporter to just read the end of your last answer and then my question.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to form.
MS. FORBES: Objection.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) You listed as one of the things you recalled from this article that you were talking about is questions of
people asking for opinions on what should be done as a result of the surgeon general's report; is that correct?
A. That's one of the things that was covered in the press.
Q. Is any of that information, the responses of people asked about their opinions about on what should be done in response to
the surgeon general's report, is any of that information information that you're relying on in forming your opinions?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. Well, again, if I understand your question appropriately, certainly these stories that I read are a small part of my overall
opinion, and I think that there is in fact some evidence from those interviews of how -- that I do rely on, in conjunction with
many other materials, in reaching some of the opinions I'm going to testify about.
I would simply add, is that I'm not suggesting that these people who are being interviewed are experts on public policy
development but they have their opinion and it's available and often that opinion, to me, reveals a very high level of awareness
of the health hazards of smoking.
So, yes, that is one piece that I consider in reaching these opinions.
MR. EVANS: Let's take a short break and check on the lunch arrangements.
(A lunch recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) We're back on the record after a lunch break.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Dr. Ford, when we left off we were talking about some of the various bases of your opinions and we were talking a little bit
about public and governmental reaction to smoking and health information.
Do you recall?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Let me ask you along those lines, did you consider at all reaction by the tobacco industry to smoking and health information?
A. Yes, I did, to the extent that the tobacco companies made statements in one form or fashion that entered the public domain,
I took that information into consideration in reaching my opinions.
Q. How did that influence your opinion as to the level of public awareness of smoking and health information?
A. Well, as I think I've indicated in answers to other questions, I don't isolate sort of one stream of information or one set of
sources out from the other, but I try to view it as a sort of coherent whole. So I think what I can say is that there was extremely
high level of public awareness that the health hazards of smoking in part of that -- in the body of information, which was
the basis for that public awareness, were a number of statement and other types of information that came from the tobacco
companies, but that from an overall standpoint, public awareness of the health hazards of smoking was high.
Q. Just so I'm sure, was there anything in particular about tobacco companies' reaction to this information that played a
significant part in forming your opinions?
A. The companies' responses were certainly things, to certain issues, were certainly information I considered and contributed to
the information of -- to the larger information, environment that was out there. So. It was a part of the material that I reviewed
in reaching my conclusions, is I guess the best answer I can give.
Q. We've been talking all day about possible health risks of cigarette smoking. What specifically are the possible health risks
of cigarette smoking?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form. Outside of the scope.
A. Yes, I'm not a medical or scientific expert, and I wouldn't be prepared to testify authoritatively in answer to that question.
Q. Let me ask you this: What did the general public have an awareness of as specific health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. The general public I think had a broad awareness of the health risks of smoking that embraced a number of issues or a number
of disease categories, which would include cancer, especially lung cancer, heart and coronary artery disease, emphysema,
chronic bronchitis. Also widespread publicity about correlation between smoking and low birth weight in babies, premature
delivery of babies. And over the course of time there developed a public awareness clearly of certainly what some people in
the scientific community were at least saying was a connection between other people smoking and your health. Secondhand
smoke is one of the popular terms for it.
I don't mean that to be an exhaustive list, but off the top of my head, those are the kinds -- responses of the health risks of
smoking that there's a lot of information reaching the public about.
Q. Would the specific diseases associated with secondhand smoke, were they-- in any way different than the specific diseases
that public associated with smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
MS. FORBES: Object to the form.
A. Again, I think you're asking -- you might be asking for a medical conclusion there, if I understood your question correctly.
Q. I do mean to be asking about what the general public had knowledge of in terms of the risks.
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form. You want to start over? I think you have the question truncated here.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) in your earlier answer when you named certain diseases that the general public had an awareness of that
link to cigarette smoking, you also mentioned an awareness of secondhand smoke issues. Now, my question to you is, did the
general public have an awareness of specific diseases associated with secondhand smoke?
A. Probably the best answer I can give you to that question is that in the first half to two-thirds of the 20th century there was
a lot of concern about environmental smoke, smoke that's just in the environment, that was connected to a whole variety of
diseases that was very similar to the firsthand smoking.
I think most of the information I had and was certainly not a focus of my research for this case, or actually in the other case I've
been involved in, has largely just involved the concept of were people aware of the fact that there were health risks from what I'm
calling here in lay terms secondhand smoke, and that there were. I haven't really investigated -- I don't want to say definitively
one way or the other but I haven't really investigated for specific diseases under the category of secondhand smoke, other than
to say there's certainly a concern for emphysema, bronchitis, lung cancer, some of the same diseases that were under smoking.
Q. For the purposes of my question, let's set aside the secondhand smoke issue and talk about the public's knowledge regarding
health risks to the smoker.
You've mentioned lung cancer and heart disease, chronic bronchitis and emphysema, and low birth rate babies. I believe those
are the ones I have listed.
Any other specific diseases that the general public was associating with cigarette smoking?
A. Again, I want to enter the caveat this isn't an answer with any medical or scientific expertise on my part. Just trying to recall
information that reached the public through the popular media.
I think some of these things would fall into fairly broad categories. Any hardened and coronary artery disease, including things
that I as a layperson might throw into that category, like high blood pressure, as well as risk of stroke and other things like that.
I think you mentioned the major disease categories but sometimes they were talked about in terms of lung diseases, heart disease,
things that are very -- suggest very serious illness, but there might be others. You know, if you were asking a medical expert,
I'm sure they could give you more specific diseases but I think I have embraced most of the broad disease categories, and of
course with the additional stipulation that included the fact that many people found smoking difficult to quit.
Q. Was there a specific awareness of risks of any type of cancer other than lung cancer?
A. Well, yes, there was, and I'm not sure that off the top of my head I'm going to be able to recapitulate facts and figures, but
certainly very early on things like lip cancer, throat cancer, mouth cancer, were very much concerns, and certainly as more and
more research was done on a variety of subjects, there were additional types of cancer that the public was informed of until
the -- say the most recent 40-year period.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
I'm probably not going to be able to say exactly when all of those disease -- some of those more recent disease categories --
necessarily began receiving widespread publicity off the top of my head, but I know within generally that time frame.
Q. Speaking in terms of the general public's awareness of the risk of, let's say, lung cancer from smoking, what was the general
public's awareness of why smoking caused lung cancer?
MR. NEWBOLD: Objection to the form; foundation.
Go ahead.
A. I'm not sure I can answer the question in exactly the way you ask it. I think the general public are not health experts. There
were a number -- a large number of stories reaching the public, and of course about the health risk associated with cigarette
smoking and lung cancer, and I think the type of information that was being broadly disseminated to the public was how much
greater your risk was of dying from lung cancer if you smoked. The fact that the more you smoked, the greater your increased
risk was and if you quit smoking, you reduced your risks over time. I think that information was reaching the public.
There was also a lot of information reaching the public about laboratory research looking for specific carcinogens in cigarette
smoking, that sort of thing, but I don't think that -- obviously, I think the public was well informed there was research of that
kind going on, but I think that it was -- what I can say from my research was that the public was well informed bout the risks,
the much greater risk that the smoker incurred of getting lung cancer than the nonsmoker.
Q. What did the general public -- what were they aware of of how much greater the risk for a smoker than a nonsmoker was
of getting lung cancer?
MS. FORBES: Sorry, can I have that question back. I just lost it.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
MS. FORBES: Thank you.
A. Well, one thing that struck me about these stories is that the amount -- also the amount of detail of that sort that was in them,
and while the number might have varied slightly depending on which study was being reported in the newspaper, most of the
accounts of these states give a great deal of detail. And a good sort of norm or one of the sort of typical types of figures that
were given of them in a number of them, that one out of 10 or 15 out of 100 smokers will contract lung cancer, whereas only
one of 275 or one of 300 nonsmokers will.
Now, I'm not -- hasten to add, I'm not saying that was a fact or figure that people carried around in their head and can quote off
the top of their head. I think that's something public health experts do, but that sort of information was broadly available and
was clearly part of the information the public had at its disposal and part of what created the awareness of the health hazards
of smoking.
Q. To use your examples, you said there may have been information that one out of 10 smokers might get lung cancer, and
what was the figure you gave for nonsmokers?
A. I believe it was -- I meant to say one out of 275.
Q. Is that the range of risk that you would designate as being within the common knowledge of the general public?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. I would say that that is -- were figures that were commonly reported during what you might call the first wave of statistical
or epidemiological studies in 1950's, early 1960's. Those figures, as I point out, they vary from article to article or from study
to study, and I think 15 out of a hundred or one out of 10 were figures that were pretty commonly and widely reported in this
time period.
Q. In what time period are you speaking?
A. I'm sorry. Let's say the late 1950's.
You do get, as I say, over time some slightly different: figures being published, and I'm not saying I can even recall off the top
of may head what all of them were, but I think that I've represented to you pretty clearly what type of information the public
was exposed to regarding lung cancer in that late 1950's period, for example.
Q. In the time since the late 1950's, is it the common knowledge of the general public that the risk of getting lung cancer from
smoking has shown to be greater than was being reported in 1960?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. To the best of my recollection, that figures would be still consistent with the range of figure that we reported from a later
period. Again to the best of my recollection. I probably haven't reviewed some of that material recently enough to recall right
off the top of my head.
Q. What is the general public's awareness of the risks of getting heart disease from cigarette smoking?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
This is a time objection. My objection is to the form of the question because you haven't specified a time, and we've been over
a hundred years today.
MR. EVANS: Fair enough.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Let's talk about the time period of the last ten years, shall we, and I'll ask you, what is the general public's
knowledge as to the risks of getting heart disease from cigarette smoking over the past ten years?
A. I really think I probably have to answer your question in two or three parts so I can be accurate.
I'd say, taking around 1990 as an operative date, that the public is broadly and widely aware, I think my research would indicate,
virtually everybody knows that cigarette smoking is a risk factor in both lung cancer and in heart disease.
There is a slightly higher percentage of persons who believe that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer than believe that cigarette
smoking leads to heart disease, but in terms of awareness, I think the awareness is virtually -- is universal essentially, but there
is some difference.
So I guess I would say I don't know there is any difference in 1990 about awareness. As survey data can measure it, there does
seem to be some small difference in belief, roughly -- again, I'm pulling figures out off the top of my head, but something like
94 or 95% believe that lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. I believe that figure in heart disease is somewhere around 85.
So that's the information that I can tell you about.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Thank you. I wasn't asking for you to compare information about lung cancer and heart disease. Let's just take heart disease.
I'm asking you what is the public's awareness of what the risk is of getting heart disease from cigarette smoking?
A. Well, I guess I was thinking -- my answer to that question is that the public was universally aware that cigarette smoking
increases your risk of heart disease. Now--does that not answer the question that you're trying to answer? If. It doesn't, I'll
try again.
Q. Is there any general awareness of how much greater a smoker's risk of getting heart disease is than a nonsmoker's?
A. I understand, I believe, maybe the difference you're saying.
Certainly, just like all of the articles about lung cancer suggest, give very specific kinds of information, so, too, does the coverage
of heart disease.
To pick one that I can recall from my research off the top of my head without reviewing everything, it was that smokers were
about 60% more likely to have heart disease than nonsmokers. And, again, that was a widely reported figure and I think was
part of the foundation for the information, that heart disease was a health risk that comes from cigarette smoking.
People have brought access to the information. Being able to quote that information off the top of people's heads, I think, again,
is to -- would be to expect not a common level of knowledge but an expert level of knowledge, but I think that knowledge
was widely disseminated and part of what people absorbed as they reached decisions about the relationship between smoking
and heart disease.
Q. Let me make sure I understand your answer. To be able to quote the level of risk off the top of your head might require
some expert level of knowledge; is that what you said?
A. Yes, I think that's right.
Q. But if it's something that someone could look up, is that in your category of what you would define as common knowledge?
A. Well, I think in this case it wasn't a matter of looking it up. It was something that was broadly disseminated, and by that I
mean it's in newspapers, it's in magazines, it's in all sorts of things that ordinary consumers are reading all the time. It's not like
you have to go to the library and go to the medical section and check out a medical dictionary to look it up. So I do think that's
something that's common knowledge. It's not necessarily things that an ordinary citizen would regurgitate, I think, on a regular
basis, but it's a part of that fundamental body of information on which common knowledge is based.
Q. Is there common knowledge -- and let's stick to the time period of the last ten years for the questions I'm asking you now.
Is there common knowledge among the general public as to what components of cigarette smoke are known to be carcinogens?
A. Well, first of all, I'm just not sure I'm qualified to answer that question. I'm not an expert on carcinogens.
Q. Well, the general public would also not be an expert on carcinogens; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. So what would the general public's awareness be?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Based on my research, which did not focus specifically on that question, I would say that there has certainly been a
considerable discussion in the public about specific items in cigarette smoking that might be carcinogens, but I don't think I have
any evidence that would suggest that any of those specific things might fall into the category of common knowledge. What was
common knowledge, I think, is the general thing that cigarette smoking causes cancer, and there's certainly been no shortage of
information about possible carcinogens from tobacco smoke, but I don't know that I could, certainly without focusing on more
than I have specifically identified, to say they have common knowledge of specific carcinogens.
Often that type of information enters the public press in a more general way anyway. Components of cigarette tar cause lung
cancer, something like that.
Q. But not what components?
A. Well, as I've said, I think there have been lots of stories, talking about this and that and the other component being looked into
it as a source of it, but I think your original question was to what extent could the general public identify specific carcinogens,
and I'm paraphrasing your question. I sort of interpreted your question and I'm saying based on my research I don't think they
could do that.
Q. Would you say the general public had common knowledge on the distinction between animal carcinogens and human
carcinogens?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form. Outside the scope.
A. I couldn't answer that question based on my expertise.
Q. You could not answer whether the general public had knowledge about that based on your expertise, is that what you're
saying?
MS. FORBES: Object to the shorthand of that question.
A. If you'll restate the question, I'll give it my best shot at answering.
Q. Well let me just back up to start over because we confused ourselves here.
Did the general public have common knowledge as to what would be the distinction between an animal carcinogen and a human
carcinogen?
A. Wells, again, I think that there was certainly a lot of discussion in the public press that certain things that caused -- could
be identified in the laboratory as causing cancers, the laboratory animals, might or might not cause cancer in human beings,
and perhaps rice ??. There was some commentary on that. And so I think there was certainly a lot of information in the public
making that distinction, but I don't think I could testify based on my research that that is a distinction that would be drawn, would
be common knowledge, although I'm not sure that my research would have necessarily answered that question definitively one
way or the other. It seems to be more of a medical or scientific type question and not an awareness of health risks type question
that I would have looked at.
But based on materials I have reviewed, that's the best answer I can give.
Q. Does the general public have a common knowledge as to how much one would need to smoke in other words to get an
increased risk of lung cancer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. The information that reached the public and I think is generally well understood by the public is that the more you smoked,
the greater your risk was, and that the only way to not run the risk was to not smoke, and if you wanted to minimize the risk,
you had to stop smoking, and that beyond that, the more you smoked, the greater at risk you were.
And I think that information is well-known among the public. Some of the specific data about exactly how much more you had
to smoke to incur more risk was broadly available. I don't know that I have -- again, I think that was part of the information the
public used in developing its awareness of the health hazard of smoking but I don't know I would say that would be quoting
those figures off the top of my head.
Q. Where would the general public have heard or learned that the only way to eliminate the risks of lung cancer is to not smoke?
MR. NEWBOLD: I object to the form.
A. Let me --
Q. No, let me clarify.
In answer- to my earlier question you said that the information was out there that the only way to not run the risk of lung
cancer from smoking would be to not smoke, and I want to know where the public, specifically where would they have seen
that information?
A. That information was really available in a wide variety of sources. Most of all the public and private public health
organizations made that comment: The American Cancer Society, the American Lung Association.
It was interviews with researchers, people like Dr. Hammond, who conducted the American Cancer Society statistical study;
interviews with Ernest Wynder, who was one of the pioneer researchers in this area. Those would often say that the surgeon
general said that in 1959 very clearly.
I think there were really multiple sources. Textbooks from the 1950's and '60s are going to say as well. So there's really a wide
variety of different sources from which the public heard that information.
Q. You said the surgeon general said in 1959 the only way to eliminate that lung cancer risk from smoking would be to not
smoke, correct?
A. Yes, and I believe I'm accurate on that date.
Q. Was there also information that one could reduce one's risk of lung cancer by reducing the amount that one smoked?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form of the question.
A. The way the information was presented to the public essentially was the more you smoke, the greater your risk, and that
smoking puts you at risk for lung cancer. Actually, they were in magazines, and a number of other sources I looked at very
clear graphic sorts of depictions of this. You know, if you smoke a pack of cigarettes a day, this is your risk of lung cancer. If
you smoke two packs a day, this is your risk of lung cancer. If you don't smoke, this is your risk of lung cancer.
The court reporter can't pick up my hand gestures but very small amounts for people who don't smoke and substantial amounts
for people who smoke one pack a day, and even greater amount of risk for people who smoke two packs a day and so forth.
So I think that information certainly reached the public and that was the form that it was usually presented in.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Now, that information certainly doesn't say that one pack a day smokers have much, much higher chance of getting lung cancer
than people who don't smoke, but not as great a risk as people who smoke two or more packs a day. And those are the statistics
on the whole -- the aggregate body of smokers as they were developed at that time.
Of course, for any individual looking at that data, the decision is if I smoke, I'll either get lung cancer or I won't, and it's kind of a
yes or no proposition, and they have to make that individual decision based on it, but they have that information at their disposal.
Q. Was there any sort of consensus among the general public of a level of smoking that you could engage in and not have
risk of increased lung cancer?
A. As I said before, I think that the information that was broadly disseminated and was common knowledge is that smoking
is a risk factor for lung cancer and the more you smoke, the greater your risk is. The only way to not run a risk from smoking
of getting lung cancer is to not smoke.
Clearly I have seen anecdotal comments from people that sort of -- that not wanting to quit smoking all together, their strategy
will be to cope with the risk, would be to smoke less, but I don't think there was any information coming out suggesting that that
was -- that contradicted the notion that you're still running a significant risk, and the only way not to run that risk is to not smoke.
Now, people might make different decisions about that or whether to believe that information, but I don't think there was any
information that contradicted that, as a general proposition, which is not to say that nobody said it.
Some people may have said that they believe that, but that was a different question.
Q. When we were talking about the various bases that you drew on to form your opinions, and we were talking about, polling
and survey data, et cetera, cigarette prevalence.
Would you include people's observances of other people's smoking habits as one of the things that informed public knowledge?
MR. SCHMIDT: I'm sorry, I don't understand the question. Could I get that repeated.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
MR. SCHMIDT: Object to the form because I don't think there is any factual foundation for it.
I don't mean to interrupt, but I also thought this witness said he hadn't interviewed anybody.
MR. EVANS: I understand your objection.
A. I think that I would probably again have to break that question -- my answer at least to that question down into a couple
of parts.
If people's observations of other people's smoking habits -- your question is, did people's observation of other people's smoking
habits influence.
I think there is some evidence that in some cases that was a small part of the information that was at people's disposal when
they made decisions about smoking and about their understanding of risk. I think that, again, people -- that is an abundance of
evidence that people got their health information about the risk of smoking from sources generated by people who had expertise
in the area. Whereas, relying on other people's behavior would not have brought that expertise to bear, and it's very clear it was
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
entities like the American Cancer Society that had great credibility about that, but people do observe people's smoking habits,
and in this one piece of a much greater information puzzle.
I think clearly when people who smoked died of lung cancer, sometimes this would involve famous people dying from lung
cancer. That would get a lot of coverage, and that certainly, at least an indirect way, in which an observance of smoking behavior
had some type of influence, and there's some evidence in depositions that I've read and also from some of these interviews that
we talked about this morning that having known someone who smoked and died of what was perceived as a smoking-related
disease was certainly a part of the information that people had at their disposal.
But I would emphasize that I believe my conclusion would probably be pretty much the same even without that. Information,
based on my research, but that information was certainly a part and did -- and I did consider it.
Q. Let's talk again about the period of the half ten years, 1990 to 2000.
Is it your opinion that the general public fully appreciates the health risks of cigarette smoking?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. It is certainly my opinion that it is common knowledge among the general public that the health risks of cigarette smoking
is common knowledge among the general public, and in fact in the 1990's I think that it's fairly clear that the public believes, in
fact, that cigarette smoking -- they're not only aware of these risks but they believe in fact that cigarette smoking causes a number
of serious life-shortening diseases, that cigarette smoking can lead to fatal disease. I think in that period of time the public is
not only aware of those risks, they believe them. A substantial number of Americans believe those risks and smoke anyway
based on their decision to do that, but I do believe that the public is not only aware but believes in those risks in the 1990's.
Q. In your opinion, does that awareness and belief constitute a full appreciation of the health risks of cigarette smoking?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form of the question.
MS. FORBES: Objection.
A. I think it constitutes an appreciation if they smoke, they're running a substantially greater risk of getting these diseases and
dying at a younger age, and information has been broadly disseminated among them giving some statistics about precisely what
-- how much shorter that life might be. I again would emphasize a distinction between that common knowledge and a more
expert level of knowledge that you might only expect medical or professional public health people to have.
Q. One of the documents provided this morning and I have not marked it as an exhibit and I will do so now.
MR. EVANS: I will ask the court reporter to mark this, please.
(WHEREUPON, Exhibit-4 was marked for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, could you identify for me what the court reporter has labeled as Exhibit No. 4?
A. This looks like my billing record for this case.
Q. This is three pages. It says, “Work done in July 2000”; the second page, “Work done in August 2000”; and the third page,
“Work done in September 2000.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Will there be additional expenses for the month of October?
A. Yes, there will. And I will supply that bill at the end of this month.
Q. Can you estimate for me the number of hours you think you will have spent on this case in the month of October?
A. Prior to today, that would have been, I believe, about 16 hours.
Q. Have you spent any time prior to July 2000 in work for this case?
A. No, I did not, with the understanding, to be completely forthcoming to you, of course, I have done some work on West
Virginia-related materials in the past in connection in particular with an individual case down in Jacksonville, the Karbiwnyk
case. She was a native of West Virginia, and I had done some substantial work on West Virginia materials for that case, which
I used as sort of a foundation. But I was not asked or made aware or asked to serve as an expert in this case until sometime in
early July of this year, and all the work that I've done for this case therefore is indicated here.
My only concern is to communicate clearly to you that not all of the material that I've collected from West Virginia was related
to this particular case.
Q. I understand.
Let's talk about the Year 2000. What other tobacco cases have you been involved in besides this West Virginia case?
A. I have been involved in the Little versus R. J. Reynolds, case, a case in which you deposed me back in the spring of this year.
And I also was involved in the Jones versus R. J. Reynolds case, which was completed in Tampa, Florida just earlier this month.
Q. Right, and you gave testimony in the Jones case, right?
A. Yes, I gave trial testimony there.
Q. Did you also give a deposition in that case?
A. I was not deposed in that case.
Q. What's your best estimation of the number of hours you spent on tobacco-related litigation work, such as what you're doing
here, for the Year 2000?
A. Just give me a minute to try to think about that, to be as accurate as I can.
I'm going to try to answer that one in two parts. Apart from work I had done in the Little case, and there's been either no work or
virtually no work on that since the deposition that I gave back in March, and I think I gave you a figure for that case at that time.
Q. Yes, you did.
A. I just can't recall that one off the top of my head. That seems like that might have been 60 to 80 hours but I can't recall
that for sure.
In the Jones case, that's going to be -- would be about 70 hours. And then this looks like about 60 hours.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
So I guess my estimate for the year as a whole is somewhere between 175 and 200 hours.
Q And has that all been billed at $100 an hour?
A. Yes, it has.
Q. Was that your billing rate last year as well?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you estimate for me your total income related to tobacco work for the year 1999?
A. I think I can do that. 1999 was the year in which- I had done more work than I had before or since in that area, and I believe
it was around 350 hours or maybe a little bit more than that. I n that 350 to 400 range.
Q. So about $35,000?
A. Yes.
Q. Did that constitute the most you made from tobacco-related work in a given year?
A. Yes, it certainly did.
Q. I want to make sure I have a complete list of cases you've been involved in, and I know I was given that information back
in March.
Since March, when you gave a deposition in the Little case, you gave trial testimony in the Jones case?
A. That's correct.
Q. And then you're here today?
A. That's correct.
Q. Are there any other instances of testimony?
A. No. Absolutely not.
Q. Did you meet with attorneys in preparation for today's deposition?
A. I certainly have met with attorneys in the Blankenship case, presenting results of my research and preparing -- checking
over this reliance list to-turn over to you today.
Q. The hours reflected on your invoices for July, August, and September, does that include any meeting with attorneys?
A. Yes. Any meeting with attorneys would be folded into that, that billing, yes.
Q. Approximately how many times have you met with attorneys? And I'm talking about in regard to the West Virginia case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. I believe I met with attorneys regarding the Blankenship case on three occasions.
Q. When was the first one of those?
A. I believe the- first one of those -- if I consult these, was in July.
Q. Do you recall how long that meeting was?
A. Three, three and a half hours.
Q. Do you recall who was there?
A. Marilyn Forbes from Womble.
Q. Anyone else?
A. I think Paul Koethe from the Jones, Day law firm was also at that meeting.
Q. Any other attorneys?
A. Not to the best of my recollection, no.
Q. What was the second meeting?
A. The second meeting with Marilyn a week -- it would be in October. It was after the Jones trial. Monday, maybe the 16th of
October, I met with Marilyn-Forbes, Bill Newbold, and Paul Koethe from Jones, Day was at that meeting as well.
Q. The first meeting, where did that take place?
A. Here in Atlanta.
Q. And the second meeting?
A. Here in Atlanta.
Q I believe you said there were a total of three meetings?
A. Yes. We met yesterday, in reference to the reliance list.
Q. About how long was that meeting?
(Discussion ensued off the record.)
A. It probably lasted about four hours, more than two hours of which involved going over this -- me simply reading over this
list as much as anything.
Q. Who was present at that meeting?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Mr. Newbold, Marilyn Forbes, Ed Schmidt, and there was an attorney who was working with Marilyn Forbes, whose name
I don't recall. Chris Jones. Excuse me. He attended a portion of the meeting.
Q. Was anyone from the Jones, Day law firm at that meeting yesterday?
A. Mr. --
MR. EVANS: I'm sorry. My apologies.
A. Also, actually, Liza Kessler, an attorney with Jones, Day was also at that meeting.
Q. When were you first asked by attorneys for any tobacco company to engage in the research that you're testifying about?
A. In July, I believe July, perhaps late June, but around July of 1995, an attorney in the Jones, Day law firm representing R.
J. Reynolds, the client, contacted me and asked me if I would be willing to do research in the area of public awareness in
smoking and health.
Q. Do you remember the particular topic you were asked to research? Was it as you just described?
A. Yes, I believe in fact it was, as I just described.
MR. EVANS: Read the answer back.
(The record was read by the reporter.)
A. To be more precise, public awareness, historic public awareness of the health hazards of smoking.
Q. Thank you for that clarification because I did want to ask you about that. Were you asked specifically to look into awareness
of the risks of cigarette smoking?
A. The answer that I can give is that to recall precise words from that conversation is very difficult to do at this point. I know
from that conversation I learned that the project, if I was willing to undertake it, was to do historical research and decide what
information about the health hazards or health risks of smoking was the public aware of at various times, you know, various
times in modern American history.
That's my sort of best general recollection. I can't recall the specific words of the question but I've tried to convey the content
of it as careful as I can.
Q. Was it then a narrower task than just being asked to research all information on smoking that was out there?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. Yes. Certainly my recollection is that the question at hand was what -- in various points in history, particularly modern
United States history, what information was the public aware of related to smoking and health.
Q. Where did you start in gathering that information? What sources did you go to first?
A. Well, I sat down and sort of tried to think through a good research outline, as I would for any other sort of historical research
project that I would undertake.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
I did, of course, some checking on the secondary literature on tobacco, cigarette smoking generally, to find out what was already
done, what I might draw on, what ideas I might get from that material about where to go.
I found to a very large extent, of course, the secondary literature dealt with a broader range of topics and did not focus very
much on the question of the public's awareness about smoking and health issues. I concluded pretty quickly I would have to
undertake a fairly extensive amount of primary research, as historians normally do when they're conducting their own research
projects, and of course what I decided to start with specifically within that category of primary sources were major national
newspapers, the New York Times being probably the obvious place to start in that sense and also major national magazines
with broad circulation.
Q. Let me ask you to give me a couple of definitions. In the context of what you were working on, what would qualify as a
secondary source and what would qualify as a primary source? I'll ask you about secondary first.
A. Secondary sources are, for an historian -- I assume this is pretty much cross disciplinary, but I certainly know for historians.
Secondary resources are really published, hopefully peer reviewed works that other historians have done about subjects you are
beginning research on or related to subjects that you were beginning to do research on.
So any historical works that treated cigarettes, disease, those kind of things would have fallen into that category.
Does that answer your question?
Q. Yes. Now if you would distinguish for me what your primary source would be.
A. Primary sources are sources that are not the work of other scholars. There certainly is a general rule not the work of other
scholars, but sources that existed in time and space with the period that you're studying.
For example, if you were doing a research topic about, something about American politics in the 1890's, primary sources
would be newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, things that were published in the 1890's, things that date to the period that you're
studying, and that was how applied that here.
Now, the question of exactly what is a primary source is certainly a subject of considerable scholarly discussion among historians
in certain specific cases, but I think I've given you a good general answer to that.
Q. We've talked about various sources you've looked at before, like polling data. Are published results of a poll taken primary
or secondary source for you?
A. A poll that was taken, say, in 1957, like the one we discussed earlier, is a primary source for the decade of the 1950's, let's
say. Or even for the 1960's, probably, would be considered a primary source.
The fact that that poll might be published or republished 20 or 30 years later doesn't detract from the fact that it is a primary
source. If it was taken in the 1957, it's a primary source from 1957.
Again, you're into an area that there are some gray areas. For example, there is often discussion among historians about a memoir
that somebody writes, let's say 50 years and they discuss some early portion of their life and career. Well, even though it's written
by an active participant, it's written 40 years later and its a reflection, is that a primary or secondary account of something? So
in some ways you have to take each item on an individual basis and to really authenticate that it's a primary source.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Is a contemporaneous newspaper article on the poll -- and the example you're using is the 1957 poll -- is a contemporaneous
newspaper article about that poll a secondary source or primary source?
A. That would be a primary source, if it's contemporaneous, yes.
Q. The 1964 surgeon general's report itself, is that a primary source for your research or a secondary source?
A. You're certainly doing a good job at picking out the ones that fall in the ambiguous categories.
Certainly the surgeon general's report, the summary of the surgeon general's findings is, I think, very clearly a primary source,
and certainly the coverage of it, the newspaper coverage of it, which was saturation coverage, is certainly a primary source.
There are things -- if you take the surgeon general's 1964 report as a whole, I can't think of an example off the top of my head
but it would probably be a secondary source about some things, but the essential findings of that report I think are a primary
source, yes. If I've made my distinction the way I intend to.
Q. So if the surgeon general's report is listing among its studies what Dr. So-and-so found about smoking and health, to look
to the report for that source, it would be secondary; is that correct?
A. Well, especially if there was a substantial gap in time and space. If it's referring to a study that's done in 1961 or 1959, I
think it might even -- might legitimately be considered a primary source about that. But if it's referring to a study that was done
in 1938, for example, it would probably be better perceived as a secondary source.
Q. Let me suggest a source that you've already said you did not consult, but an interview with a member of the general public
about what do you think of the risks of cigarette smoking, is that a primary source of information or a secondary source of
information for your field of study?
A. An interview with a -- let me ask you if I have an understanding of the question. You're asking me if an interview with a
member of the general public is a primary source or a secondary source?
Q. Yes.
A. Almost by definition that's, as historians, I think typically understood that would be a primary source.
Q. Where did you begin your search when you wanted to find particular information on West Virginia?
A. I think that I first went to -- well, in some ways it's hard to say which I did first but I certainly looked for any kind of
secondary materials on West Virginia. Also went very quickly to the major newspapers in West Virginia and the State Capitol,
Charleston, in Wheeling, which is where this case was. The jurisdiction for this case was out of Wheeling and many other
places in West Virginia.
I also, looked at educational materials. As I indicated earlier, because of some earlier research I had done, I already looked at
educational materials from the state of West Virginia and other state laws and other materials from the state of West Virginia
for an earlier case I had been involved in. So that had already been done. So I think that gives you a good general indication
of how I tackled that.
I certainly read the depositions that I asked for in regard to this case also, for any general ideas about research.
Q. As a starting point, did the attorneys you were consulting with provide you with any materials?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. The only thing that the attorneys have provided me with were copies of these depositions that I asked for, and I think my
specific request to them was any fact depositions that shed light on the lives of the plaintiffs or any deposition that might relate
directly to my testimony.
Q. Did any of the attorneys ever suggest to you or show to you a newspaper article or magazine article?
A. No, they have not.
Q. I know you've testified about this before, but let me ask you again.
Do you consider the effects of cigarette advertising in formulating your opinions on what was common knowledge?
A. Yes. Cigarette advertising was information that entered the public domain. The public was broadly aware of, came to them
through a wide variety of sources, and that is information I considered in forming my opinion today related to the public
awareness of the health hazard of smoking.
Q. What effect, in your opinion, does cigarette advertising have on the public's awareness of the health risks of cigarette
smoking?
A. Even though cigarette advertising has been widespread throughout the period, public awareness of health hazard smoking
was high and rising throughout the period.
Q. Well, I understand what you're saying. Did the cigarette advertising then have any effect on the public's awareness?
A. Well I guess what I'm arguing is that all of these things that I considered, which included advertising, certainly together
provided the body of information on which the public's knowledge was formed, and advertising was out there, the public was
aware of it, and the result of all of this, with information coming from all of these different sources, many of which we've
talked about today, was that the public was extraordinarily well aware of the health hazards of smoking. Certainly, there may
even have been some instances in which comments and controversy about advertising contributed very directly to that public
awareness. There's certainly no evidence that advertising undermined the public's awareness of the health hazards of smoking.
Q. When you looked at magazine articles regarding information on smoking and health, did you do any analysis to consider
the amount of advertising that would appear in that same magazine?
A. Certainly as I reviewed magazines and assistants reviewed magazines, the advertising in those magazines was something
that I took into account, yes. Cigarettes were advertised in -- they were not advertised in Reader's Digest. They were advertised
in magazines like Life, for example. They were also advertised in newspapers that I covered, and certainly I reviewed those
advertisements.
Q. Did you undertake any sort of systematic analysis? And let me give you a concrete example. If I were to point to an article
from Time Magazine, anywhere in your research would you have notated the number of cigarette ads that were also in that
same issue of Time Magazine?
A. Okay, I understand your question. I think that a two-part answer would be that my evaluation of that with regard to magazines
has simply been to note that cigarette advertising regularly appears in these magazines, as qualitative -- I mean very seriously
undertaken on my part but essentially qualitative analysis.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
I have undertaken in some cases to analyze the frequency with which ads appear in newspapers over time, and to the best of
my recollection my findings on that for the 1950's were that there was a general range in most newspapers between about three
cigarette advertisements per week and about six cigarette advertisements per week in the period that I analyzed.
Q. Did you do any sort of cross reference between a particular article on smoking and health and the advertising that appeared
in that same issue of the newspaper?
A. Other than certainly to note that on some occasions advertisements would appear on the same day's stories about smoking
and health, but I don't think I've undertaken quantitative analysis of that.
MR. NEWBOLD: is this a good time for a break?
MR. EVANS: Yes, it would. Let's take a short break.
(A recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, have you done any research about public knowledge or awareness about any other consumer
product other than cigarettes?
A. I have done some research in sort of -- something I referred to earlier, sort of in a comparative perspective, comparing
cigarettes to other product. I have not researched other products independently in the same fashion certainly that I've -- in their
health risk as I have cigarettes, but I have done some comparative work looking at the health risk of cigarettes, versus other risks,
versus other health risks, some of which -- whether they're consumer product or not, thinking about that aspect of your question.
But, yes, alcohol, beverage alcohol is a consumer product. So I have looked, tried to place some of that into comparative
perspective, yes.
Q. Did you look, when you were doing a comparison with alcohol, did you look to other sources about public knowledge or
awareness about the risks of alcohol?
A. Yes. Again, to make clear, I wouldn't have undertaken the same type of research project, but I have looked at sources
regarding the public's perception of health risks of alcohol.
Q. Can you give me any examples of the sources that would be making that sort of analysis of alcohol?
A. I certainly think I can. I know I can get you in the right general area. It's something that was a subject of survey data in the
1970's and '80s. I believe there are a couple of polls conducted, which should, I believe are listed here, by the Roper polling
organization, that ask questions like -- and I think, too, the United States Government and its Adult Use of Tobacco survey, of
regular poll taken under government auspices since the 1960's also included a number of questions asking the public which of
these -- for the type questions they would ask: Of which these present a high risk to your health? And it would be something like
smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol, living near a nuclear plant, and so forth. Those are the type of things that I've looked into.
Q. Are you aware of any scholarly work that is on the topic of public knowledge or awareness of the risks of a consumer
product other than cigarettes?
A. Any scholarly work? it actually seems like in doing some of this research I did pick up a citation to an article or two which
I looked at but I cannot recall those off the top of my head, and I do not believe they've been included on the reliance list, but
I may in fact be aware of them and have seen them.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. Do you recall what the product was?
A. My recollection is that it was not a specific product but again a sort of comparative type study.
Q. Well, let's return to cigarettes --now.
Are you relying on any scholarly or authoritative sources on public awareness or public knowledge of the risks of cigarettes?
A. On public awareness of the health hazards of smoking?
Q. Yes.
A. This is the result of my own research into primary sources, and I would say that I'm not relying on any scholarly work.
However, I do think there are existing scholarly works which present conclusions that are certainly consistent with those, which
I am testifying to.
Q. Can you cite to me any scholarly works on this topic of the public awareness of the health risks of cigarettes?
A. Okay, that's the qualification I need to make. I don't know that the scholarly works I'm referring to focus on that issue, but
they focus perhaps on some larger issue and deal in some fashion with public awareness.
The best example I can think of is in James Patterson, an historian at Brown University, wrote a book called “A Dread Disease”
and it's a study of cancer and what he accurately, I believe, describes as the cancer scare of the. 1950's in the United States,
which suggests that the public followed anything related to cancer with great interest in the 1950's, and he does in fact have a
chapter on lung cancer, or at least a section on lung cancer, and his statements regarding public awareness of the health hazards
of smoking, I believe, are in fact very consistent with my testimony regarding the fairly narrow time periods of the 1950's and for
-- that's one of the periods that I cover, and his conclusions regarding public awareness, I believe, are very consistent with mine.
MR. SCHMIDT; Can I interrupt for a second because you're making a distinction -- maybe you are making it. If you are, you
are. But are you also distinguishing this from, example, the Gallop polls? Would that be not a scholarly work?
I don't think you're trying to trick him into that but I'm just not sure what the distinction is, if you-all define it and the way you're
talking about them sound like a written treatise versus something else that might be considered a scholarly work.
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, if you would like to provide any explanation at all on what you understood a scholarly article to
be, you are certainly welcome to do that.
A. Thank you. I should have qualified my answer by saying this: That I was referring to historical scholarship on this topic,
since I think it is fundamentally the historical -- the historical public awareness of the health hazards of smoking is, in my view,
a subject best investigated and researched by historians, and I certainly was confining my answers to scholarship produced by
historians that was related to this subject matter.
Certainly not excluding the fact that there's much scholarly research on, including medical research, that involves all of this
material, but I was referring to historical scholarship on this particular topic, and I understood your question. If I misunderstood
it, I apologize.
Q. No. I think we were on the same track.
MR. EVANS: Off the record.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
(Discussion ensued off the record.)
Q. (By Mr. Evans) Dr. Ford, are you familiar with any scholarly peer review articles that deal with risk perception?
A. I have seen some scholarly peer review work dealing with risk perception. It was not written by historians, but I do recall
seeing a few things in that regard that I looked at. Something I ran across in my research either cited those works or -- and
I think in one case I might have been even asked a question about an article of that nature, cross-examination and looked at
an article at that time.
Q. Would any articles on risk perception be included in your reliance materials?
A. I think those are not materials that I have relied on.
Q. Do you consider yourself as having any expertise in risk perception?
A. Historians have to evaluate a wide variety of material in reaching their conclusions but I'm certainly not an expert in I'm an
historian, and I think I can comment as well as professional historian about risk and certainly public awareness of risk. To the
extent that there is some scientific specialization in it, I certainly don't claim to have that.
Q. Just to clarify, you're not an expert in psychology, are you?
A. That's correct, I'm not a psychologist.
Q. Are you an expert in advertising?
A. Well, again, I'm not an expert in advertising from the standpoint of designing advertising campaigns, internal components
of ads. I did evaluate advertising and its impact on the public awareness of the health hazards of smoking for this case.
Q. Have you ever published any literature on the topic of advertising?
A. No, I have not.
Q. And are you an expert in public health?
A. No, I am not.
Q. Medicine?
A. No.
Q. Or epidemiology?
A. No, I'm not an epidemiologist.
Q. Have you done any research on how people read magazines in terms of how much time they spend on advertisements versus
articles, that sort of thing?
A. I have some general familiarity with that, but I've not undertaken any specific scholarly research in that area.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
Q. You've testified a number of times before that, I believe, that you have not considered internal tobacco industry documents
in the materials you rely upon. Is that correct?
A. I think certainly the accurate way of stating it would be that I have not asked the tobacco companies or their attorneys to
provide me with any internal company documents.
To the extent, however, that something -- then that remained -- you know, remained an internal company document. To the
extent there were documents generated by tobacco companies that came into the public domain either through a newspaper
story or a pamphlet published, say, by the tobacco industry, other than I have in fact reviewed those if they came into the public
domain, but nothing that was an internal document and remained an internal document didn't come to the public domain in
this time period.
Q. Did you ever consult with a tobacco company to determine what literature had been put into the public realm?
A. If I may ask for clarification? Do you mean literature that was published by a tobacco company or a trade association?
Q. Yes, I do. And did you ever -- my question, did you go to the tobacco company and say, do you have a list of the things
that you put out to the public?
A. No, I did not. I tried to follow the same methodology in terms of tobacco industry publications I did with other publications.
My charge was to investigate what information the public was aware of, and by definition had to be in the public domain, and I
tried to discover what information was in the public domain that related to this subject and looked at it. So I sort of approached
it from the other end. When I could see that there were some number of, for example, publications that came into the public
domain that were sponsored by or published by a tobacco institute, I certainly looked at those publications.
Q. Have you done any research or reviewed any materials about the general public's perception of cigarette companies?
MS. FORBES: Object to the form.
A. Well, I think in doing the research that I've done on the public awareness of health hazards of smoking, I have certainly
encountered, and in some ways it is material to this research, encountered some things about the public perceptions of tobacco
companies. I wouldn't want to represent that I could present a -- necessarily a full and well-rounded analysis of that opinion but
I have certainly seen and been informed by some of their opinions about tobacco companies, yes.
Q. Can you determine whether or not the general public's perceptions about cigarette companies has changed over time?
A. I think perhaps I can answer that in a limited way. I think that, yes, there certainly have been some things that have perhaps
changed over time and perhaps other things that have not, but I think from the earliest data that I can recall seeing, credibility
of tobacco companies, on their statements -- maybe credibility isn't exactly the right word. But whether the public looked to
them for reliable health information, the opinion has always been low on that. The public never appeared to look to them for
health information.
On the other hand, I think I have seen some evidence, again not a great deal because I haven't been investigating that question
in particular, but certainly the overall public perception of tobacco companies is less positive today than it was some years
ago probably.
Q. From your research do you know what brought about that change in perception?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. Because that's not a question that I specifically researched, I don't think -- I think it would be speculation for me. I'm not
sure I could answer that with expertise. So I think an answer to that would be pretty much speculation on my part.
Q. In forming your opinions, did you consider what members of the general public did as a result of being informed about the
health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. Yes. I mean I think that is certainly one thing that I evaluated as part of this larger picture.
I've certainly testified in the past, and still would, that widespread public awareness of the health hazards of smoking is not
necessarily going to dictate any particular type of behavior. There can be a wide variety of responses to information, but I
certainly have paid attention to what some of those responses have been over time, yes.
Q. And what are some of the responses of the general public to information on smoking and health?
A. Well, again, it probably requires sort of a more time specific type of answer. Certainly one frequent response to the release
of a statistical study showing a strong correlation between smoking and lung cancer would be for a large number of people to
quit smoking. That was a frequent response.
Others would claim that they switched to cigars or to pipes. The quitting response was reflected in a wide -- some people just
quit, some people went to smoking clinics. There was a wide variety of response there. Some people simply said they continued
right on smoking and they were going to take their chances.
Others responded by going to work to enhance educational programs about smoking, trying to convince young people not to
smoke and to become involve in some sort of public education campaign in that regard.
Those are not meant to be an exhaustive list of responses but those are some of the things the public did in response to this
information.
Q. Under your analysis of common knowledge of the risks of smoking, is there a difference in common knowledge to smokers
and cigar smokers and nonsmokers, the various categories you were mentioning?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form of the question.
A. Generally, when I'm talking about kinds of knowledge, I'm talking about it was common knowledge to the entire population,
whether they were smokers, nonsmokers, cigar pipers pipe smokers or whatever. On some issues it's possible to break down
that population into some segment, but generally common knowledge is exactly that. It refers to the general population and it
include people of all different smoking and nonsmoking categories.
Q. So the common knowledge of a smoker of a high tar and nicotine cigarette under your analysis would be the same as the
common knowledge of a smoker of a low tar cigarette?
A. Well, I think that what is true is that I'm talking about a level of common knowledge among the general public and not
comparing -- trying to claim that I can compare one individual versus another. But whether the group of people who smoked
high tar cigarettes and -- they had the same level of awareness of the health risks of smoking. Now, different people had that
knowledge and reached different decisions about what to believe and what to do, but they had that knowledge.
Q. Suppose we have a smoker of a high tar cigarette, who has, under your opinions, who has a broad awareness of the health
risks of cigarette smoking and suppose that smoker switches to a low tar cigarette and believes, rightly or wrongly, that he has
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
reduced his risks. Now, I take it under your analysis you assign him the same common knowledge to the community that you
do any other person, correct?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form.
A. Well, again, I think that it's hard for me as an historian to talk so much about hypothetical individuals as opposed to broad
categories of people for whom the data, the information generally is much better for. But I think regardless -- I think people
had the same awareness of the health hazards of smoking pretty much regardless of what decision they make about smoking,
not smoking what cigarette product to take.
Now, clearly there are -- different people reach different decisions about what to do and there are different levels of belief about
those health risks. Not awareness but belief.
Smokers generally believe -- many smokers believe they were running great risks by smoking but their level of belief was
somewhat lower than the population as a whole.
Clearly I have seen some qualitative or impressionistic examples of the fact that some people did switch from higher or lower
tar cigarettes, and in other words to reduce their health risk, and there was some discussion in the public media that that might
in fact be the case, but that was also disputed.
The clear and consistent message is that the only way to really minimize your risk is to quit smoking, but I don't disagree with
the proposition that some people, rightly or wrongly, did respond by switching from filter to nonfilter or high tar to low tar.
But I think these are different individual responses based on the same body of information of value and included that critical
dimension of personal evaluation and decision.
Q. If I understand your testimony correctly, you would acknowledge that the person who switched to a lower tar cigarette might
have a different level of belief as to the health risks of cigarettes than someone who didn't switch?
MR. NEWBOLD: Object to the form of the question.
A. I really think that's hypothetical because I don't know that I've actually seen data on that. I do know that what I was referring
to in the answer was certainly that throughout most of the 1950's and 1960's there was widespread public awareness of the health
hazards of smoking. Smokers were somewhat likely to believe that cigarettes caused, say, lung cancer than the population as
a whole was, according to survey data. That is -- that's certainly correct.
Q. I believe you've testified that the level of awareness of the health risks of smoking has remained very high and has not
diminished. Am I correctly --
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. What sort of information could enter the public's knowledge that would diminish or reduce that level of common knowledge?
MS. FORBES: Object to the form.
A. That would be utter speculation on my part. As an historian I think I can tell you what in fact did happen, but I don't think
I could tell you what might theoretically happen.
Q. Is there a difference in what the common knowledge to the public is depending on that public's education level?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. I think that what my research has tended to show is that educational level may have some impact on the sources that people
most commonly rely on for their information, but that there are so many sources which contribute to common knowledge that
almost everyone in the community has access to some of those sources.
People, for example, who may not read news magazines often work with people who do. People who don't read magazines
watch television. The popular culture, the slang terms are out there just everywhere and reach all levels of the population.
So I think you can say that people of different educational levels depend on different sources in combination, but the proportion
of their dependence on different sources varies, but there's not really any indication that that is any substantial part of the
population that doesn't get this message.
Q. Did you undertake any analysis of the general public based on differing educational levels?
A. I have certainly seen some figures on that. I certainly think that it certainly tends to show that even the people with the
lowest educational attainment are still overwhelmingly aware of these risks. It may be slightly lower on a percentage basis than
some of the better educated.
Q. How did you go about conducting the analysis based on --
A. It seems like -- if I'm misrecalling this -- it seems like there is some survey data, certainly in more recent times, showing
this, and I believe the adult use of tobacco surveys that the HEW carries out on a periodic basis.
Q. Is that a part of your reliance materials?
A. It should be.
Q. Is there any difference in terms of common knowledge to the public depending on whether they are rural or urban dwellers?
A. I believe that breakdown has been used but I don't believe there was a meaningful difference.
Q. Again, have you done any analysis of breaking down rural versus urban dwellers?
A. To the extent that some of the survey data makes it possible for me to look at that I've certainly looked at it.
Q. You didn't conduct any independent research on that, did you?
A. Well, I guess I would say that my research in the survey data was independent research conducted. I didn't go out and do
interviews.
Q. Any difference in what the common knowledge to the public would be depending on cultural difference -- let me strike that.
Depending on ethnic differences of the population?
A. I believe there's some survey data breaking out perhaps African Americans from the general population, and that survey
data, as I recalled, showed African Americans were overwhelmingly aware and believed in the health risks of smoking, perhaps
at a slightly lower rate than the population as a whole, but a very high level of awareness nonetheless.
Q. Can you recall what survey data you were relying on for that --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51In re: TOBACCO LITIGATION (Medical Monitoring Cases)., 2000 WL 35717504 (2000)
A. I probably could not off the top of my head point to you- the specific survey, but I'm sure it's one of the ones I've tried to
list here. I believe it is, anyway.
Q. This might be a good time, since we have talked on a few occasions about this list of reliance materials, and I would like
to have the court reporter mark this as an exhibit.
(WHEREUPON, Exhibit-5 was marked for identification.)
MR. EVANS: Can we take a two-minute break?
MR. NEWBOLD: Sure.
(A recess was taken.)
MR. EVANS: Let me state that I also produced here at this deposition a box of West Virginia specific articles and materials
that I've been given the opportunity to look over.
It is my understanding that those same materials are going to be produced as part of a supplemental exhibit list; is that correct?
MS. FORBES: Jerry, that is correct, and just so the record is clear, there are few additional documents in that box that you had
a chance to look at over lunch that are marked “national materials” as opposed to “West Virginia materials.”
MR. EVANS: Thank you.
MS. FORBES: So we are supplementing mostly West Virginia materials, but it was clearly marked and banded national
materials, and that will be all part of the supplementation, so you all will have a copy of all of that.
MR. EVANS: Just to be clear, everything that is in that box is going to be produced as far as this supplemental production?
MS. FORBES: Exactly, and everything in that box, unless we have an inadvertent error, is on the reliance list.
MR. EVANS: I understand. I wanted to clarify that on the record.
I have no further questions.
MR. NEWBOLD: We'll read and sign.
MR. EVANS: Thank you, Doctor.
(Deposition concluded at 3:20 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52
