UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Original Image of 2002 WL 34428171 (PDF)
2002 WL 34428171 (D.D.C.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, District of Columbia.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff,
v.
PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., Defendants.
No. 99-CV-02496(GK).
August 8, 2002.
The Videotape Deposition of Kenneth Ludmerer
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: RICO >> Civil
Case Type: RICO >> Criminal
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Deceptive Acts/Practices
Jurisdiction: D.D.C.
Name of Expert: Kenneth Marc Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances.
For the Plaintiff: U.S. Department of Justice
Civil Division
1331 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W.
Suite 1150-20
Washington, D.C. 20004
By: Ms. Mary Jo Moltzen Ms. Noelle M. Kurtin.
For the Defendant Lorillard: Shook, Hardy & Bacon
One Kansas City Place
1200 Main Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105
By: Mr. David M. Woods.
For the Defendant Philip Morris: Hunton & Williams
1751 Pinnacle Drive
Suite 1700
McLean, Virginia 22102
By: Mr. Daniel C. Jordan.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Also Present: Ms. Chris Walker-Byerley
Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Video Operator: Mr. Brent Christopher Christopher Video
4024 State Line Road
Kansas City, Kansas 66130.
THE VIDEOTAPE DEPOSITION OF KENNETH LUDMERER, produced, sworn and examined on behalf of the Plaintiff,
pursuant to Notice, on Wednesday, August 7, and Thursday, August 8, 2002, at the Office of the United States Attorney, 400
in the City of Kansas City, in the County of Jackson and State of Missouri, before me,
ALISON A. TRACY, RPR, CCR #554 of JOHN M. BOWEN & ASSOCIATES Court Reporters, a Notary Public, Registered
Professional Reporter and Certified Court Reporter, in a certain cause now pending in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, wherein UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is Plaintiff and PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al., are Defendant.
INDEX
WITNESS: Kenneth Ludmerer
Direct Examination by Ms. Moltzen ... 4
August 8, 2002 Session ... 250
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT NO. ... PAGE
1 - Notice of Deposition ... 25
2 - Expert Report of Dr. Ludmerer ... 26
3 - CV of Dr. Ludmerer ... 27
4 - Joint Defendants' expert disclosure for Kenneth Ludmerer ... 30
5 - List of deposition and trial testimony ... 31
6 - Updated CV of Dr. Ludmerer ... 28
7 - Handwritten notes ... 103
8 - References ... 112
9 - Handwritten Paradigm ... 117
10 - Paradigm ... 119
11 - Supplemental Bibliography ... 125
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
12 - Additional Bibliography ... 128
13 - Smoking and Health, Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General ... 129
14 - Report on Visit to U.S.A. and Canada 17th April - 12th May 1958 ... 208
15 - A Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers ... 221
[Note: Pages 4-249 missing in original document]
know if there are 50 million smokers in the U.S., but roughly three or four smokers out of 10,000 developed lung cancer and
died from it. That did not make sense with the traditional view where if you are exposed to a toxin it is going to cause it. So
all of these things had to be worked out and were worked out.
And the second revolution in epidemiology was central to developing these concepts. But those concepts didn't exist at the time.
We know them now, it makes sense to us now, but they all had to be figured out and demonstrated and proved and argued and
this sort of thing and that was the fifties and sixties.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 5:22 PM.
(The deposition stood in recess at 5:22 p.m. to reconvene on August 8, 2002, at 8:30 a.m.)
AUGUST 8, 2002 - VOLUME II OF KENNETH LUDMERER
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Today's date is August 8, 2002. The time is 8:42 AM. This is the continuation of the deposition of
Kenneth Ludmerer. Please proceed.
MS. MOLTZEN: I would like all of us to introduce ourselves for this tape this morning too in case these two depositions get
mixed up. So I'm Mary Jo Moltzen representing the United States.
MS. KURTIN: Noelle Kurtin representing the United States.
MR. WOODS: David Woods with Shook, Hardy & Bacon representing Lorillard Tobacco Company.
MS. WALKER-BYERLEY: Chris Walker-Byerley with Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
MR. JORDAN: Dan Jordan of Hunton & Williams representing Philip Morris.
THE WITNESS: I'm Ken Ludmerer, the person doing deposed.
BY MS. MOLTZEN:
Q Dr. Ludmerer, you understand that what brings us here today is a lawsuit in which the United States has sued some of the
tobacco companies and other entities, correct?
A Correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Q What do you understand the allegations in this particular case to be?
A Candidly I don't understand the case very well so I probably will learn something now. But it is my understanding that there
are two aspects of the case; one is the effort of the United States Government to recover money for payments that it has made
over some previous period of time in the Medicare and Medicaid programs for tobacco-related illness, and then secondly I have
heard that there is something involving RICO with this case but I can't even tell you what RICO is and I don't understand it and
I don't know what those issues are. But that's my understanding of the case.
Q When did you first hear about this particular case?
A I don't remember exactly, frankly. As I mentioned yesterday, maybe three percent of my time the last few years has been on
these sorts of issues. If Mr. Woods should call me there is a deposition or a trial and in a day or two for that. It is not something
that I carefully follow. But I don't know. The papers, the last couple of years I remember hearing, reading references to the
Department of Justice case and didn't pay much attention to it. It is my recollection that Mr. Woods contacted me about being
a witness in this case early of this year, 2002. But that's about it.
Q That was my next question, who first contacted you to ask you to work on this case. And it was Mr. Woods?
A That's my recollection as we sit here today that it was Mr. Woods. It is not something I would say with absolute certainty,
but it is highly likely.
Q And the approximate time period was early in 2002?
A It would have either have been late 2001 or early 2002. It would have been no later than early 2002 because I notice that
my expert statement is dated January 30 of 2002. It is possible that he made his original contact with me sometime last fall of
last year. Frankly I don't remember precisely.
Q Do you remember what kind of information you were given about this case at that first contact and what was expected of you?
A Well essentially what I said before in terms of my understanding of the case that it had to do with an attempt to, I don't know
what the word would be, recoup or reclaim payments made in previous years under the Medicare program, federal moneys for
cigarette-related illness; and then in addition, the issue of RICO was in some way involved with the case. I didn't understand it
then, I don't understand it now. And if this case moved forward, would I be willing to give my conventional historical testimony
that we have been discussing on how we came to know that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. I said if my time permits
I would be glad to do it.
Q Other than asking you to give testimony, did he ask you to do anything else?
A No.
Q Since that initial contact what work have you performed?
A I performed no new work. And I would say, by the way, that that is true of my involvement with each of the approximately
10 depositions or trials over the last four or five years that we went over yesterday. There has been no new work. My opinions
are based on the work that I did in '88 and '89 and I have had no new work to do. I report what I did back then. I have not
been doing new work.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Q How many hours, other than the six hours and 23 minutes of this deposition over the last two days, have you put in on this
case so far?
A I would have to add them up, which I haven't done, but I would say maybe 15 or so. We had a meeting here in Kansas City
last week and discussed some of the issues. I flew in late Monday -- excuse me, late Tuesday, we talked a little bit about it then,
reviewed a few of the key papers and so forth over the weekend, so it adds up to maybe 15 hours, something of that sort.
Q When you say looked at some of the key papers, what do you consider to be the key papers?
A I took a look at the Surgeon General's report, some of the important primary or secondary sources in the literature, just my
bibliographies to refresh myself with the names and to be as up to date as I can for questions that you might have about some
of the specifics.
Q When you say Surgeon General's -- did you say Surgeon General's reports?
A I said the Surgeon General's report singular referring to the '64 report, not other reports.
Q How much do you charge per hour for your work?
A As stated in the disclosure itself, $350 per hour.
Q In addition to the $350 per hour, do you also have any kind of daily charge when you are on travel or do you still charge
on an hourly basis?
A If I'm away overnight, as we were yesterday, instead of 24 hours I have a $3500 rate if I'm overnight.
Q I want to correct something that neither of us made an error yesterday but I want to make this as complete as we can. I had
given you Exhibit, Deposition Exhibit 5 which I tried to compile a list of the deposition and trial testimony that your attorneys
had sent me. I had 10 cases on that. That was in the last four years. Then during our discussion yesterday you added two more,
you added the Cipollone deposition and the Kotler trial. They were before -- they were longer than four years, you went back
to the beginning for those?
A That's correct.
Q I think -- there is one more case I want to mention. Did you also possibly either testify by deposition or at trial in a case
Moore for the State of Mississippi in 1997?
A Is that an Attorney General case, State Attorney General case?
Q Could very well have been.
A The answer to that is yes.
Q I just wanted to make this complete for both you and I. So we have not only 12 but we have 13.
A That's correct.
Q Was that a deposition or trial?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
A That was a deposition.
Q And you testified to this a couple times yesterday that you did the original work and then you testified both in Kotler and
Cipollone, is that correct?
A Correction, I did not testify in the Cipollone case. I gave a deposition as part of the pretrial work for the re-trial of Cipollone.
I did not appear at trial in Cipollone and I was not part of the first Cipollone case.
Q Thank you. Those were in the early nineties. Then there was a break?
A About six years.
Q About six years. And who initiated the contact after that six year break?
A That was Murray Gamick of Arnold & Porter who is the individual that we discussed yesterday who contacted me back in
the late eighties. Now, as I said yesterday, I've got other things to do in my life. Total amount of my professional time that has
gone into these activities I estimate maybe three percent.
So the first time Mr. Garnick contacted me in 1996 was to appear in an individual smoker case in the state of Florida, this was
the first contact in five or six years, and I declined because I was too busy.
And then he contacted me roughly a year later, maybe it was six months later, but a period of time after that, in regard to the
Attorneys General cases as a group that were being brought, and at that time I said if I'm able to make the time to testify, I
will do so. And it was that conversation that led to the Mississippi-Moore deposition. And you are right, this is the last four
years through '98. That deposition was 1997 and not on here. But that was the sequence of events. Then you have a complete
record I think of everything going forward.
Q Thank you very much. In that initial work that you did in those two years, you had mentioned yesterday that periodically
you would have meetings with one or more attorneys. At those meetings were there any other people present except you and
attorneys?
A There was some paralegals.
Q Were there other experts?
A As we sit here today I do not remember any contact or discussions with other experts at any time.
Q Were there other historians at the meetings?
A No, there were not.
Q What is the total amount you have earned from doing the tobacco litigation work to this date?
A I would say somewhere between 500 and $550,000. You mean from the very beginning?
Q From the very beginning.
A Correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Q I believe you said you probably have spent about 15 hours on this case, correct?
A Something of that sort.
Q These questions should be pretty easy to answer then. Approximately how much time have you spent reviewing documents
and materials in coining up with your opinions for this case?
A I'm not sure I understand the question. Are you talking about the specific review for this case or are you talking about the
original work that led to my opinions back in --
Q I believe that your expert report says the initial work took about 1,000 hours, is that correct?
A That's correct. It was a big project. As I mentioned before, had Murray Garnick called me a year earlier or a year later I
wouldn't have been able to undertake it because of other projects of my own. But the serendipity of the circumstances was that
I was between books and was able to fill up the time while I was looking for a new book to work on.
So the original research that my opinions are based on goes back then. And then I have done for this case what I typically do,
I'll spend a little bit of time reviewing notes that you have and records and that sort of thing, refresh myself on names and dates,
take a quick look at the Surgeon General's report, things of that sort, as my specific preparation for the deposition.
Q So it would just be a couple of hours then? The question was how much time have you spent reviewing documents for this case.
A A few hours.
Q We are not counting the initial work. 1,000 and two all together?
A A few hours.
Q Did you read the -- do you know what a complaint in a case is?
A I can guess.
Q It is the initial pleading that the plaintiff files with the court. Did you read the United States's complaint in this case?
A I do not remember having read that. I won't say that I haven't, but I don't remember having read it.
Q Then the term of art for the response is called the Answer and so each of the defendants then answered the allegations in the
complaint. Did you read any of the defendants' answers in this case?
A No, I did not.
Q Do you know what an interrogatory is?
A No.
Q Once the complaint and answers have been exchanged, the judge sets up a certain amount of time in which discovery can
be done, including depositions. But you can also write written questions to each other, asking them to answer, and then the
interrogatories come in and then you answer the interrogatories. Do you remember in this case reading any of the interrogatory
answers?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
A I can say definitely I have not seen any interrogatories.
Q Did you read other expert reports from this case?
A Yes, I did.
Q Which ones were they?
A I read the Brandt report and the Proctor report.
Q Did you read any depositions from this case?
A Not that I recall.
Q The expert report is Exhibit 2?
A Correct. My expert report?
Q Your expert report.
A It is Exhibit 2. I have it in front of me.
Q Okay. Did you prepare the expert report by yourself?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A As we discussed yesterday, it was a team effort between myself and representatives of a legal defense team. I did not draft
the original report. It was drafted for me to save me time.
But it came out of conversations we have had, it has come out of depositions and trial testimony and it reflects my views. I
proofread it and signed it. I did some editing. As we discussed yesterday, quite candidly, I did not look at it very carefully
when it came, because if I were doing this today there are certain wordings that we would change, that I would change as we
discussed yesterday. But I did approve it and it does represent my views. But I didn't sit down and do the original drafting.
Q When you received the draft from the attorneys and you said you proofed it and edited it, do you remember if you made
any changes at that time?
A My recollection is I made a few changes in wording and tone and so forth. I really cannot tell you precisely what they are but
I do remember making a few changes and suggestions. My only comment to that would be that if I were doing it today I would
have made a few more, the ones that we indicated yesterday. But I'm pretty sure I made a few changes at that time.
Q Did you preserve a copy of that draft report with your changes on it?
A No. I think I made a few changes either by pencil or pen on it and sent it back to them and let them put it in their own word
processor and incorporate the changes. They sent me back a copy for signing.
Q What proportion of this current report, Exhibit 2, is new or different from your original report?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
A Could you please explain to me what you mean by my original report?
Q For the first case -- what was the first case that you had to write an expert report?
A Frankly I don't remember because each case is different. And I know there have been other expert reports but not invariably,
and I just don't remember which of these required an expert report and which didn't.
Q Are there a lot of -- what proportion of this report is different from the most recent report that you have written?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A There is no substantive difference among any of the reports. All of the reports express the same general views. All of the
reports relate to opinions that I formed back in 1988, 1989 when I did the original work. I do recall that the requirements of the
cases are different so some of the expert reports are shorter, others are longer.
But essentially in terms of the substance and opinions, they say the same thing. There have been no changes substantively from
one to another. In form there may have been, some will be shorter and some will be longer, but no changes of opinion or meaning.
Q Have you ever met any of the other historians testifying for the tobacco defendants in this case?
A I don't know who the other defendants are so I would be pleased to respond to that if given the names but very frankly I
don't know who the other experts are.
Q Have you ever met with Peter English?
A I do know Peter English.
Q Who is Peter English?
A Peter English is a highly regarded physician historian. He is actually a pediatrician historian at Duke. He has written a number
of books about rheumatic fever and early physiology. He is also a well-regarded pediatrician. We have never discussed legal
issues together. In fact, I didn't even know he was a witness in this litigation until now. But I am acquainted with him, think
well of him.
Q Are you familiar with Surgeon General Burney's, it wasn't his report, but it was the report of the study group on smoking and
health organized the urging of the Surgeon General Burney in about 1957? Are you familiar with the conclusions of that report?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Well certainly I recall that the first public health statement was Surgeon General Burney's 1957 statement, I do remember
that, yes.
Q And are you aware that in 1957 public health officials in Great Britain, I believe the group is called the Medical Research
Council, issued a statement discussing the causal relationship between tobacco smoking and lung cancer?
A Yes, I am. As we talked about yesterday, and also as in my previous testimony, just as a generalization, this is the period
that you see a number of important public health organizations, private, public, United States and other countries starting to
take stands on that. There were quite a few others as well.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Q You mentioned this yesterday, I believe, that again then in 1959 Surgeon General Burney issued a statement on behalf of
the Public Health Service. Are you aware of that?
A That's correct.
Q And--
A That was a stronger statement than this '57 statement which again indicates in my judgment the growing consensus and
greater degree of confidence about drawing conclusions. '59 -- as we talked about yesterday this is a rapidly changing dynamic.
Each year new information coming in, new tools to analyze information are being developed.
So his statement of 1959 is a stronger statement than his 1957 statement.
Q And then are you aware that in 1960 the World Health Organization study group also issued a statement about the relationship
between cancer, lung cancer and smoking?
A I am aware that the World Health Organization came out with a statement, and I will take it as a given that the years that you
are citing are correct because I could not recite specifically which group, which year. But as a generalization I'm aware that
many important health organizations are taking statements one year and then another, then the next year someone else jumps
on board, the next year someone else jumps on board and so forth. I just want to state for the record if I were taking a test I
couldn't say it was World Health Organization of '59 or '60, or '60 or '61. I don't have that type of recall as we sit here today.
Q Would you agree it was before the Surgeon General's 1964 report?
A Yes. As I have been saying consistently, it is the late fifties that you are pointing out that you see many such groups taking
such positions, and increasing into the sixties.
Q Then I want you to turn to Page 6 of your report, and this is going to the sentence that is going to go from the bottom of
Page 6 over to Page 7. “In conclusion, although the question of a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer has
certainly become a major concern between 1950 and 1964, there was no consensus during this time period among scientific
and medical authorities that cigarette smoking was hazardous to health.” Is that still your opinion as we sit here today?
A Yes, it is, and it is the opinion that I was giving yesterday. If I were writing this today, I think I would add a few adjectives and
describe things as we have been discussing for the past day about evolving consensus, the growing consensus because tide is
definitely turning. As we discussed yesterday, to say that there is not a consensus does not mean that you have equal numbers of
people on both sides reserving judgment. If you were talking the early sixties, I would say -- I agree with the Surgeon General,
that the general opinion decidedly had moved to accept the view that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. But for a consensus,
not for a dominant view, not for the overwhelming view, not for the near consensus, if you are talking a consensus, what
scientists of divergent perspectives and traditions and views all except for the laboratory workers going along with it as well as
epidemiologists, but practicing physicians and chest surgeons as well as the scientists who are studying it, for serious challenge
of the argument to evaporate, that terminal step in my judgment required the first Surgeon General's report and that's when
our current consensus -- we have a near consensus before then, a growing consensus, but my research being comprehensive
in looking at everything that was said found that even in the early sixties there were responsible groups, responsible scientists
who had not yet come on board. Fewer of them in the sixties compared to the fifties, but not every group had come on board.
The American Medical Association, for example, is an example of a group that was -- that changed its view in response to the
Surgeon General's report. That's another example of how the report in my opinion brought about the final consensus.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
So I would say that a near consensus. But the terminal step in this event that goes back all the way to early observations and
suggestions of the twenties and thirties and forties it terminates, is brought to conclusion with the Surgeon General's report.
And my judgment, our current consensus that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer dates from there.
Q The reason I had asked you about some of those statements by medical and health authorities is because of the wording of
this particular sentence. And I know we talked about words yesterday, but the precision of words is my currency, and I'm sure
as a scientists it is your--
A Right.
Q All of a sudden here you had changed from scientific and medical community to scientific and medical authorities. So that's
why I went back and I picked out scientific and medical authorities.
A Well now there I would say the same thing. Authority and communities. There were authoritative scientists in the early
sixties who remained skeptical because of the lack of biological information. There were authoritative organizations, the most
prominent being the American Medical Association. So you can look at it either way. I think either statement is correct. You
can look at authorities who had yet to come on board or you can look at it at the community more largely. But I think there
either word would be correct.
And this gets back, in my judgment, to the evolutionary nature of science. Particularly when you have creation of a new model
or a new paradigm, something big that people wrestle with or really debate, you are always going to have people who are
at the beginning and accepting a new idea or concept, most people will be somewhere in the broad middle, as we discussed
yesterday, many people depend on the views of the opinion makers, then you all have some people who are more conservative
for whatever reason who are among the last to come on board. That's really where things were in the early sixties. Most people,
but not quite all, had come on board. Whether you use the term authorities such as the laboratory scientists at the National
Cancer Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering, Philadelphia Cancer Institute, or whether you use organizations such as the AMA,
or whether you use practicing physicians who see patients every day. Most people had come on board but you still had this
tail end in the early 1960's. After the Surgeon General's report this tail end came on board and that's why I personally would
date the consensus to the Surgeon General's report.
Q Am I correct to say then the change from previously using the word community and in this one using authorities, you really
by changing that word weren't trying to reflect a difference or a distinction?
A No, I really wasn't. The important point is that the same observation is present if you are looking at a scientific authority who
is doing research and writing papers, if you are looking at the organizations that are taking positions, and if you are looking at
the general medical community that is practicing medicine. So the same phenomena is occurring with all of these. The general
medical community includes all of these people. Obviously some individuals are leaders and opinion setters and most are not.
But if you are looking at the early sixties, there is no question that the dominant opinion within the medical community had
changed. Regardless of whether you are defining medical community the practicing community or the research community,
there is no question that sentiment has changed. I agree with the Surgeon General's observation that there had been a decided
opinion. But if you are asking the question when did everyone jump on board? When did disagreements stop? I agree with Dr.
Sir Richard Doll who says the Surgeon General's report, that's when it stopped. I agree with all of the secondary literature that
says the Surgeon General's report brought everyone on board. We know the AMA came on board as a result of that. We know
that laboratory workers who were persuaded that this was a legitimate new discipline and epidemiology of chronic disease
established itself. The few who were responsible exceptions as we discussed yesterday people as such as Dr. Brownlee who
wrote the critical review. In the next few years he retired and died. We know that Sir Richard Doll himself says that with the
'64 Surgeon General's report that was the time that serious scientific opposition ended; and that is consistent with what I have
found in my work.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Q Does consensus require unanimity?
A As we discussed yesterday, no. It is a judgment call. It is not a 100 percent view. Certainly requires a near unanimity, but
it is a qualitative, not a quantitative assessment. It depends on who the dissenters are. If a physics graduate student doesn't go
along with a certain concept, people are likely not to pay much attention. If Professor Einstein doesn't go along what a certain
concept, people are likely to put a lot of credence to that.
That, by the way, is one of the reasons for the lingering doubts in the early sixties because the greatest scientific figure in
my judgment by far of these events was Sir Ron Fisher. He was the Einstein of biology. And I don't mean this in any way
to be derogatory to the great scientists who created the field of epidemiology of chronic disease but they did it based upon
the fundamental work that Fisher did mathematically. Fisher is one of the giants of 20th century biology. He was part of the
evolutionary genetic synthesis showing that mathematically you can reconcile Darwinian evolution with Medalian genetics.
His repeat created the field of biostatistics. The mathematical tools that epidemiologists use to analyze data came from some
of Fisher's basic work. So for Fisher to have objections it is like Michael Jordan being on my team. This is not just an average
person. So you have to look at who is objecting, why people are objecting. But again by definition you are not going to have the
consensus if you have -- a consensus means people have come together, people of divergent views; in this case the laboratory
people have accepted epidemiology. That happens with the Surgeon General's report. People of divergent views and traditions
and sympathies and perspectives accepting an idea or concept, which isn't to say that you can't find somewhere someone
somewhere who may object, but that person has become marginal.
And all of these things happened with the Surgeon General's report. In Dr. Doll's words, I'm quoting from a paper he wrote that
recounts the history of this, he is not a professional historian but lived through and he participated and he remembers events
and these are very important issues to him. He is among the many who says that with the first Surgeon General's report serious
scientific opposition to the idea is subsided and we moved on to the next step. And I would agree with that interpretation.
Q When I asked the questions before, it was about preparation, it was the preparation of the expert report. Now I'm moving on
to preparation for this particular deposition. What did you do to prepare for this deposition?
A Well I did what I mentioned in answer to your question a few minutes ago. I had two meetings with Mr. Woods, with Dave
Woods and with Chris Walker-Byerley to discuss some of the issues of the case. Over the weekend I reviewed some of my
own notes, took a look at the Surgeon General's report, things of that sort, some of the key articles, refresh myself on some of
the names and dates and sequence and that type of thing.
Q How long was your first meeting with your attorneys?
A Well this would have been I think Wednesday or Thursday of last week. And I would say it went approximately four hours.
Q Was anyone in attendance besides your attorneys and you?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q I'm sorry, your attorney and your attorney's assistant?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
Q Between David Woods and Chris Walker-Byerley, was anyone in the room besides those two?
A For the approximately four hours of discussion we had -- there was three of us. There was an attorney whose name I do not
remember who is involved with this case who walked in the room toward the end of the meeting, said hello, was there for two
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
or three minutes. I don't really consider that person as being part of the meeting but I did see another individual while I was
there. The substantive conversation for the four hours that we met was with Chris and Dave.
Q How long was the second meeting?
A That would have been -- what day is today?
Q Today is Thursday, the 9th -- 8th.
A So that would have been Tuesday, flew in late Tuesday and we met for, I don't know, two or three hours.
Q Who was at that meeting besides you, Chris Byerley and David Woods?
A The same two individuals.
Q Did you have any other meetings with anyone else about this case?
A No.
Q Did you have any phone conversations with your attorneys about this case in preparation for your deposition?
A I had a number of telephone calls, by a number of I mean three, four or five with either Dave or Chris, but largely over the
logistical details. We didn't discuss substantive things but there were questions of dates and times and flights and when do you
need me, those sort of things. So there were a handful of telephone calls with one or the other of them on that type of detail.
Substantive conversations we had the two meetings that I mentioned to you.
Q Was any correspondence, whether it be paper or fax or electronic E-mails, exchanged between you and your attorneys in
preparation for this deposition?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A I do not recall any correspondence on any substantive issue. There were a couple of E-mails pertaining to flights and travel
arrangements and things of that sort. I had an electronic ticket by definition that came by E-mail.
Q Earlier you said that you spent about 15 hours total preparing for this case?
A Maybe it was 10, maybe it was 16, you know.
Q Of all that time part of it of course was preparing and working on the expert report. How much of that was spent on preparing
for this deposition?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
A Well, I would say essentially all of those 10 or 15 hours has been on the deposition. The expert report as you know came
in January, I took a very quick look at it, edited a few things. Obviously today I wish I had taken an even closer look at it,
but that was a matter of minutes.
Q Do you anticipate reviewing any additional materials in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
A I reserve the right to should something appear somewhere that I should know about, but I have no intention at this time of
doing so. There is nothing I'm aware of that I would be doing.
Q At this point in time do you anticipate rendering any additional opinions in this case?
A No, I do not.
Q If you do any further work or form any further opinions concerning the subject matter of this litigation, please inform your
attorneys so that he or she may direct you to amend your report.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
MS. MOLTZEN: I would like to take a break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 9:24 AM.
(Short recess was taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Back on the record.
The time is 9:34 AM.
Q Dr. Ludmerer, while we were on the break your attorney handed me a deposition that he hadn't provided to the United States
before in the case of Harvey versus ABB Lummus, L-u-m-m-u-s, Global, Inc. It was deposition testimony that you gave on
May 13 of this year. Do you remember this case?
A I did give a deposition in May of this year. If I did not recognize its absence from this list you showed me yesterday, then I
apologize. But it is correct that I did give a deposition in May of this year for the Harvey case was an individual smoker case.
Q So now I believe we have all 14 cases to the best of our knowledge?
A To the best of our knowledge. That includes the two cases from the early, I call it the early period, and then 12 depositions
or trials from 1997 through the present.
Q Why did you start testifying again after the early period?
A Well, there are two dimensions to that. Number 1 is I did not immediately start testifying because the first time that I was
contacted about a case and maybe even the second time I declined because I was too busy with other projects. But then the
chief reason is that things were very quiet at that time in tobacco litigation. I hadn't heard from them. I didn't have any contact
with representatives of the defense for roughly six years.
So when they contacted me again, the issues were very similar as they were before and I felt that again the same tension we
discussed yesterday; on the one hand a very firm conviction that smoking is hazardous and causes cancer and other diseases, a
desire that everyone in the world would stop smoking tomorrow; but at the same time the same advocacy of history as a field
and having the historical events correctly delineated. There were witnesses -- there were claims, I should say, in some of those
other cases that were quite false, fictitious in terms of the scientific aspect of the story. So for the same reason -- and I consulted
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
leaders of Washington University again and reviewed the issues with them. For the same reasons that I agreed to participate in
the late eighties, I agreed to participate again when I had the time, only when I had the time, in some of these more recent cases.
But the chief reason that for six or seven years there is no involvement, apparently nothing was happening, at least nothing that
they needed me for. I was not contacted at all by any of the legal firms representing the defense. I certainly had no wish or
inclination of my own to contact them so we went our merry ways.
MS. MOLTZEN: I want to put on the record the United States reserves its right to depose Dr. Ludmerer if it finds anything
in this deposition in Harvey versus ABB Lummus.
MR. WOODS: I recognize your reservation of rights. Whether you have the rights is another thing.
Q Have you prepared any charts or exhibits for this case?
A No, I have not.
Q In the four trials that you have testified in, five trials that you testified in, did you prepare any demonstrative exhibits for
those trials?
A In a couple of the cases there were demonstratives. I don't have them but there were demonstratives in a couple of cases.
Q Do you remember what those demonstrative exhibits were?
A Not precisely. There was a demonstrative that I recall that summed up the principles of how one goes about doing the history of
medicine. We talked about those things yesterday, comprehensiveness, fairness, looking at all of the evidence, the evolutionary
nature of medical knowledge, things of that sort, avoiding hindsight. So there was one demonstrative that listed those things
as bullet points. I recall a demonstrative that showed competing explanations for the cause of lung cancer circa '53 and '54.
Exactly the things that we discussed yesterday, tobacco number 1, a genetic cause, radiation, pollution, a few other possibilities,
including other, including the idea, including the possibility that none of the things we were presently looking at would be bear
out to be the cause and would have to keep doing work. There was a demonstrative showing how new work continued to be
done; that the growing evolving consensus and the types of work that were done in the mid fifties and late fifties and early
sixties to help lead to the consensus. I'm speaking from memory. But these were the sorts of things that were --
Q In one of the trial transcripts that I read, and I believe it was Boeken, am I saying that right B-o-e-k-e-n?
A I think so.
Q There was a demonstrative evidence, exhibit, that I believe was titled Controversies Regarding Lung Cancer and Smoking,
1954 to '64. And from the testimony it sounded to me like number I was controversy among epidemiologists, number 2 was
controversy among statisticians, and number 3 was epidemiologists versus experimentalists. Did that demonstrative exhibit
reflect your discussion yesterday about the disputes between those groups?
A Yes, it did. Substantively those topics were part of our conversation yesterday, and we are talking mid fifties, particularly,
though it continues through the Surgeon General's report. But there were disagreements within the epidemiologists as we
discussed; less over the validity of epidemiology, less over the issue of does cigarette smoking cause lung cancer, more
over the issue of proportion. With the majority of epidemiologists saying that lung cancer is the main cause; environment,
pollution, things of that sort are the minor cause, but there were epidemiologists. The most notable was Hueper who was a chief
epidemiologist at the National Cancer Institute so we are not talking about a minor figure, who was of the other view, cigarette
smoking is a factor, but a minor factor. A major factor has to would with atmosphere, environment and pollution.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Plaintiff, v. PHILIP..., 2002 WL 34428171...
Actually that debate continues through the Surgeon General's report and the Surgeon General discusses this and draws the
conclusion that the other epidemiologists were correct, Hueper was wrong, cigarette smoking was the major factor; environment,
pollution as Hueper suggested were factors but minor. Then there was very, and I think ultimately more powerful criticisms that
came from the statisticians themselves, Fisher and Berkson. Epidemiology is an applied science and is filled out of the work
of basic statistics in terms of the mathematical tools. And the criticisms of leading statisticians about bias and the studies not
being properly designed, the data not being properly analyzed, populations of patients not being representative, these types of
criticisms as Berkson and Fisher made in the mid and late fifties and early sixties, those worry people and engendered responses.
And that's also continued through the Surgeon General's report. Then lastly, again we discussed this yesterday, an issue that
I think was the most important issue of all, the most powerful issue of all is this whole issue of world view, how does one in
medicine demonstrate something to be a cause, what do we mean by cause and what nature of proof do we have to have. Do
we continue to insist on having experimental proof as we traditionally have done in medicine, or, in the absence of definitive
experimental proof can we by inference draw conclusions about causality from other types of data. And that world view issue
I think was really the heat of it. That's why in my opinion we are talking about a paradigm shift, a classic scientific revolution,
one world view arising to stand with -- I won't say replace another, we still believe in experiments -- but to stand with it, the
creation of a new science. I believe that third was the most important issue at all at the time. And those things -- I will trust
you when you say there was an exhibit, I don't remember exactly which trials had exhibits and which didn't and what they said.
Certainly the exhibit that you describe incorporates those concepts that I have reviewed now and that we discussed yesterday.
MS. MOLTZEN: Thank you. The United States has no more questions for Dr. Ludmerer.
Off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Going off the record.
The time is 9:45 AM.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: We are back on the record. The time is 9:46 AM.
MR. WOODS: I have no questions.
MS. MOLTZEN: The United States does want to put on the record that the United States used 7 hours and 16 minutes for the
deposition of Dr. Ludmerer.
MR. JORDAN: I have no questions.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This concludes the deposition. We are going off the record at 9:46 AM.
(Witness excused.)
KENNETH LUDMERER Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of NOTARY PUBLIC
My commission expires: UNITED STATES OF AMERICA -vs- PHILIP MORRIS, INC., et al.
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16
