In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34663497 (PDF)
1997 WL 34663497 (Miss.Ch.) (Expert Deposition)
Chancery Court of Mississippi.
Jackson County
In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of Mississippi Tobacco Litigation.
No. 94-1429.
April 1, 1997.
Deposition of: Kenneth M. Ludmerer, M.D.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Jackson County, Mississippi
Name of Expert: Kenneth M. Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Unknown
Appearances of Counsel.
Attorneys for the State of Mississippi: Ness, Motley, Loadholt, Richardson & Poole
By: Charles W. Patrick, Jr., Esq.
151 Meeting Street
Suite 600
Charleston, South Carolina 29402
(803) 577-6747.
Attorneys for Philip Morris Inc.: Arnold & Porter
By: Murray Garnick, Esq.
James Rosenthal, Esq.
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004
(202) 942-5908.
DATE: April 1, 1997
TIME: 10:15 a.m.
LOCATION: Arnold & Porter
555 Twelfth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C.
TAKEN BY: Counsel for Philip Morris Inc.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
REPORTED BY: Josett F. Hall Registered Merit Reporter and Notary Public.
Computer-Aided Transcription By:
A. WILLIAM ROBERTS, JR., & ASSOCIATES 46-A STATE STREET, CHARLESTON, SC 29401 (803) 722-8414 (803)
731-5224
PROCEEDINGS
Whereupon --
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D. a witness, called for examination, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified
as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, could you state your full name.
A. Kenneth Marc, with a C, Ludmerer.
Q. And it's pronounced “Ludmerer”?
A. Correct.
Q. I believe you were previously deposed in the case of Cipollone, Thomas Cipollone, as executor in the estate of Rose
Cipollone?
A. Yes.
Q. And that was a deposition that was taken, by the cover of it, it appears to be March 25 and I believe March 26, 1991?
A. Correct. There's a typographical error -- at least in my copy there was a typographical error.
The date is correct, but in fact that was a Tuesday. You'll notice that the first day was a Monday, March 25.
Q. Right.
A. Excuse me. March 24. March 25 in fact was a Tuesday, not a Wednesday.
Q. Oh, okay. All right.
Since that time have you been deposed again in this litigation?
A. No.
Q. Have you been deposed in any litigation?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. No.
Q. Prior to the deposition in the Cipollone case I believe you gave trial testimony in the Cotler case in Boston, Massachusetts?
A. That is correct.
Q. Prior to the time of the Cipollone deposition, had you testified or been deposed in any other case?
A. No.
Q. So if I can summarize here, the only two times that you have appeared on the written record as far as testimony either by
deposition or trial testimony would be in Cipollone or Cotler?
A. That is correct.
Q. And you did not testify live as a witness in the Cipollone case when they went to trial in New Jersey?
A. That is correct.
MR. GARNICK: Counsel, just for the record, Dr. Ludmerer gave the deposition for purposes of the retrial.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. That's what it seemed to appear, and then I was just misinformed by someone in my office that you had testified in the
Cipollone case at trial.
Now, I've received some billing records this morning, and I believe that as of the time of the deposition in the Cipollone case
you testified -- and we can look at the record if there's any confusion about this -- but that from August 1988 to June of 1989,
when you reviewed the literature and essentially did the work that went into the project which is the subject matter of your
testimony, I saw that you stated that you spent 1,000 hours doing this particular project.
Would that be a correct statement?
A. Yes.
Q. And then in preparation for the -- let me back up.
And you billed at the rate of $200 an hour, which would mean that you received $200,000 from Philip Morris or Mr. Garner's
law firm for doing that particular project; is that correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And in preparation for the Cotler trial you spent an additional 200 hours preparing for that case; correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And then billing at the rate of $200 an hour, you received approximately $40,000 for preparing for Cotler?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. Correct.
Q. And then in preparation for the deposition in the Cipollone case and/or the retrial, you spent an additional 300 hours at $200
an hour for a total of $60,000; would that be correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, since March of 1991, how much time have you spent in the preparation of your testimony for any tobacco-related
litigation?
A. Until now?
Q. Until now.
A. Well, there had been no work, no preparation, no contact until November of last year.
Q. And what happened in November of last year?
A. Sometime during the month of November, probably in the middle of the month, Murray Garnick, Mr. Garnick, contacted
me about presenting my findings for this case.
Q. And this. is the case brought by the attorney general for the state of Mississippi?
A. Correct.
Q. And would the totality of your billing records be the documents that were handed to me this morning?
A. Yes.
MR. PATRICK; Let's for purposes of the record mark this as an exhibit. This will be Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 1.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 1 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Dr. Ludmerer, I'm going to hand you what I've marked Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 1.
Would this be your billing records for the month of November 1996?
A. Yes.
MR. PATRICK: Let's mark this as Plaintiff's Exhibit 2.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 2 was marked for identification.)
MR. PATRICK: And why don't we go ahead and mark that as Plaintiff's Exhibit 3 while we're at it.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 3 was marked for identification.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, let me show you Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 2.
Would these be your billing records for December 1996?
A. Yes.
Q. And Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 3, would that document indicate your billing for January 1997?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you submitted any other bills other than the ones we've had marked?
A. No.
Q. Have you done any additional -- let me withdraw that.
Have you spent any additional time in reviewing the literature or doing any work or consultation since the end of January 1997?
A. Yes.
Q. How much time have you spent, approximately?
A. I've, oh, spent another 80, 90, a hundred hours or so to the best of my recollection at this time, more in March than in February.
Q. What is your standard hourly rate at the present time?
A. At the present time it is $300 an hour.
MR. PATRICK: Let's have this marked as the next exhibit.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 4 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, let me show you Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 4, which purports to be the disclosure statement, indicates what your
testimony may be in the Mississippi case.
Have you seen that document before?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. And would it be an accurate statement of the subject matter of your testimony and outline generally what the areas of your
testimony will be?
A. Yes.
Q. And attached to that disclosure statement is a copy of your curriculum vitae.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Is that your most current, updated CV?
A. I think so.
Q. Okay. All right. I didn't know if there was something that should be added to it that's not there.
A. No.
Q. I saw that you're receiving an award either this month or the past month from the American College of Physicians?
A. Last week.
Q. Last week.
Where did you receive that award?
A. Philadelphia.
Q. And I've noted it was -- well, you tell me.
What was the award for?
A. There are two different citations which say roughly the same thing.
One citation reads: For contributions to humanism in medicine.
The other citation reads: For contributions to the medical humanities and the history of medicine.
Q. What is humanism in medicine?
A. I'm not sure what they refer to -- what they're referring to. I'm just telling you what the citation says.
My interpretation of it, particularly in light of the other citation, is bringing a broad awareness to medicine, putting medicine
in a broad social context, contributions to the medical humanities, those sorts of things.
Q. You are a medical historian in addition to being a medical doctor, are you not?
A. That is correct.
Q. Do you know a Dr. David Osinoff?
A. I'm sorry?
Q. Dr. David Osinoff at Boston University?
A. That name is not ringing a bell. May I ask who he is?
Q. A medical historian who also studied at Johns Hopkins. I was just curious as to whether or not you were familiar with him.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. That name is not ringing a bell.
Q. Now, in reviewing your prior testimony, I saw that you had reviewed a lot if not all of the literature concerning tobacco
smoking and health that's been published between 1930 and 1964.
Would that be a correct statement?
A. Yes.
Q. And what was your purpose in reviewing this literature?
A. My assignment was to come to an understanding of the state of the art both medical and biological during that period from
the published medical literature.
So we are best referring to information available to working medical scientists wherever they may be during that period on,
number one, what was understood about the causes of lung cancer and, number two, what was known or understood about the
health consequences of cigarette smoking and with particular reference to lung cancer.
Q. Were you trying to determine what the consensus of thought was within the medical and scientific community between 1930
and 1964 and how that may have evolved concerning whether or not cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. Not necessarily. The assignment was to determine, as I said before, what we have called the state of the art.
There are times when -- not just with reference to lung cancer or cigarette smoking but to any subject, there are times when there
may be a consensus, but there are many times when there may not be a consensus or there may be considerable disagreement.
That's something of course that we see today all the time. You read the newspapers. One consensus panel-says.give
mammograms on women, you know, in the forties and the other says it's not necessary.
So it would be inaccurate to say that the assignment was to determine the consensus. It would be more accurate to say what
was known, what was understood.
It was a very neutral question that allowed me the greatest intellectual freedom and responsibility to understand what was known
and what was discussed at the various points in time.
Q. Well, let's start with the end point, that is, 1964.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. what was known by the scientific community concerning whether or not cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. At what date?
Q. 1964. The date of the surgeon general's report.
A. Well, the surgeon general's report summarizes what was known and summarizes the evidence.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
So if one were to ask what had been accomplished, what was -- you know, what studies had been done, what-were the various
interpretations, that certainly is a good place to point to.
Q. So if I look at the surgeon general's report -- and it's entitled Smoking and Health Report to the Advisory Committee of the
Surgeon General of the Public Health Service -- well -- and published in 1964.
I know it was published in 1964, but I don't see a date on the document. I may be just overlooking it.
But the surgeon general's report was published in 1964; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. And if we turn to page 31 where it's stated, regarding lung cancer, cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer,
it states, “Cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men. The magnitude of the effect of cigarette smoking far
outweighs all other factors.”
A. While that was the conclusion of the surgeon general's report, not everyone agreed with that conclusion. Not everyone agreed
with the report, as I'm sure you know.
But that certainly was the conclusion of the surgeon general's report.
Q. And-can we say that was what was scientifically known as of 1964 concerning whether cigarette smoking was a cause of
human lung cancer?
A. That would be inaccurate, the phraseology that you gave.
It was the conclusion of the surgeon general's report that cigarette smoking was causally related, whatever terminology you gave.
And certainly in the aftermath of the surgeon general's report, the dominant majority of the scientific community accepted that.
But I think it would be inaccurate to say either that it proved it or that everyone disagreed with it because there were individuals
from other disciplines who had different canons of truth who were not in agreement with that particular statement phraseology.
So did it prove it or not? I don't think one can say that. Many people believed that it did, but there was disagreement on that
point, among reasonable people.
Q. Who were the investigators or scientists that disagreed with the conclusion of the surgeon general's report?
A. I can tell you in general the source of individuals prior and up to because I have not systematically reviewed the literature
after 1964. My own study stopped with this.
I know from secondary literature that debate continued, that there was disagreement in certain corners, particularly among
people who were suspicious of that conclusion before 1964.
So my comments really are those who in the early ‘60s and ‘62 and ‘63 and ‘64 who were suspicious.
But the doubters, if you will, came from different corner? one group was the working experimental biological scientists, many
of whom were at the National Institutes of Health, many of whom were at the National Cancer Institute, who had a traditional
laboratory-defined view of causation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
In other words, in their view, to say a certain substance caused a disease required experimental verification in the laboratory.
You had to be able to produce that disease under experimental conditions before you could draw conclusions about causality.
A second group included pathologists at various places who were suspicious. Primarily they saw lesions in areas with, you
know, many different sources of conditions leading to lung cancer. They saw lung cancer in patients who didn't smoke.
So there were a number of pathologists who spoke out that I would say that they were probably less important than the
toxicologists, pharmacologists, experimental scientists.
And then the third large group were various statisticians, including Yerushalami, including Ronald Fisher, including Joseph
Berkson, who had a variety of concerns and criticisms of the evidence and of the conclusions drawn from the evidence.
Q. Who were some of the experimental scientists or laboratory investigators that you mentioned that questioned the relationship
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer?
A. It's hard to pinpoint names for example.
I know that members of the -- I believe it's the American Society for Pharmacology and the International Society for
Pharmacology, workers in the field of pharmacology, workers in the field of toxicology.
I know that there have been a number of reports of the various laboratory investigators at the National Cancer Institute who
also had a biological view who .demanded, at least at that time, that there be experimental production of a disease to be able
to draw conclusions.
Those would be examples of the types of individuals. I'm not able right now as we sit here to give a whole listing of names.
Q. Was there one that may stand out that you might recall?
A. Not as I recall here.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 5 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, I've handed you a document that I want you to assume and accept that it was authored by Sir Richard Doll. And
it's marked as Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 5.
And this document was attached to his videotaped deposition that was given recently in the case brought by the State of Florida.
Are you familiar with Sir Richard Doll?
A. I am familiar with the name. I've never met him.
Is there a date for this?
Q. I can only tell you that this document is a draft of a document that was still in draft form as of January 1997. But I cannot
pinpoint an exact date.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. I'm sorry. What was -- January?
Q. January 1997.
And if you would turn to page 17.
Would you agree with the statement given by Professor Doll on page 17 under the title Acceptance of Causality -- and it's about
the middle of that paragraph -- that between 1956 and 1959, the Netherlands Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Health, the
British Medical Research Council, the National Cancer Institute of Canada, and a study group appointed jointly by the U.S.
and National Cancer Institute, the National Heart Institute, the American Cancer Society, and the American Heart Association
all reported that cigarette smoking either was a cause of lung cancer or should be accepted as being a cause for public health
purposes and a year later an expert committee of the World Health Organization 1960 also accepted that smoking was a cause
of the disease.
Do you agree or disagree with what Sir Richard says in that particular statement?
A. I agree with that.
In fact, I would go one step further to point out to you that part of my testimony is the accumulation of evidence from 1950
onward and the spread of acceptance, if you will, of the idea, the statements of some of the public health groups in different
countries.
That's part of my testimony and I do agree with that.
Q. Sir Richard then reports on page 18 that in 1962 the Royal College of Physicians of London reached the conclusion that
cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer.
Would you agree with that?
A. Yes, I would.
Q. And would you also agree that the Advisory Committee to the United States Surgeon General in 1964 also came to the
conclusion that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. With the qualification that you add “in men.”
Q. And on page 19 at the top of the page, Sir Richard reports that following these reports -- and referring to the Royal College of
Physicians of London and the surgeon general -- the idea that smoking was a major cause of lung cancer ceased to be seriously
challenged, except by the tobacco industry outside the United Kingdom, where it had been quietly accepted, and a few eccentric
individuals such as Burch and then in parentheses 1983.
Do you agree or disagree with the comment by Sir Richard on page 19?
A. With the qualification that I have not systematically studied events past 1964. With the qualification that my knowledge of
post-1964 comes from secondary literature as well as just the personal experience of having lived through and gone to medical
school in 1968, and so forth.
I believe he is being presentistic and falling into some historical trends. I believe that is one of those partially true but not
possibly untrue statements. I'm suspicious of the wording and phraseology he uses.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Q. Well, how would you modify that statement to make it more scientifically acceptable, if that's a proper thing to do?
A. Please understand that I have nothing but great respect for Dr. Doll. I've never met him, but I have extraordinary respect
for him.
But if we were in a conference of historians right now, if this were a condition or an idea in something that was not emotionally
laden and policy laden that cigarette smoking is, I think you would find historians saying that that's another example doctors
can't do history without historical training.
They're presentistic. They tend to pay tribute to ideas of the past that subsequently are shown to be correct.
They tend to discard ideas from their past that subsequently are shown to be incorrect without taking into account the context
of the time and the reasons for doing something or believing something, the reasons for not doing something or not believing
something.
You have to look at things in the context of time. You can't look at with hindsight and reward ideas that are currently those
that we accept today.
I think what one would need to do is to look at the ‘60s and the ‘70s, and so forth, and look at exactly what are the arguments,
you know, what are the arguments being advanced, what are the responses to those arguments, you know, what is the nature,
is there validity to them.
I would accept -- and it's part of my testimony -- the first part of his statement that -- well, I'm not eyen certain I would accept
that. I'd have to think about it.
I would certainly accept the point of view that the controversy quieted down and that the dominant teaching became that cigarette
smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
What I would question is this disdainful attitude toward proponents, particularly the proponents early on in the ‘60s and so forth.
I have read secondary sources that have pointed out that there was disagreement among responsible scientists, that issues of
experimental -- if a person had issues, had concerns that there was no experimental proof of causation in 1963, such a concern
would not have been put to rest by the surgeon general's document.
You know, good toxicologists, pharmacologists, experimental biologists could entertain such views without being called
eccentric in the ‘60s, and so forth.
You have to look at the point of time. Are you talking 1965? 1995? 1983 such as Burch? What are the arguments? What are
the counter-arguments?
It in short requires a much more sober, serious analytical discussion and one that places the discussion in context rather than
uses hindsight as Dr. Doll gives in those few sentences.
Q. Did you begin medical school in 1968?
A. That's correct.
Q. You went to Johns Hopkins?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. Yes. That's correct.
Q. When you were in medical school, would it be correct that you were taught that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. That's what I was taught.
Q. In what particular courses did this issue come up? Did you take anatomic pathology? Or in what medical school course
would a subject like this arise?
A. To tell you the truth, I don't remember.
I'll tell you what I do remember the most about smoking when I was in medical school. And that was in either 1970 or 1971
when the Johns Hopkins Hospital voted to continue selling cigarettes through its cigarette machines in the hospital corridors.
Q. Were you opposed to that policy?
A. Yes, I was.
Q. How did you voice your opposition, if you did?
A. I don't remember formally voicing my opposition. I didn't write to the Baltimore newspaper or, you know, write a letter to the
dean, though I do remember having conversations with my friends and classmates and, you know, expressing my disagreement
with that policy to friends and classmates.
Q. Why were you opposed to Johns Hopkins' selling of cigarettes?
A. I accepted the common teachings of 1971 that smoking was a public health risk and did not think it was appropriate for the
Johns Hopkins Hospital to continue selling cigarettes.
Obviously authorities at the hospital disagreed with me for some reason.
Q. I recently found out that the State of Florida sold cigarettes to inmates in prisons, so...
A. So did other hospitals. At that time.
Q. Do you know how long Johns Hopkins continued the practice of selling cigarettes?
A. No, I don't. I'm sure that information is available. I don't know.
Q. Now, among some of the statisticians that you've mentioned as far as expressing disagreement with the proposition, that
cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer was Sir Ronald Fisher?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Who is a prominent statistician in the United Kingdom; correct?
A. Uh-huh.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
May I tell you something about Fisher?
Q. certainly.
A. Fisher by far, by orders of magnitude, was the greatest scientific figure associated with this discussion. Fisher is one of the
handful of truly great biologists of the twentieth century.
As you know, he was a theoretical biologist, a mathematical biologist who ranks in biology much the same way as Einstein
does in physics.
His scientific stature eclipses that of anyone else involved with the controversy, whether Hammond and Horn, Doll and Hill,
Wynder, et cetera, et cetera, you know, great scientific figures who made magnificent contributions, but if you'll ask whose
name will be lasting in the twenty-first, twenty-second, twenty-third centuries as a scientist, it will be Fisher's.
(Pause in the proceedings.)
While you're thumbing through the papers, is this a copy that I may keep or does this go to --
Q. That should go -- oh, that one? Does that have the exhibit sticker on it?
MR. GARNICK: Doctor, that will be an exhibit to the deposition transcript. You'll eventually get a copy.
THE WITNESS: No immediate rush.
MR. PATRICK: I have too many copies and I'll be happy to give you one here.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
MR. PATRICK: Let's mark this as the next exhibit, please.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 6 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, let me show you an article that is marked as Exhibit 6. It appeared in the American Journal of Epidemiology, which
I believe is published by Johns Hopkins, is it not?
A. I don't know.
Q. It's an article by Paul Stolley, S-T-O-L-L-E-Y. I don't know if I'm pronouncing that correctly.
Do you know a Mr. or Dr. Stolley?
A. No, I don't.
Q. And while we're on the subject of Ronald Fisher, are you familiar with this article concerning Dr. Fisher?
A. No, I'm not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Q. Since you're not familiar with it, I'm not going to dwell on it, but let me just ask you and see if you have any independent
knowledge.
It's stated in the abstract or the summary that his views may have been influenced by personal and professional conflicts, by his
work as a consultant to the tobacco industry, and by the fact that he was himself a smoker.
Do you have any comment on that particular statement one way or the other?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Okay.
MR. GARNICK: Let me just say, Doctor, if you need to read the article first, you should feel free to do that.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. If you'd rather read the article, I can ask you some questions about --
A. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe I should read it. If you're asking questions about a specific article that I haven't read, it would probably
be better if I were to read the article.
Q. That's fine.
Let me just ask you independent of the article, you have some expertise or some knowledge of the subject of eugenics; is that
correct?
A. And history eugenics, that's right.
Q. Do you know whether or not Sir Ronald Fisher had a particular interest in the field of eugenics?
A. Yes, I do. He, on the analyst side of things, was involved with the eugenics movement. I do not remember the details of
his involvement.
I know that he, like most eugenicists of his period, had involvement, some more, some less. I do not know offhand the details
of his involvement.
Q. Do you know whether or not he had some, although a brilliant mathematician and statistician, some fairly odd views
concerning genetics and the propagation of the species?
A. They're odd to us today. They were common among geneticists, biologists and polite society at that time.
Again, the question that you're saying reflects this presentism and taking things out of context.
They are odd to us today. They're odd to me. They were odd to me when I wrote about it in the 1970s.
But in the context of this time, it was remarkable how many political leaders, how many leaders of society, et cetera, et cetera,
accepted that world view, much the same way that, you know, is it odd that, you know, prior to 1865 slavery was legal, is it
odd that during World War I the thrust of the civil rights movement was combating Jim Crow as opposed to actually making
opportunities available to blacks or, as we would probably say today, African Americans.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
You have to put things into context at the time. Not doing so is an example of presentism and a fundamental historical flaw.
I can go one step further to say that if we were to discount the work of anyone who had even a peripheral association with
the eugenics movement at that time we wouldn't have the science of genetics because virtually every geneticist, including the
Nobel laureates, before World War II had some type of involvement with it.
Q. Would it be correct to say that although Sir Ronald Fisher may be remembered as a brilliant mathematician in the twenty-
first century that he won't be remembered as being on the right side of the cigarette smoking issue?
A. Assuming our present understanding holds up and is not overthrown at a later date, yes.
But from the standpoint of the historian science, the reply is: So what?
As Vandenbroucke points out in this article in 1989, an article that I have read and do agree with, great minds can be right,
great minds can be wrong, but you have to interpret their views in the context of the time and not with the augury of hindsight.
In other words, the fact that a great scientist may ultimately not be correct in a particular issue does not negate the genius
or greatness of that scientist any more than we think Einstein was less great because he was wrong on certain things, as we
presently understand the state of knowledge of physics to be.
Q. Off the subject of cigarette smoking and lung cancer, I saw that you in your resume or CV had written something concerning
AIDS?
A. I believe so.
Q. Do you presently believe that the cause of AIDS is the HIV virus?
A. I accept that teaching. I'm not an expert in AIDS.
I also recognize that there are profoundly important questions of underlying biology. Why do some exposed individuals get
it? Why do other exposed individuals not get it? Why does it take very fulminant courses in certain individuals? Why does it
not produce disease in others?
There are also social determinants of AIDS. You know, from that perspective, deficiencies of American society that allow drug
addiction to be as prevalent as it is is a cause of AIDS.
Q. But do you accept the teaching that the biological cause of AIDS from the viral standpoint would be the HIV virus?
A. Yes, I do. With the qualification that I'm not an expert in AIDS, but I've been taught that, and I certainly do accept that.
Q. And you recognize that in the study of AIDS there are certain individuals who have put forward the view that HIV is simply
associated with AIDS and is not a cause of AIDS? Are you familiar with that?
A. I've heard that said.
My article on AIDS -- I was reflecting on it as we were speaking -- had to do with how different groups have been stigmatized
at different times.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
In other words, when you have -- in history, when there have been epidemics and one has not understood the root of the epidemic,
it gets very easy to stigmatize the outcasts of society at that time as the cause of it.
And that was the theme of the paper that I wrote on AIDS.
You learn much about yourself by looking at who's stigmatized and much about the values of different societies at different
times by who they happen to pinpoint as the cause of this epidemic or that epidemic.
MR. PATRICK: Why don't we take a minute or so. I want to get some coffee and I want to look for a reference rather than
-- so I can point to it.
(Recess)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Looking on Plaintiff's Exhibit 5, which is the draft by Sir Richard Doll, page 16 --
A. Page 16?
Q. Page 16, and turning back to the subject of Sir Ronald Fisher.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Dr. Doll states in the last sentence of the first full paragraph, he says, “According to Sir Walter Bodmer, who visited Fisher
shortly before his death, he had intended to recognize” --
A. I'm sorry. Where are you?
Q. I'm sorry. In about the middle of the page, last sentence of the first full paragraph.
A. Okay.
Q. He states that “According to Sir Walter Bodmer, who visited Fisher shortly before his death, he had intended to recognize
publicly that smoking was a cause of the disease but did not have an opportunity to do so.”
And it cites “Bodmer, personal communication.”
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Do you have any knowledge of whether Sir Ronald Fisher had before his death and I believe in 1962 come to the conclusion
that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. No.
Q. Do you know whether or not Professor Berkson came to the conclusion that cigarette smoking was a cause of cancer at
any time?
A. I don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Q. Do you know when -- Professor Berkson is no longer alive?
A. I presume so. But presuming he did die, I don't know when he died.
Q. Do you know if Professor Berkson consulted for or received funding from the tobacco industry?
A. It's my understanding that he was consulted. I don't know the details or precisely what the arrangements were. It is my
understanding from years ago that he was contacted.
Q. Does that make a difference to you as a scientist?
A. No. What matters is the quality of ideas and not where a person's funding happened to come from.
Q. Are you a member of the American Medical Association?
A. No.
Q. I believe you do review from time to time books for the Journal of the American Medical Association?
A. I have, uh-huh.
Q. Are you familiar with an issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association which was dated July 19, 1995?
A. No.
MR. PATRICK: Well, we'll work off of a reprint. Let's have that marked, please.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 7 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to show you an issue, a special -- not a special issue but an issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association dated July 19, 1995, concerning tobacco-related issues.
And I would point you to page 258, the concluding paragraph of the editorial.
First of all, are you familiar with this editorial entitled The Brown and Williamson Documents Where Do We Go From Here?
A. No.
Q. On page 258 there's a listing of the physicians associated with the American Medical Association. I believe it's their board
of directors.
Do you know a Dr. Todd, James Todd?
A. I'm acquainted with him.
Q. Looking at that list, do you recognize any other individuals with whom you are acquainted or that you may have some
personal knowledge of?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. George Lundberg.
Q. Who is he?
A. He is an editor of the journal.
Q. Do you know him?
A. Casually.
Q. Anyone else?
A. Those are the two individuals that I know personally.
Q. How do you know Dr. Todd? Have you met him?
A. I have met him, yes.
Q. In what context?
A. A year ago the AMA was considering a national commission to study medical education. As far as I know, they are still
considering it, though there's been no meeting since then.
But they did convene an invitational meeting in Chicago to discuss the feasibility of this project.
A number of medical school deans, foundation officers, authorities in medical education, a couple of university presidents, one
of the past secretaries of Health and Human Services, maybe a dozen or so people, were invited to this meeting.
I happened to be one of those individuals. And Dr. Todd was at that meeting.
Q. If you can look back on page 278 and let's go back to the summary --
A. 278?
Q. To page 258. I'm sorry.
A. 258. Uh-huh.
Q. Okay?
And if you look at the bottom of the page, the left-hand column, this states, “In summary, the evidence is unequivocal.”
Do you see where I am?
A. Yes, I see that.
Q. “The U.S. public has been duped by the tobacco industry. No right-thinking individual can ignore the evidence. We should
all be outraged, and we should force the removal of this scourge from our nation and by so doing set an example for the world.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
We recognize the serious consequences of this ambition, but the health of our nation is more important than the profits of any
single industry.”
And then on top of the next page or the next column -- excuse me -- “On behalf of the physicians of this country and the people
they serve, the AMA pledges its best efforts to the eradication of tobacco-related disease. We solicit the support of the public
and our government in this endeavor. It is a worthy cause.”
Doctor, do you agree with the comments made or taken from the editorial by the board of directors of the American Medical
Association?
A. In part.
Q. What part do you agree with?
A. I very much agree with the view that tobacco is a great public health risk. From the time I've been in medicine, I've personally
believed there are health hazards associated with it.
I've counseled my patients, my family not to smoke, and I believe that it is in the interest of the public health to decrease cigarette
smoking, eliminate it if you can. I very much agree with that.
Please let it be understood that I accept the public health risk of tobacco.
Q. Do you agree with what they say, “we should force the removal of this scourge from our nation”? Do you agree with that?
A. Where are you?
Q. The third sentence -- well, four sentences down.
“We should all be outraged, and we should force the removal of this scourge from our nation.”
I'm just asking whether or not we should force the removal of this scourge from our nation, whether you agree with this.
A. I don't know. This is beyond my expertise. It certainly is beyond my historical expertise for this case, which is 1930 to 1964,
which is what I've reviewed. It's beyond my medical expertise.
The question you're asking gets into areas of public policy and law, you know, do we prohibit something, do we -- you know,
what techniques are advisable, appropriate, legal, to combat a public health threat. I don't know. I don't know.
It's obviously an extreme statement. I don't know. I don't have a good opinion on that, and certainly no expert opinion.
Q. As a clinician and when you are practicing medicine, I believe you stated you counsel your --
A. Right.
Q. -- patients --
A. Exactly.
Q. -- either if they smoke to stop and if they don't they should never start?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. Right.
Q. Would that be correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And your family?
A. Exactly.
Q. Tell --
A. No question.
Q. -- that people --
A. Absolutely.
Q. -- should not smoke cigarettes?
A. Absolutely.
MR. GARNICK: Let me just interject, Doctor. Let him get out the question before you answer.
THE WITNESS: Sure.
MR. GARNICK: Especially if your answer is going to be “absolutely.”
THE-WITNESS: Yes, I do counsel my family and patients in that fashion.
But what I don't know is the method. Is counseling sufficient? There's individual responsibility. Do we outlaw it as this sentence
suggests? That's where I express my humility and I don't know.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Do you believe -- well, answer if you can answer it because I think you said you stopped your research or your project as
of 1964, the date of ‘64.
Based on what you knew from teachings in medical school, would you agree that there was substantial controversy existing
within this medical and scientific community concerning whether or not cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer as of
1971?
A. As to whether cigarette smoking was a cause of --
Q. Cancer, lung cancer.
A. -- cancer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
At that time -- and I'm speaking from memory -- at that time the controversy as it had existed a few years before unquestionably
had quieted down. And the dominant view accepted the findings of the surgeon general's report and accepted new criteria of
causality.
I'm aware that there were other positions. I'm aware that there were other canons of causality in that there were -- that there
was disagreement and that not every question had been answered.
But I do remember that the dominant teaching at that time was that smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
Q. Have you reviewed or have you been supplied any internal tobacco industry documents on this issue?
A. Would you please repeat that question.
Q. Yes.
Has Mr. Garnick or anyone affiliated with Philip Morris or Arnold & Porter supplied you for your review internal corporate
documents authored by various executives of people -- executives in the tobacco industry commenting on whether or not
cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. In regard to this case?
Q. In regard to this case.
A. No, they have not.
Q. Have they given you any documents for your review at all, period?
A. Internal documents?
Q. Internal documents.
A. The only internal documents that I have seen were those that I was shown six, seven or eight years ago, and they were
specifically documents that Dr. Jeffrey Harris produced as part of his testimony in the Cipollone case, and I don't remember
if that was one of his -- if that was his supplemental expert report or whether it was as part of the -- whether it was part of
the testimony he gave at trial.
But somewhere along the line Dr. Harris referred to internal documents. Those specific documents which were from a far earlier
period I was shown to help understand what Dr. Harris' testimony were.
Those are the only documents I have seen. I have seen nothing in the last six or seven or eight years. I hadn't been involved in
the case until, you know, in November. I never have seen anything from the recent years.
Q. Well, that answers my question.
So the only documents that you saw were supplied as a result of Dr. Harris' testimony?
A. That is correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Q. So would it be fair to say that you are unable or not in a position to assess what the knowledge was within the American
tobacco industry concerning the issue of whether cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer prior to 1964?
A. Yes.
Q. That the answer is that you are unable to assess that?
A. I am unable to assess company attitudes or positions prior to 1964. My work has exclusively been on published medical and
biological literature, nothing internal to the companies.
Q. Do you think the American public should have been aware that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer prior to 1964?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to the form.
MR. PATRICK: I'm going to rephrase it.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. If you were a layperson -- say you're a cigarette smoker, and it was 1960. Would that person, had that person looked at the
medical and scientific literature, either looking at the literature or asking his doctor whether or not cigarette smoking was a
cause of lung cancer, should that person have come to the conclusion that it was a cause?
MR. GARNICK: I'm going to object to the form.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. You can answer.
A. Who knows? It depends which article they read. You know, there are those that said it is a cause, be concerned. And there
were an awful lot of articles that at that time were skeptical of the claim.
So it depends, you know -- it depends.
Also, it's my understanding that there was great attention in the public press given to the controversy, so I would be -- I really
would not expect that a citizen in 1960 would have to go to the medical literature to find a discussion of this. It's my understanding
that there was considerable discussion already in the popular media.
Q. Reader's Digest, for example?
A. Correct.
Q. And if someone read Reader's Digest, the conclusion that that person could come to would be most probably that there was
a connection between cigarette smoking and some health risk; would you agree with that?
A. I don't know because I have not read the Reader's Digest articles. I do not know how accurately they reflected the controversy
of the time.
And if they did reflect the controversy of the time accurately, they would have pointed out that this is a question for investigation,
this is a concern, we don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
So I really cannot answer your question what, you know, the average person would have concluded reading the Reader's Digest.
Q. What about True magazine? Are you familiar with a publication that existed at that time called True?
A. I've never heard of it.
Q. You don't know whether or not if you read True magazine you would have come to the conclusion that it was okay and
there was no health risk associated with smoking?
A. As I said, I never even heard the name of the magazine until now.
Q. In this issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, there is some mention of the fact -- now I'm looking at
page 243 -- that Washington University received funding from the tobacco industry for cancer immunology.
Are you aware of any work of Washington University or contracts that were performed by Washington University on tobacco-
related issues?
A. I am unaware of what funding, if any, that Washington University has received from this source or any other source, outside
of a few sources I'm familiar with.
I know we have a lot of National Institutes of Health, NIH, support, a lot of support from the Markey Foundation, the Howard
Hughes foundation.
You know, we get support wherever we can find it. What matters is the quality of the work, not whether it happens to. be funded
by the American Cancer Society or the Markey Foundation or, you know, a tobacco consortium.
Q. So you're --
A. I don't know.
Q. You just don't know?
A. I don't know.
Q. You're unaware?
A. I'm unaware.
Q. Have all your contacts regarding this project been with either lawyers at Arnold & Porter or Mr. Garnick?
I mean, have you consulted with other lawyers representing tobacco companies?
A. What do you mean have I consulted with them?
Q. Have you spoken to them about your opinion?
MR. GARNICK: In connection with this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. In connection with this case or with Cipollone or with Cotler. Any other law firm or lawyers?
A. Please understand that they've consulted with me. I have not consulted with them; they have consulted with me.
Q. That's fine.
A. Yeah. But the answer, to the best of my recollection, is yes.
Q. Let me define it further.
A. Yeah.
Q. Have you met with any lawyers within the law firm of Shook, Hardy & Bacon, which is a law firm in Kansas City,-Missouri?
If you recall.
A. You have to understand, I'm not a professional witness, and at some of the early meetings there would be a dozen people
from different firms, and Shook, Hardy & Bacon may have been one of the firms represented and it may not have been one
of the firms represented.
I don't know.
Q. Do you know the name of a lawyer, Bill Shinn, William Shinn?
A. No, I do not.
Q. How about Bill Ohlemeyer?
A. I do not know that name.
Q. Do you know a Bennett LeBow?
A. Is that the head of Liggett?
Q. Yes.
A. I read the name in the newspapers. That's the extent of my knowledge.
Q. Did you read that he made a statement in which, about which his company recognizes that cigarette smoking is a cause
of lung cancer?
A. I've read news articles in the last few weeks to that effect. I certainly know no details.
Q. Have you read anything about a Dr. Eyesenck, if I'm pronouncing that right?
Are you familiar with him, Professor Eyesenck from London?
A. How do you spell that name?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
Q. I think it's E-Y-E-S-E-N-C-K.
A. That's a familiar name. I probably read between 1,500 and 2,000 items. It's not ringing a bell, but it's a familiar name. I'm
not certain.
Q. Are you familiar or do you recall reading any papers by Dr. Essenberg, E-S-S-E-N-B-E-R-G?
A. Again, that's a familiar name, but I'm not immediately locating it or placing it.
Q. Do you know if --
A. Do you have a paper --
Q. Yes, I have a copy. I'll get you a copy of this.
Let me just hand you a paper entitled Technical Papers, Cigarette Smoking and the Incidence of Primary Neoplasm of the Lung
in the Albino Mouse.
This is dated 1952 and it appeared in Science magazine.
Do you recall reading this in the course of your research project?
A. Not at the moment. It's highly likely I read it seven or eight years ago. I would know for certain by whether it's on my
bibliography that I put together at that time, but it is not an article that is immediately familiar to me.
Q. I looked at your bibliography before. I certainly didn't try to bring all of the documents that you had for review or literature
you had for review. But I could not find this particular reference, and not to say that you didn't look at it, but I just couldn't find it.
If you look on page 562, which would be the second page of your copy there, over on the right-hand side, it states that “Since
no other experimental differences existed between the smoked and the control mouse except the smoke, it seems justifiable to
conclude that the preponderance of tumors in the experimental mice was induced by the cigarette smoke.”
Did that particular statement jog your memory as to whether there was an inhalation study of smoke in 1952 that produced
an excess incidence of cancer?
A. No. The one sentence is not jogging my memory.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not inhalation experiments before 1960 produced any positive findings?
And-by that I mean whether or not inhalation of smoke by laboratory mice increased the incidence of cancer.
A. Are you speaking in reference to this paper in particular or just in general?
Q. No, just in general.
A. In general, the answer is that those experiments were negative, which is something that the surgeon general's report comments
on.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
This was considered, as you know, one of the holes in the cigarette hypothesis at that time, the inability to produce lung tumors
by inhalation experiments in experimental animals.
The surgeon general did comment on this.
There was only one very recently studied -- very recently published study with dogs that might have had a positive result, but
even with that study the surgeon general's committee was cautious that they had reservations about that study and that in general
the inhalation studies in different animals were negative.
Q. Do you know why it was so difficult to produce cancer in laboratory animals by inhalation?
A. I don't know the basic biology of that, whether it has to do with the animals, with the difficulty in replicating human smoking
conditions in animals, whether the modes of administration. I don't know why the studies were negative.
Maybe it couldn't be done. You know, maybe there was an error in the hypothesis. That was a question that was raised by
people at the time.
I do not know what has happened with that line of inquiry subsequent to 1964. I don't know if there were -- if there have been
positive results more recently or not, and if so, in what animal or not.
But I do know that prior to 1964 that line of experimentation had been generally unsuccessful, but as to why that is I don't know.
Q. Doctor, I'm going to not be much longer, but I just want to go into very briefly some of your opinions regarding what
happened prior to 1950.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Would you agree that there was -- there are instances of case reports or anecdotal evidence that lung cancer may have been
caused by cigarette smoking?
A. There were case reports. Whether that was considered real evidence or not was a matter of dispute.
As you know, most scientists at that time dismissed those reports because of their anecdotal nature and the lack of evidence.
MR. PATRICK: Let's mark this particular article as the next exhibit.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 8 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Let me show you the next exhibit. It's Plaintiff's Exhibit Number 8.
This is the first article --
A. Right.
Q. -- published by Richard Doll in 1950. It appeared in the British Medical Journal September 30, 1950, Smoking and Carcinoma
of the Lung.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
You're familiar with this paper; right?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. And if you would turn to page 747, the right-hand column, the middle of the page, and let me just read this paragraph.
“Consideration has been given to the possibility that the results could have been produced by the selection of an unsuitable
group of control patients by patients with respiratory disease exaggerating their smoking habits or by bias on the part of the
interviewers. Reasons are given for excluding all of these possibilities, and it is concluded that smoking is an important factor
in the cause of carcinoma of the lung.”
Would you agree that Professor Doll and Professor Hill at that time concluded that smoking was a cause of lung cancer, and
this was in 1950?
A. I don't know what they concluded in their own minds at that time.
I do know that this was one of the articles that was a major turning point in heightening the awareness of the scientific community
in general that smoking might be a risk factor.
I know that ultimately no one, including Dr. Doll and Dr. Hill, considered the retrospective evidence to be conclusive, which
in their own words is why they undertook the prospective studies.
But I don't know why -- I don't know what was actually going on in their minds and what they thought versus what they believed
versus what they suspected versus what they wanted to investigate.
Q. If Professor Doll states now that it was his conclusion at that time -- and that is in 1950 -- that cigarette smoking was a cause
of lung cancer, would you agree or disagree with his statement?
A. I wouldn't know.
MR. PATRICK: Let's mark this as the next exhibit, please.
(Plaintiff's Deposition Exhibit Number 9 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Well, I thought I had an additional copy of this, but I only have one for me. I can't find it.
But if you'd turn to page 373 -- and this is a document entitled or a paper entitled Conversation with Sir Richard Doll, British
Journal of Addiction in 1991.
And at page 373, left-hand column, toward the end of the first column, it says: “All this evidence enabled us to conclude that
cigarette smoking was actually a cause of the disease. We said that in our first paper, and the only credit I would claim for us
is that we did pluck up our courage and state this openly. We believed that it was the sensible scientific conclusion.”
Do you have any comment on that statement by Sir Richard Doll as to what he believed at the time that he wrote the paper
in 1950?
MR. GARNICK: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
THE WITNESS: On the basis of the selected information you've given me, it doesn't change my opinion. I don't know if he
really believed it himself or not in 1950. Or liked to think that he did.
Memories can be flawed. A problem with world history. You like to recall events in the way that is more favorable to you.
I don't know.
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Doctor, do you intend to look at the literature, examine the literature after 1964 in order to draw any conclusions about the
subject of cigarette smoking and disease?
A. It's my understanding that I will not be going forward from 1964 in my effort, that the testimony I will be asked to give will
be confined exclusively to my findings from the 1930 to January 1964 period.
Q. And if I were to look at your testimony that you gave in the Cotler case, would that essentially be the testimony that you
would give in this case, in the Mississippi state case?
A. Quite -
MR . GARNICK: Objection.
Do you mean word for word or the substance?
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. Not word for word but just in general.
If I looked at your disclosure statement and I looked at the testimony given in the Cotler case on direct examination, that the
matters discussed there would be essentially the matters you would discuss in the trial of this case, the state of Mississippi case?
A. Quite frankly, I don't know what I'm going to be asked to testify on or what questions that I'll be asked.
I have reread my testimony in the Cotler case and I stand by it, but I don't know what I will be asked to discuss or testify on
specifically for this case.
Q. But you have not deviated from your opinions given in the Cotler trial, have you?
A. That is correct. I continue to adhere to those opinions, to maintain those opinions.
Q. Essentially, Doctor, your testimony is that prior to 1964 there was controversy over whether or not cigarette smoking was
a cause of lung cancer?
A. Right.
MR. PATRICK: Doctor, I don't have any further questions. I appreciate your time. I'm sorry we had to -- this is off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
EXAMINATION
BY MR. GARNICK:
Q. I do have one clarifying question.
Dr. Ludmerer, in response to your last question, you said your testimony before 1964 was one of the state of the art of smoking
and lung cancer was one of controversy.
When you were answering that question, were you -- did you have in your mind that the entire period before 1964 could be
characterized as in controversy?
A. I debated whether speaking up or not and I'm glad you clarified that.
My testimony is that the period of controversy was 1950 to 1964, that the scientific controversy began with the Doll and Hill
paper, among others, and...
EXAMINATION
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. There were, though, some scientists, physicians, such as Alton Ochsner, prior to 1950 that put forward the position that
cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer?
A. My testimony is the same as Dr. Doll's.
My testimony is that there was no substantive, reliable body of knowledge to cause concern among more than a handful of
individuals in the medical and scientific community that cigarette smoking was a risk for lung cancer until his paper and the
Wynder and Graham and other papers in 1950 began the controversy.
I agree with Dr. Doll. I agree with the various surgeon general reports. I agree with the counts of others who participated in the
controversy that in the 1950s something happened, they began to look into the question, and that's when the controversy began.
MR. PATRICK: All right.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. GARNICK:
Q. One more question.
You said that “My testimony is the same as Dr. Doll's.”
A. Okay. I'm sorry.
Q. Doctor, did you read Dr. Doll's testimony?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29In re: Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex Rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34663497...
A. Okay. It shows my inexperience as a witness. I'm just a doctor, a professor.
But he did make a point that I happen to agree with in terms of 1950 being an initiating date of the controversy, and I do not
mean to say my testimony is the same as his. But I do agree with him on that specific point as to when the controversy began.
EXAMINATION
BY MR. PATRICK:
Q. If the question arises that you do testify in the Mississippi case -- and of course I have no control over what you do or don't
do -- but could you review that article on Sir Ronald Fisher, because there may be some questions about that at some later time.
A. Okay. I'd be happy to.
MR. PATRICK: All right. That's it.
(Reading and signature not waived.)
(Time noted: 11:50 a.m.) DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, to wit:
I, Josett F. Hall, before whom the foregoing deposition was taken, do hereby certify that the within-named witness personally
appeared before me at the time and place herein set out, and after having been duly sworn by me, according to law, was examined
by counsel.
I further certify that the examination was recorded stenographically by me and this transcript is a true record of the proceedings.
I further certify that I am not of counsel to any party, nor an employee of counsel, nor related to any party, nor in any way
interested in the outcome of this action.
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30
