1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
For Opinion See 2001 WL 34133821 , 2000 WL
33534572 , 1997 WL 33635627 (Trial Order)
Circuit Court of Florida,
11th Judicial Circuit.
Dade County
Howard A. ENGLE, M.D., et al., Plaintiffs,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY, et al.,
Defendants.
No. 94-08273 CA (20).
November 6, 1998.
Deposition of: Augustus M. Burns, Ph.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fail-
ure to Disclose
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud
- Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Ci-
garettes
Jurisdiction: Dade County, Florida
Name of Expert: Augustus M. Burns, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Page 1
4000 Bell Atlantic Tower
1717 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
Attorney for the Defendant Philip Morris.
John C. Monica, Jr., Esq Melissa R. Castro, Esq
Shook Hardy & Bacon, L.L.P.
Market Square West
661 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Ste. 600
Washington, D.C. 20004-2615
Attorney for the Defendant Lorillard Tobacco
Company.
Elizabeth P. Kessler, Esq
Jones Day, Reavis & Pogue
1900 Huntington Center
Columbus, Ohio 43215
Attorney for the Defendant R.J. Reynolds To-
bacco Company.
INDEX
WITNESS ... PAGE
AUGUSTUS BURNS, PH.D. Direct Examination
by Mr. Hoag ... 3
EXHIBITS
Appearances: Plaintiff's Exhibit 1 ... 100:15
John Hoag, Esq.
Stanley M. Rosenblatt, P.A.
Concord Building, 12th Floor
86 West Flagler Street
Miami, FL 33130-1807
Attorney for the Plaintiffs
(Appearance by Speakerphone). Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 ... 140:18
Plaintiff's Exhibit 3 ... 147:12
Plaintiff's Exhibit 4 ... 154:19
Plaintiff's Exhibit 5 ... 160:14
JURAT ... 167
William P. Geraghty, Esq.
Shook, Hardy & Bacon, L.L.P.
26th Floor, New World Tower
100 North Biscayne Boulevard
Miami, FL 33132-2387
Attorney for the Defendant Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation.
CERTIFICATE OF COURT REPORTER ... 168
(Thereupon, AUGUSTUS BURNS, Ph.D., having
been first duly sworn, testified as follows:)
DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. HOAG:
Stephen J. McConnell, Esq
Dechert, Price & Rhoads
Q Could you state your name for the record,
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 2
please. A No.
A My name is Augustus M. Burns. Q How did you cone to be contacted about the
Possibility of being an expert witness for the to-
bacco companies or tobacco company?
Q And you're a Ph.D. is that correct?
A Yes.
Q Have you ever been deposed before?.
A Yes. I've been deposed once before.
Q When was that?
A The first contact I had was a telephone cell
from an attorney with a law firm in Winston
Salen, North Carolina.
Q Do you remember What law firm that was?
A It was in May, 1997. A Womble, Carlyle and S??dge, to the best of my
recollection.
Q And what was that about? Q And when was that telephone contact?
A It was the State of Florida lawsuit against the
tobacco companies. A Sometime in October, 1994, I believe.
Q And who took your deposition?
A An attorney named Wayne Hogan.
Q And how long did that deposition last?
A It started at about 9:15 In the morning, nd con-
cluded at about 3:50, to the best of my recollec-
tion.
Q Was that also taken in Gainesville?
A No. It was taken in Washington, D.C.
Q Have you ever testified at a trial?
A No. I have not.
Q Have you ever been qualified as an expert wit-
ness by a Judge in any proceeding?
A I'm not sure if I have ever been qualified.
Q Have you ever testified in any proceeding In
front of a Judge?
A No, I have not.
Q Do you remember the name of the attorney?
A Keith Clinard, CLINARD.
Q First name Keith?
A Yes.
Q And did you know that that telephone call was
going to be made to you prior to the time it was
made?
A No.
Q Had anyone told you that a firm representing a
tobacco company or tobacco companies may con-
tact you about the Possibility of being an expert
witness or a consultant?
A As I remember It, a call cane to the Chairman
of my department, and the notice of that call was
relayed to me, and I was asked if I would be will-
ing to have a conversation with -- I suppose Mr.
Clinard was the person who made the call to the
history department. I'm not certain that he was
but I suppose he was.
Q Who is the chairman of the department?
Q Prior to the tine that you served es an expert
witness in the case that the Florida Attorney Gen-
eral's office brought against the tobacco industry,
had you ever been an expert witness in any other
case?
A The chairman at that tine, at that tine, was
named Fred ??regory.
Q You're talking about the history department at
the ?? of Florida?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 3
A Yes. A Capable in what sense?
Q Now, so It's your ??anding that prior to the
time that you were direct?? someone contacted
the chairman of the history department where you
work at the ??versit?? of Florida to Inquire about
the possibility of whether or not there was ?? who
could serve as an expert witness for the tobacco
industry; is that correct? Q Having the ability to do the same type of work
as you've done, based on his credentials and aca-
demic background?
A No. I don think the was that specific at all. It
was si?? and, in fact, I think and my knowledge
of this process is not clear because I was never
told, never inquired about the full details of it.
A I'm not sure that -- our training is different in
terms of our subject fields and our range of In-
terests in history, so I'm not sure exactly how to
answer that question in any sort of specific way.
Q Is there anything that you've done to prepare as
an expert In this case that would have been out-
side the realm of the area of knowledge of Dr.
Gregory?
But I think the call went to Dr. Gregory, and Dr.
Gregory was asked if he would be interested in
having a conversation about this work, and as
asked me if I would be interested in talking to the
attorney from Winston Salen. A Well, my field of interest is the history of the
American South, and that interest distinguishes
my scholarly life from the scholarly life of Dr.
Gregory, who is a historian of science.
Q You had conversations or at least a conversa-
tion ??tt a Dr. Gregory about this? Q When you say Dr. Gregory is a historian of sci-
ence, what do you mean by that?
A That one conversation was the only conversa-
tion we ever had. A I mean he's a scholar who studies the history of
science.
Q And Dr. Gregory told you he was initially con-
tacted about the possibility of being an expert of
some kind, and instead of him doing it, he re-
ferred it to you; is that correct? Q And under that umbrella, the history of science,
what is the definition of science?
A He asked me if I would be interested in talking
to Mr. Clinard.
Q Did he tell you that he was not interested in
talking to Mr. Clinard? I'm talking about Dr.
Gregory now.
A I understand. I am not curs that he specifically
told me that he wasn't interested. He simply asked
me if I would be interested in talking to Mr.
Clinard.
A Well, outside of the dictionary definition of the
word “science,” I'm not sure that I can give you a
more elaborate definition than that. One of the
areas of interest for people who study the history
of science is the history of scientific ideas.
Q So what was the reason that Or. Gregory re-
ferred this to you rather than doing It himself, If
you know?
A I don't know the answer to that question, He
never explained to me -- he never went beyond
asking me if I would be interested in talking to
Mr. Clinard.
Q Does Dr. Gregory have a PhD.?
A Yes.
Q Would he have been capable, as far as his aca-
demic background is concerned, of doing the
same type of work that you have undertaken for
the tobacco company or companies?
Q When he asked you if you would be interested
in talking to Mr. Clinard, did he give you any
idea what you would be talking about with Mr.
Clinard?
A The reference was In very general terms, and
the answer to the question, the beet answer that I
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
can give, is that the call that I made to
Clinard was just a call of Information, and I
not clear from that initial referral from
Gregory exactly what the nature of this call
about.
Page 4
Mr.
was
Mr.
was
Q Did you know whether or not it had anything to
do with tobacco or the tobacco industry after you
finished your conversation with Dr. Gregory?
A I'm not sure that I knew that that was the case. I
can't remember specifically.
Q what was your general understanding of what
the interest of the caller was who initially had
called Dr. Gregory?
A I really wasn't sure except that there was an in-
quiry about the interest of the caller in talking to
a historian about some issue in Southern history. I
didn't know whether It was an inquiry about the
history of agriculture or what the subject specific-
ally might be from the basis of my conversation
with Dr, Gregory.
Q Now, did you say, and if you already said it,
I'm sorry for repeating it, did you saw your
Primary ares of interest as a professor is the his-
tory of the American South?
A Yes. That was the answer -- that's what I said,
yes.
So while my research interests are in the history
of the American South. I teach other courses that
are more generally associated with the history of
the United States.
Q What specialized ??. though, do you sometimes
teach?
A I have taught seminars on a study of the United
States in the 1958's. I've taught seminars on
American ??ace relations in the American South.
I've taught seminars on the history of public
policy in the United States from the new deal
through the Reagan administration.
As I sit here now, those are some of the courses
that I have offered over the course of my career. I
have offered courses in many areas of interest,
and I'm not sure that that's a complete list of what
I've taught, but it's ?? list of some of the courses
that I have taught recently in the last five or 18
years.
Q I'll get back to that In a few minutes. Let me
just follow up with some additional questions
concerning your contacts that led you to become
an expert witness or listed as an expert witness in
the Engle case.
After the first telephone contact that was referred
to you by Doctor -- I have lost my notes here --
by the chairman of the history department --
Q And do you have any other interests that are
secondary to that but still of significance to you
as a historian? MR. MCCONNELL: Dr. Gregory.
A I teach courses in United States constitutional
history, I teach the general united States history
survey, both sections of it. The ?? half of the
course, which ??rally runs from the founding of
Jamestown or from the ?? of through the and of
the reconstruction period after the Civil war, The
second course runs from the civil war, from that
period to the present. Q -- what, if anything, did you do in response to
that contact?
I teach a course on a regular basis in United states
economic history. I oftentimes offer seminar sub-
jects, seminar courses on more specialized topics
of interest.
BY MR. HOAG:
A I called Mr. Clinard.
Q Did you cell Mr. Clinard before he called you?
A I'm not sure whether he called me. I'm not sure.
The course of this contact here now, I'm not cer-
tain about. It's possible that Dr. Gregory gave him
my name but as my memory is today, it's more
likely that he gave me Mr. Clinard's number, and
I called Mr. Clinard, but I an not sure which of
those processes, which of those procedures was
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 5
the way in which ve made our initial contact. A Yes.
Q Okay. Regardless of whether it was you called
him or he called you first, what was discussed
during that first conversation you had with Mr.
Clinard? Q Had you finished your answer?
A Well, as I remember that conversation today,
we had a very general discussion about the work
that he was doing in some of the litigation that
was then under way about the use of tobacco and
the cases that were then being worked on.
We talked more generally about my background
and about where I had dons my academic work,
what kind of credentials I had, and Just, we had a
very general conversation that was just a way for
us to introduce ourselves to each other.
Q What did he tell you about the cases that were
being worked on?
A Not very much, as I recall it. He was more in-
terested in talking to me about my interests and
my background than in explaining, as I remember
the conversation, than in explaining to me in
great ??ll what it was that he was working on as
an attorney.
But that's what I remember from that conversa-
tion, mostly, that It was Just an introductory tele-
phone conversation.
Q During that Introductory conversation, he did
mention to you that it had something to do with
the use of tobacco?? la that correct?
A Yes. And that it had something to do with the
history of tobacco. But I was not clear from that
conversation exactly what, what exactly -- excuse
us just a minute, We have a slight interruption.
MR. MCCONNELL: Can we go off the record
for a second?
(Thereupon, there was a pause in the proceed-
ings).
A Yes. I had basically Finished my answer. It was
a general conversation, and the specific details of
It, I don't remember. I did have a sense from that
conversation of the general kind of work that he
was involved In, but more than that, more than
that, he was interested In talking about my in-
terests and my training.
Q During that conversation, did you know prior
to or at least by the tine the conversation was
over, that he worked for or represented a tobacco
company or tobacco companies?
A Yes.
Q What was your understanding of what tobacco
company or tobacco companies he works for or
worked for?
A As I remember It, his firs was working for R.J.
Reynolds.
Q And did you cone to understand during that
conversation that there was a lawsuit or lawsuits
that had been flied against R.J. ?? and other to-
bacco companies regarding the use of tobacco by
customers who claimed had been injured as a r??t
of smoking cigarettes?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to from.
THE WITNESS: I don't think the conversation
was quite that specific as I remember it. But I was
aware that they were involved in legal work de-
fending the tobacco companies, specifically de-
fending R.J. Reynolds.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is it your understanding that your expert testi-
mony in some way assists the defense, meaning
the tobacco industry, in defending itself against
lawsuits that are brought by individuals claiming
they have been injured ?? cigarette smoking?
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to from.
Q Do you remember where we were, Doctor?
MR. MCCONNELL: From.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MR. GERAGHTY: Vague. You can answer it.
Page 6
BY MR. HOAG: Q So the research project I'm referring to is the
one that you Just mentioned in that answer, what
research were You asked to do by these people?
Q You can answer it. A You mean by Mr. Clinard?
A My understanding is that the research, the work
that they would ask me to do, would be in their
judgment of assistance to them in defending the
cases and the work that they are doing. Q Whatever people you're referring to In that pri-
or answer.
Q Do you believe it is of assistance in defending
the tobacco companies against allegations that
have been brought against the tobacco company?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection to from.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join.
THE. WITNESS: I don't have an opinion about
whether I believe it or not. That seems to me a
decision that the people who have asked me to do
this research project can determine for them-
selves.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q What people asked you to do a research
project?
MR. GERAGHTY I'm sorry, we didn't hear that,
John.
MR. HOAG: Okay. I'll repeat It.
A I'm still not clear, sir, exactly the nature or your
question.
Q In your prior answer just a moment ago. you
said you were asked to do a research project, and
I'm just asking you what research project were
you asked to do?
A Well, in my conversation with Mr. Clinard, I
wasn't asked at that point to do any research
project.
Q All right. Then it must not be that that you're
referring to. So what research project were you
referring to in the answer that you gave a few mo-
ments ago?
A Mr. Clinard and I had a conversation on the
telephone, and, at that point, I didn't have any re-
search assignment at all.
Q I'm not asking you about that with this ques-
tion. What I'm asking you about is the research
project you referred to in your answer a moment
ago. what research project was that?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q What people asked you to do a research
project?
A I'm unclear as to, as to your specific reference
here. when you say what people, I don't know
when and I don't know the context of your ques-
tion, sir.
Q It's directly related to your prior answer. If you
could read back his prior answer, please.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the
next to the last answer).
A I'm still not clear as to the context of your
question.
Q When you used the expression research project
a moment ago, when you referred to a research
project you had done, what research project were
you referring to?
A You mean in my conversation with Mr. Clinard
about my interests?
Q No. I mean in response to my question and the
answer that was read back about two minutes ago.
Your answer. Do you want to have the answer
read back again?
BY MR. HOAG:
A Yes, please.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MR. HOAG: Would you read back his answer
where he talks about a research project, please?
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the
particular answer).
MR. MONICA: Could we have the question be-
fore the answer as well?
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the
particular question and answer).
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Okay. Now, Doctor, It's Just been read to you
the answer where you said, where you talked
about the people asked you to do this research
project. You recall hearing that answer --
A Yes.
Page 7
Q What work were you asked to do?
A I was asked to do some work on the issue of
public ??ess and the issue of the historical discus-
sion about the use of tobacco and cigarette
products and other forms of tobacco as well, in
the state of Louisiana.
Q So the research project that you were referring
to in ?? answer to the question asked previously
was a research project about, it was about the
state of Louisiana?
A Yes. That was the first research assignment
that I was given after my conversations with Mr.
Clinard had proceeded to a more extensive dis-
cussion of the historical project that they wanted
me to undertake.
Q -- that cane from your correct? Q Did you have any other research projects you
were given after the first one?
A Yes, yes. A Yes.
Q When you used the expression, this research
project what research project were you referring
to? Q What were the other research project you ??ers
given to do?
A I was giving you an answer that suggested that
the valve of whatever research I'm asked to do in
defending these case is a determination for the
people to make for whom I do any work that I'm
?? to do.
A I was asked to begin a study of the history of
tobacco in Florida.
Q Were you asked to do anything else other than
the history of tobacco in Florida?
A Sir, who is they? A Well, that's a very broad topic, and I was asked
specifically to take charge of a research assign-
ment, which would examine the history of to-
bacco in Florida and all of its ramifications.
Q The people you referred to in that answer we've
read about three times so far. Q When you say “and all of Its ramifications,”
what do you mean?
A Okay. Subsequently, after several additional
conversations. I was asked to do a research
project, yes. A Well, there are several different dimensions to
this project, in any assignment of that type. In the
first place, tobacco has been integral In the his-
tory of the state of Florida, and the state has been,
the state of Florida has been actively involved in
the production and cultivation of tobacco in the
history of Florida for many, many years, and so
the assignment that I was given was to examine
the history of that subject in all of Its dimensions.
Q Did they ask you to do a research project?
Q And what research project were you asked to
do?
A I was asked to do some, to begin to do some
work on a case that was then pending in Louisi-
ana.
Q Did that include, then, the history of the beha-
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
vior of the tobacco industry and the tobacco com-
panies themselves In Florida?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Vague.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join.
BY MR. HOAG:
Page 8
form the people of the state about tobacco and to-
bacco products, and to understand the very signi-
ficant impact that tobacco has had on the growth
and development of the state of Florida and the
communities in the state where ??co has been a
prominent subject.
Q Now, In your opinion, does the impact of to-
bacco on the people of Florida Include the health
Impact of tobacco on the people of Florida?
Q You can answer.
A To the extent that that history is reflected in the
public record and the broad nature of that subject,
in some sense, yes, but the most important focus
of my project and my interest here has been the
role of the state of Florida and its various institu-
tions and agencies.
Q Is that what you were asked to focus on, the
role of the state of Florida and Its various Institu-
tions and agencies?
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I don't think Dr. Burns
was finished. You need to let him finish his an-
swers.
A The concern that the state has expressed about
the use of tobacco products in the state is part of
this picture, yes.
Q Well, aside form the concern expressed by the
state is the actual health impact of the people in
the state of Floria part of your research?
A To the degree that the subject is part of the ??
general picture, it is a subject of some interest to
me, but let me suggest that I'm not a scientist and
I'm not a health expert, so I can't talk in clinical
or scientific terms about the health impact of the
use of this product.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Were you finished. Dr. Burns?
A Well, that was one of the focal points. I was
also interested In the Impact of tobacco on the
people of Florida. Its economic impact, the polit-
ical impact of the culture that grows up around
tobacco cultivation, and the Importance to the
state of the benefits that the cultivation and pro-
duction of tobacco meant for the economy of the
state of Florida.
Q Is that what you were asked to focus on?
A I was also -- well, that's part of the assignment.
They gave me a very general assignment, and
how the assignment was interpreted and accom-
plished was essentially my responsibility, and so
I focused on those areas because I thought and
still believe that those are important considera-
tions In understanding that subject and in re-
searching that subject.
I also looked at the history of the state in its effort
to regulate the consumption of the product, to in-
Q Is It necessary for you to be a scientist in order
to do research on the health impact on the people
of Florida from e historical perspective?
A It's not necessary for me to be a scientist to un-
derstand that this has been a subject of extensive
public discussion for many decades in ?? history,
and to review the record of that discussion, and to
not the policy decisions that have been node loc-
ally and statewide in reference to that very broad
topic.
Q Well, based on all the research that you have
done on this broad topic, and especially the broad
topic of the of tobacco on the people of the state
of Florida, what is, in general terms, the health
impact of tobacco on the people of the state of
Florida?
A Well, again, I'm not an expert on the medical
consequences of the use of tobacco products, so I
don't have an expert opinion as to the impact on
the health of the people of Florida associated with
the consumption of tobacco products.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q Well, as an expert, you understand you are al-
lowed to rely on information that you've re-
viewed: correct?
Page 9
A That is correct. I do understand that. historical research from a very broad base of in-
quiry that sent me on a search for the sources of
this topic across the state of Florida, and indeed,
in other libraries in other Parts of the country as
well.
Q Well, based on the information you've re-
viewed as a historian. what is the health impact of
tobacco on the people of the state of Florida? Q Were any of those documents provided to you
by the tobacco industry or any person working for
a tobacco company or tobacco companies?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection, Scope of expert-
ise. A There were, in those boxes, there is a copy of a
deposition, There are, I'm not sure, the documents
that you have are the product of my historical re-
search.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join in that objection.
THE WITNESS: Once again, I an not a health ex-
pert and I don't have an expert opinion that can
answer that question In any sort of quantifiable
way.
I can tell you that the nature of that issue has been
a subject of intense public discussion.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You reviewed many documents in preparation
for your testimony today as an expert witness:
correct?
A Yes, I have reviewed a good number of docu-
ments.
Q There are at least five boxes of documents that
you've reviewed that have been provided to us at
our request, meaning me at my request. Do you
understand that?
A Yes.
Q And those five boxes that have been provided
to me, did you know that they had been provided
to me, five boxes of documents that you have re-
lied on or reviewed?
A Yes.
Q Now, among those documents are articles from
physicians which deal with the health impact of
tobacco on people in the state of ?? correct?
A There are some articles of that type, yes.
Q Do you have any reason to doubt the credibility
of those documents that you have reviewed or re-
lied on that concern the health Impact of tobacco
on the people of the state of Florida?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Beyond the scope
of the expert disclosure.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A That information is evaluated in the same way
that a historian evaluates any information. Histor-
ians have to evaluate any documents, any inform-
ation that cones before then, in terms of their
credibility and in terms of the context in which
the documents are generated.
So, in a sense, historians are by nature skeptics,
and they bring to the examination of any docu-
ment a critical eye, which means that they have to
separate documents and evaluate then and decide
as to the historical value of those documents.
Q Have you read all of those documents?
A Yes.
Q And how were those documents selected?
A They were selected as part of the process of
Q Were any of the documents that concerned the
Impact, the health impact on Floridians of to-
bacco, were any of those documents something
that you had some reason to doubt the credibility
of the document or the credibility of the author?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MR. MCCONNELL: I'm going to object to the
vagueness of the word “credibility.”
Page 10
cess of historical research.
BY MR. HOAG: Q Okay. In the process of this historical research
that you've done for the tobacco industry, did you
find any inconsistencies concerning the health
impact of tobacco on Floridians?
Q You can answer. MR. MONICA: Objection, vague.
A Historians don't accent any documents that
they ?? at face value. I have no reason to doubt
the credibility of those documents except as I
would doubt the credibility and question the cred-
ibility of any document that I examine. MS. KESSLER: Objection.
Q Okay, So that's true for every single document
that you reviewed or relied on or have reviewed
for purposes of your expert testimonial is that
correct? THE WITNESS: The nature of the impact on the
health of Floridians of the consumption of to-
bacco products has been a subject or continuing
discussion and controversy. People In the medical
area over the course of the last seven or eight
decades, or even farther back than that, have
made a number -- have been Involved in a discus-
sion about this very important -- about this very
heavily examined and researched topic.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join.
A Well, the process of historical research is the
process of evaluating documents. Of examining
documents form a very broad-spectrum of source
materials, and evaluating the documents in the
context of the time in which they are producted,
and in light of the work, of the are in which those
documents ?? to which those documents apply.
Q Were there any inconsistencies in the docu-
ments that you reviewed or relied on that con-
cerned the health, the impact on health of tobacco
on the people in the state of Florida?
MR. MONICA: Objection. vague.
MR. MCCONNELL: Join.
MR. MCCONNELL: Join.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q During your review of these historical docu-
ments for the assignment that you were given by
the attorneys representing tobacco companies did
you find any public statements from physicians
dating from 1960 to the present that indicated
anything other than cigarette smoking causes dis-
ease?
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm going to object as beyond
the scope.
MR. Geraghty: Objection. Beyond the scope.
MR. MONICA: I'm going to object to the charac-
terization of his prior testimony In terms or things
being given to him.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Mr. Hoag, I'm confused here about exactly
what you mean by the nature of inconsistencies.
Can you explain that just a little bit more clearly,
please.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A The issue of casualty Is essentially a medical
question, and I'm not a medical expert.
Q Do you ever look for any inconsistencies?
A Historians -- you don't have to look for them.
They appear in the record in the nature of the pro-
Q To the extent as a historian that you reviewed
statements and research done by physicians re-
lated to disease causation and tobacco, did any of
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
those things that you reviewed indicate to you in
any way that physicians in Florida believe there is
any kind of a controversy as to whether or not ci-
garette smoking causes disease?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form and beyond
the scope.
MR. MCCONNELL: Join.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
Page 11
MS. KESSLER Objection Asked and answered.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Okay. Let me saw ?? of all, that the documents
that I have that I'm discussing here, are docu-
ments that I have producted in my own independ-
ent research effort here. Nobody has been giving
me any documents.
A As part of this political discourse -- as part of
this continuing discourse, since 196??, there has
been significant debate about the specific import-
ance and impact of the use of tobacco products,
so I'm not sure exactly how to answer your ques-
tion as a nonmedical expert. Second, the medical discussion in Florida relative
to the health risks associated with tobacco con-
sumption has been an important debate in the his-
tory of the state, and certainly there have been a
number of physicians in the state who have been
outspok?? in their concern that the c??tion of to-
bacco products poses health risks to th people of
the state.
Q I only want you to answer the question as a his-
torian who has reviewed documents, and we'll get
to some of those documents that you reviewed
and I'll ask you more specific questions about
then, but let me ask a follow-up question. Q Can you identify one, any one document that
you have reviewed that indicates that any physi-
cian in the state of Florida considers it to be con-
troversial as to ?? cigarette smoking causes dis-
ease?
Your answer to my last question, I don't believe it
was responsive to my question so I move to strike
it. MR. GERAGHTY: I'm going to object because
the doctor has obviously reviewed lots of docu-
ments and I think the question is unfair.
(Thereupon, a discussion ensued off the record). BY MR. HOAG:
BY Mr. Hoag: Q You can answer.
Q What I said was, Doctor, that your answer to
my last question in my opinion was not respons-
ive to my question and I'm going to move to
strike the answer. A Well, as I sit here today, I'm not sure that -- I
don't have recall of all of the documents that I
have examined, so it's very difficult to give you a
specific answer to a question when I don't have
the documents that I have produced here in front
of me.
What I would like to ask you, though, is during
the course of your review of these documents that
you have reviewed and researched at the request
of the attorneys that represent a tobacco company
or tobacco companies, have you seen anything
that indicated to you that physicians in the state
of Florida cons it to be controversial as to the fact
that cigarette smoking causes disease?
MR. MCCONNELL: Object to form.
MR. GERAGHTY: Join.
I think I've answered your question to the best of
my knowledge based on the information that I
can recall, which is that Florida physicians have
been concerned about the health risks and the
possible health risks associated with the con-
sumption of tobacco Products.
And they have been concerned about this problem
for many years.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q Well, the fact is, based on your own review of
documents Produced by or authored by physi-
cians, physicians In Florida have known and been
absolutely convinced for decades that cigarette
smoking causes disease: correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. ??scharacterizes his
earlier testimony.
Page 12
MR. HOAG: Okay.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You're not an economist, are you. Doctor?
A No. I'm not an economist, but I do teach eco-
nomic history.
Q But teaching economic history doesn't make
you an economist, right?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Correct?
A That is correct.
A I can't speak to what all physicians in Florida
know, My records don't disclose what all -- my
research doesn't disclose what all physicians in
Florida know. I can speak in specific terms about
what some of the specific Florida physicians have
said about the risks associated with tobacco con-
sumption.
Q And you particularly picked out certain things
that certain Physicians said in your review of doc-
uments to include It in your list of documents that
you rely on or have reviewed: is that correct?
Q I want to go back for a second to something
you brought up about historians and historians
not being scientists, Recently, there has been
some publicity concerning D.N.A. testing related
to Thomas Jefferson and whether or not he
fathered a child whose mother was a slave. You
recollect this, correct?
A Yes.
Q And this is of significance to historians, cor-
rect?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the form. A Yes.
THE WITNESS: In the course of my research,
where prominent physicians have been publicly
visible in expressing their concern about these is-
sues, I have included some of those documents,
and some of the articles that these people have
generated, an account of the activities in which
they have engaged. Q Now, do historians rely on evidence such as
D.N.A. evidence when writing about things like
whether or not Thomas Jefferson fathered a child
whose mother was a slave?
MR. GERAGHTY: John?
MR. HOAG: Right.
MR. GERAGHTY: For purposes of economy's
sake, rather than the four of us objecting indi-
vidually, will you agree if one defendant objects,
all the defendants Join In that objection?
A Well, they might, That evidence has been
available just for a very brief period of time, and
how that evidence is going to be assessed is not
yet clear.
It's obviously made a big impact at this point as
the ??itial disclosures have been revealed, but the
way in which that evidence is going to affect the
scholarship of Jeffersonian scholars is not
something that is clear at this point.
MR. HOAG: You're welcome. Q A historian wouldn't need to be an expert on
D.N.A. in order to accept the scientific findings
related to D.N.A and reach the concision that
Thomas Jefferson had, in fact, fathered a child
whose mother was a slave; correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Whenever you're ready. John. A A historian could reach the conclusion that a
MR. HOAG: Yes.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. Thank you.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
scientist or some expert had made that finding,
and that the finding was a finding that the histori-
an could accept.
Q It wouldn't be necessary for the historian to be
an expert in D.N.A. to accept that Finding as a
historian correct?
A Not to accept it as a historian, no.
Q So as a historian, do you accept as fact that it
has been established that cigarette smoking
causes disease?
A As a historian, I accept that the scientific and
medical community has concluded -- has reached
certain conclusions about the health risks associ-
ated with the con??tion of tobacco products, ci-
garettes and other forms of tobacco consumption.
Page 13
But just so our record is clear. I want to be clear
if you're asking him questions on the work that
he's done in this case or on the other case and
which opinions you're asking for today.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So could you answer my last question or would
you like it read back?
A I would like it read back, please.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question.)
MR. MONICA: Objection to form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Based on your reviews that is correct, isn't It?
But that is a historical opinion that I can reach
from the examination of documents based on the
scientific inquiry that others have conducted. MR. MONICA: Same objection. Objection to
form.
Q And when doing a historical analysis of things
that have occurred, historians have to rely on oth-
er areas of expertise, such as economists and sci-
entists: correct? THE WITNESS: My review does not ??nabls me
to make a statement, to agree to a statement as
blanket as the one you've offered here. I can't tell
you what all the doctors in Florida believe about
this subject at any point in time.
A That is correct. They do.
Q And you know from your review of documents
that at least since 1968, let me rephrase, st least
since 1964, there have been no physicians, no
medical doctors in the state of Florida who have
publicly stated anything other than cigarette
smoking causes disease. There are no medical
doctors in Florida who have said It's controversial
as to whether or not cigarette smoking causes dis-
ease; correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Beyond the scope of
his expert disclosure and I think. John, at this
point, we're getting a little far afield.
Dr. Burns has a very limited expert disclosure in
this case, and obviously, as he's discussed with
you, he's done some research. He did some re-
search in the state of Florida case, and may or
may not have formed opinions in that case.
The research record won't reveal that. I can tell
you what the doctors, whose records I have re-
searched and whose statements I have reviewed,
have said about this subject.
But In terms of what every physician in Florida
has said on this subject, I simply can't give you a
definitive answer to that question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q How did you select the statements from doctors
that you included in what you reviewed and relied
on, and/or relied on for purposes of your expert
testimony today?
MR. GERAGHTY: John, let me just interject. I
read, this is Bill Geraghty. Just so you know. I re-
ceived your notice of deposition duces tecum, and
I interpreted It to require the production of all
documents that Dr. Burns has reviewed at any
point in tine, and so those ?? all produced to you.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
You know, I'm not certain to what extent Dr.
Burns relies on any of those specific documents
for this particular case, so I just wanted you to
understand hoy I Interpreted your request for pro-
duction. So the record is clear.
MR. HOAG: The record will speak for Itself as to
your response. You said there were at ?? rive
boxes or documents that he has reviewed and/or
Felled on, and I requested those five boxes of
documents which you provided to me.
You know, this is kind of a side thing. I don't
know how it's in any way relevant to my ques-
tions at this point.
Let me have you read back my last question so
the doctor can have a chance to answer it.
(Thereupon, the Court reporter read back the last
question).
MR. GERAGHTY: Just for the record, I want the
record to reflect that the statement I made to that
question when it was first ?? I repeat it here
again.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Okay, I'm going to finish the question. Well,
let me just start over again, That will makes it
easier.
How did you, Doctor, select the documents that
you chose to review and/or rely upon for pur-
poses of your expert testimony today?
MR. GERAGHTY: My same objection that I
voiced before.
BY MR. HOAG:
Page 14
which seem to?? important, which seem to be fo-
cused on the topics that the research project sug-
gests are important, and you pick form those doc-
uments the ones which seem to be influential,
which seem to be authoritative which come from
people in positions of leadership, in positions of
administrative responsibility.
In addition, you may select documents that come
from people who are active in some particular
phase of the subject you're investigating, It's a
very broad based process.
Q How long did it take you to complete what
you've described as a broad-based process? How
many hours did it take you to do it?
A Are we talking about the work -- I'm not clear
exactly the project that you want me to talk on
here.
Q The process whereby you selected the docu-
ments for review and reliance, how long did It
take you to do that?
MR. GERAGHTY: John, again, you know, I don't
mean to Interject, but I think your question sort of
assures something that is just not the case. Let me
Just for the record indicate.
Dr. Burns has told you that he was asked to do re-
search Into the ares of public awareness in a prior
lawsuit. The disclosure in this case indicates that
he's not going to be opining on that particular is-
sue.
In response to your question for production of
documents, I simply asked Dr. Burns to give me
everything he had reviewed at all at any point in
time since he was asked to do anything related to
tobacco.
Q You can go ahead and answer.
A The process of document location and docu-
ment selection in a research assignment of this
nature is s??r to the kind of document location
and document selection that a historian would
employ in any research project of this type.
You go to source materials and you go through a
large volume of material, and you identify items
So I Just think your question assumes that there
was some selective review and reliance by Dr.
Burns In producing the document which we've
produced to you today, and I Just for the record
want to make it clear that not that's the case. It
was simply me asking him for everything that he
had.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 15
Q Oh, boy. Let me start with a different question.
The five boxes or documents that you're aware of
that have been forwarded to me, those five boxes
of documents include, anything in there is a docu-
ment that you either reviewed, reviewed and re-
lied on for purposes of expert testimony in this
case or some other case is that correct? question).
A In this case or some other case, yes, that is cor-
rect. Number two. In my ?? to you. I also made it clear
that there were many, many documents that Dr.
Burns has reviewed in too course of his research
which, because of the volume of material, It was
simply impossible for him to copy all of those
documents.
MR. MONICA: Those are only the documents In
his possession, too.
MR. HOAG: You know, we keep having extra
people add things to the testimony. It gets confus-
ing.
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I understand that. You
know, I apologize, but I Just want, you know, I
don't want you to get an Inaccurate picture of
what it is we're talking about here. I think you
are, So that's why I'm trying to explain to you
what process went on.
MR. HOAG: Well, to the extent that we haven't
actually been provided with everything that he's
reviewed nd/or r??as on for his testimony today,
I'm going to move to strike all of his testimony
and I'm also going to ask one question.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY: John again I'm sorry to inter-
pose, but I think my letters clearly indicate that in
addition to those ?? th??rs were specific exhibit
numbers on our exhibit list which were identified
for you number one.
And i made that clear in my very first letter to
you, I believe, dated September 14th, so I just
want you to understand that.
(Thereupon, there was's pause in the proceed-
ings).
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I just wanted you to un-
derstand that point, and I wanted to make sure
inst was on the record, and, you know, what I can
tell you is this.
We're obviously not going to use any document at
trial, and I'll make this representation, we're obvi-
ously not going to use any document with Dr.
Burns at trial that I have not either produced to
you in those boxes or specifically identified as
one of the exhibits on the exhibit 11st.
Q Are there any other documents that you are re-
lying on or have reviewed for purposes of prepar-
ation for this particular deposition that are not In-
cluded In the five boxes of documents? I'll make that blanket representation to you. So I
just want to make sure you understand that.
MR. GERAGHTY: Well. John -- I really think you're making more of this than
there really is. I just want to make sure you un-
derstand that.
MR. HOAG: I'm asking him this question. If he
could answer it please.
MR. GERAGHTY: I understand that, but I Just
want the record to reflect that I sent you a couple
of letters which I think clarifies what it is you're
really asking him about.
MR. HOAG: Would you read back my last ques-
tion?
MR. HOAG: Okay. Now if I can actually have
the question and the answer, I would appreciate
It.
MR. GERAGHTY: Absolutely.
MR. HOAG: Unless you want to answer for him,
again. This is getting a little monotonous and It's
getting very annoying. If you would Just let him
answer the question. Your records and docu-
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
ments, they speak for themselves.
You can make some argument later on, but I have
a right to ask the witness questions without you
answering for him.
Page 16
research assistants, who were employed by me to
help me In this process.
Q Approximately how many hours did It take you
to obtain all of these archival documents you
refer to?
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I understand that.
MR. HOAG: If you understand that, why don't
You let him do it.
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I will let him do It. I
Just want to make sure the record is clear and you
understand. I'm truing to be helpful to you, be-
cause I want you to understand what the situation
is.
MR. HOAG: The situation is, I'm going to com-
plete this deposition, and It night take e lot longer
than I thought It would because you keep Inter-
rupting.
A Do you mean, now, including the hours that the
research assistants used?
Q Right now I would like you to break it down
into how many hours you spent, yourself.
A I am not sure exactly how many hours. As I sit
here, a number that would be helpful to you,
maybe, I don't know. I really don't know for sure.
Over the course of the last four-plus odd years,
probably 300 hours. I'm Just guessing, Mr. Hoag.
I really can't tell you with certainty.
Q How many years did you say, over the course
of how many years?
MR. GERAGHTY: All right. Fine enough.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Doctor, other than the five boxes of documents
that I have been provided which I previously dis-
cussed with you during this deposition, and spe-
cifically identified defendant's exhibits, have you
reviewed or relied on any other documents as a
basis for your expert testimony today?
A Well, I was asked to start work on the history
of tobacco in Florida in, let's see, if I recall It cor-
rectly, it was in the spring of 1995.
Q Who was it that asked you to do that In the
spring of 1995?
A Stephen k??.
Q Who is he? Is he an attorney, If you know?
A I have reviewed newspapers and some other --
I reviewed newspapers, but ell of the archival ma-
terials on which, that I have used, have been
made available to you.
Q When you say all of the archival materials,
what do you mean by that?
A I mean materials that are not available except
in specific research locations where you have to
go to these locations and gather this information
through the process of historical research.
A He is an attorney for Jones, Day, Reavis &
Pogue.
Q And does he repress a tobacco company or
??es?
A Yes.
Q Which company or c??
A R.J. Re??s. I believe.
Q What is your hourly expert fee?
Q Now, did you yourself actually do all of that
historical research to obtain all of the documents
that are in your five boxes of documents?
A I did a substantial amount of it, and I had as-
sistants who helped me gather this information,
A $100 an hour.
Q Is that for all work you do or does it vary.
??anding upon the type of work that you do?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A It varies depending on the work I do.
Page 17
hours did you charge your maximum fee of $100
per hour?
Q Is It ever higher than $100 an hour?
MR. GERAGHTY Objection. Form.
A No.
THE WITNESS: Probably about, I would have to
guess, about 68 percent, 60 to 70 percent of those
hours.
Q Is it ever lover?
A Yes.
Q Under what circumstances is it lass than $100
an Hour?
A If the work that I perform is clerical in a sense,
or it's work that doesn't involve historical skills, I
?? a lesser fee.
Q And has any of the work that you've done for
the tobacco company or tobacco companies been
anything other than expert work? In other words,
has any of it been at a lesser fee than $100 per
hour?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And what is the lowest fee you charge for
things that you don't consider to be in the realm
of the $100 fee?
A The charge ranges from $20 to $38 an hour, de-
pending on what I'm doing, plus expenses.
Q How many total hours have you spent working
on the Engle case?
MR. MONICA: Object to the characterization. A Again, I don't have an exact number. I haven't
added up the hours, bu It would be probably in
the nature of 150 to 200 hours.
THE WITNESS: Sir, what is the frame of refer-
ence here, the time frame? Q Of those 150 to 200 hours, what percentage of
those is the maximum $100 per hour fee?
BY MR. HOAG: A Most of than.
Q Since you first agreed to do work or research
for tobacco companies or representatives of to-
bacco companies? Q When you say most, do you mean 90 percent or
do you mean something less?
A Yes. A No, I mean 90 percent. About 90, that would be
about right.
Q How many total hours have you spent doing re-
search work for representatives of tobacco com-
pany or companies?
MR. GERAGHTY: You mean combining
everything together? Or are you talking about this
case?
MR. HOAG: I said total.
Q Now, the monies you have received for being
an expert and for doing this kind of research for
the representatives of the tobacco company or
co??s, does that go directly to you? Do you get to
keep It yourself?
A Yes.
BY MR. HOAG: Q Prior to the time that you began to do this work
or any kind of expert work or research for repres-
entatives of tobacco company or companies, had
you ever done any other expert work that you
were compensated for? I'm talking separate and
apart from your teaching?
Q Of those 400 to 600 hours, how many of those A Yes.
THE WITNESS: I really -- I don't have a firm
idea as to the number of hours. I'm not sure. I
would guess maybe 400 to 600 hours.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q What was the other expert work that you
helped on?
A I've done work for publishing companies as a
textbook consultant, reviewing manuscripts for
possible publication as textbooks.
I've done work -- I've done editorial work for
publishing companies, revising manuscripts and
making suggestions for ways in which book
manuscripts can be improved and can be
strengthened.
I have done work for documentary filmmakers.
working on historical documentary films on spe-
cific subjects for which I was compensated.
I have done some private tutoring over the years
for which I was compensated. There are probably
some other examples of work that I have done,
but those are the ones that cone to mind as I sit
here today.
Q What documentary films did you work on or
did you get paid to do work on?
A I worked on a documentary film about a major
political figure and educator in North Carolina in
the 1930's and '40's and '50's. A man named
Frank Porter Graham.
Q Any other documentaries or films?
A I have done some consulting on a few other
documentary films, but that's the major docu-
mentary project in which I have been engaged.
Q What was the nature of the work that you did
for that particular project?
A There was a broad ?? of activities. It involved,
first of all, doing some fundamental, some very
basic historical research on the facts of this man's
career, which involved the very ?? nary task of
going into a library and examining documents
and looking for historical documentary mater??
that night be appropriate for presentation in docu-
mentary format.
It also Involved the writing of the script for the
documentary production. I wrote three of the
Page 18
scripts of the seven scripts that were done in the
process of revision, that eventually became the
script that the documentary utilized.
I did interviews with a number of the people who
were familiar with this man's life, family, friends,
and historians. and other people who were inter-
viewed on camera for inclusion in the document-
ary project.
That was a major part of the work that I did there
and I was also inter ?? and was on of the people
in the documentary film whose commentary was
included in the final product of the documentary.
In addition to that, I assisted in cutting the film
and advising on the final format in which the doc-
umentary would be presented.
Q When you say you looked at the facts of his ca-
reer, what facts are you referring to, when you
use the word “fact”?
A Well, I mean by that, the basic chronology of
his life. What work he did as a student, whet kind
of activities he was engaged in as an educator,
what kind of activities and work he was involved
in as the president of the University of North Car-
olina, which was his major position in his leader-
ship role in North Carolina in the years that I
have mentioned.
And also, looked at ?? number of the other docu-
ments that are associated with his brief political
career. In 1949, he was appointed to the United
States senate, and in 1950, he was involved in a
very sensational political campaign trying to re-
tain the seat to which he had been appointed,
which was an event of some historical importance
in the history of the South, in the history of the
postwar American South.
So what we did in that process, then, was to ex-
amine the documents that he had generated
through correspondence and through other activit-
ies over the course of his life, all of which are
Preserved in his flies, which are available to re-
searchers at the Southern Historical Collection at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Q Did you write anything, did you publish any-
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
thing that's on your resume that was related to
this work that you did on the documentary?
A Before we worked on the documentary, a col-
league and I Published a book on the subject of
Mr. Graham's Senatorial campaign, his effort to
retain the Senatorial seat to which he had been
appointed in 1949.
Q Where does that appear on your resume, on
your curriculum vita?
Page 19
ther?
A Well, there was an epilogue and a brief discus-
sion at the end of the book about Graham's career
after that Senate race was over, but the major fo-
cus of that book was on the Senate campaign It-
self.
Q Have you done any published research that has
discussed the history of tobacco after 1956?
A No.
A Where does It appear?
Q Did you saw no?
Q Yes.
A Yes, I said no.
A It appears on page 7.
Q Do you have your resume with you today?
A I'm looking at it, sir. Let me -- It's on page 6.
Excuse me.
Q You have a section on page 5 of your C.V.,
there is a section called Publications, Refereed
Journal articles, and there is one -- I'm sorry, let
me repeat the question.
Q Page 6. On page 5 of your resume, there is a section call
Publications, Refereed journal articles: correct?
A Under the heading of Books. A Yes.
Q Okay. So you had written this book before you
were asked to work on the documentary: is that
correct? Q And that section is on page 5; correct?
A That's right. Q It stops just before, the next section says en-
cyclopedia articles; correct?
Q Now, is there anything in your C.V. that would
Indicate that you have done any research related
to tobacco?
A Well, If you are going to write the history of
any part, any facet of North Carolina political
life, one of the subjects with which you have to
be familiar is the subject of tobacco and its role in
the history of the politics of North Carolina.
So that in working on the Graham book, and even
before that, in the doctoral dissertation that I did
at Chapel Hill, some assessment of the role of to-
bacco in the history of the state of Florida, excuse
me, in the history of the state of North Carolina,
is an essential part of any of that research project.
Q That research project on Frank Porter Graham,
that stopped in 1950, is that right, or did it go fur-
A Yes.
A That's correct.
Q What refereed publications, what does that
does that mean?
A It means that these pieces are submitted to a
board of editors, or to a managing editor of a
Journal, and it is reviewed for appropriateness for
that Journal and for the quality of the work that is
done. It is reviewed before it is accepted for pub-
lication.
Q Do you have any plans to submit for publica-
tion any of the research you've done that's been
contracted for or said for by represent ??es of the
tobacco industry or tobacco companies?
A I don't have any ?? plans at this time, because I
have another project which is more important to
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
me right now.
Q What is the other project?
A It's a second book on the life and career of
Frank Graham.
Q Now, the first refereed Journal article you've
got listed there, It looks like there are eight that
are on ?? is called, “The Use of Race and Hill-
billy Recordings as Sources for Historical Re-
search: The Problem of Color Hierarchy Among
Afro-Americans in the Early Twentieth Century.”
MR. GERAGHTY: You're referring to the second
entry there on page 5?
Page 20
recently, and I'm trying to remember what exactly
we wrote 26 years ago, and my memory on this
subject is pretty good, but it isn't perfect.
But I think I can answer your question. The use
of these recordings as historical documents was
to inform people interested in this fairly narrow
subject, that these documents exited and that they
had value as tools for historical research on a sub-
ject that was little understood and had been ex-
amined very little in the history of the writing
about the history of the plain people of the Amer-
ican South, plain people being mostly people In-
volved in various kinds of agricultural work in
the rural south of the early 20th century.
MR. HOAG: No, I'm referring to the first entry
on page 5, It says. “The Use of Race and Hillbilly
Recordings as sources for Historical Research.” It
goes on and says, “The Problem of Color Hier-
archy Among Afro-Americans in the Early Twen-
tieth Century.” Referring to that article. Q In order to do this research, you had to go and
find relatively obscure recordings and listen to
those recordings: is that correct?
THE WITNESS: Okay. A Some of then we did, yes.
BY MR. HOAG: Q And some of the content of those obscure re-
cordings, In your opinion, had historical import-
ance; is that correct?
Q What did you have to do In order to research
that particular article?
A Basically go to libraries and archival holdings
that collect folklore, a genre of historical materi-
als known as folklore, and find these very ob-
scure recordings, many of which are not available
commercially, and listen to these recordings and
then interpret their importance as historical docu-
ments.
Q What is “hillbilly recording”?
A It refers to a type of rural southern music that
Southerners listened to and enjoyed as a form of
popular entertainment in the years of the early
20th cantu?? South.
Q And as it specifically relates to your article,
what was the historical importance of those re-
cordings?
A Let me say, first of all, that this article was
published 26 years ago, and so I haven't read it
A That's right.
Q Did you transcribe the recordings?
A They had historical importance and they were -
- it was an item which we could note in this piece,
in this article, that night point other scholars to
these source materials.
Q In your opinion, does the content of cigarette
advertisements in Florida in the past five decades
have any historical significance?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Beyond the scope
of the doctor's disclosure.
THE WITNESS: As information -- as pieces, as
advertisements that are published in journals and
periodicals in Florida, they have some historical
significance, was.
BY MR HOAG:
Q Did anyone ask you to do research concerning
the history of cigarette advertisements in Floria?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A The research assignment to me was much
broader than that. I wasn't asked to look specific-
ally for any specific kind of documentary evid-
ence.
Q So did you, in fact, look at the history of cigar-
ette advertising in Florida?
MR GERAGHTY: Are you talking about in this
case, or I mean, can you be more specific as far
as what you mean?
MR. HOAG: On any case.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Did you on any case or for any reason look as a
historian at the history of cigarette advertising in
the state of Florida?
A I did not look specifically at the history of ci-
garette advertising in the state of Florida, but in
the course of the documentary rease?? that I con-
ducted, I have seen a lot of cigarette ads yes.
Q What particular cl??e ads have you seen if you
can recollect any?
A Well, as I sit here today, I mean, no specific ad
comes immediately to mind, so I'm not exactly
clear as to how I should answer that question oth-
er than to tall you that in the course of my re-
search, I have seen a lot of cigarette ads in news-
papers and in other periodicals, where they
routinely appeared in ??.
Q When you say routinely appeared, what do you
mean?
A Well, as a matter of r??r practice, cigarette ads
appear in newspapers in the same way that auto-
mobile ads appear in newspapers, in the same
way that department store ads appear in newspa-
pers and so on.
Q So you just noticed them, you didn't really
catalog then or make copies of them for any his-
torical p??e; is that correct? Is that what you're
saying?
A I was not asked in this case of in any other case
to conduct a history of cigarette advertising, I'm
Page 21
no a specialist in advertising or in marketing.
I'm a historian who is interested more in the his-
tory of tobacco in the state of Florida, and so be-
cause I was not asked specifically to undertake a
study of the history of advertising of any product
in the state of Florida, I noted those advertise-
ments in the normal course of examining these
documents.
Q So does the content of cigarette advertising and
the prevalence of cigarette advertising in the state
of Florida have anything to do with the history of
tobacco in the state of Florida, in your opinion?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection, vague.
THE WITNESS: Well when you say has anything
to do, I can only answer that perhaps it has
something to do with it, but the question is very
general and I'm not -- so, surely, for example, the
manufacture of cigars in Florida has been an im-
portant element in the history of tobacco in the
state of Florida.
So the effort of cigar companies in Florida to
market their cigar products is a subject of some
interest to me, but it's not a subject in which I'm
an expert and it's not a subject to which I was
specifically asked to investigate. As I say, I'm not
an advertising or marketing expert
BY MR. Hoag:
Q Would it be necessary to be an advertising or
marketing expert to, as a historian, to do research
concerning the content and frequency of the use
of c??tta advertising in Florida?
A It probably wouldn't be necessary, but it is the
kind of subject that people who are interested in
marketing and advertising per se would more nat-
urally conduct than a historian asked to talk about
the history of tobacco In Florida, or to Investigate
the history of tobacco as a subject of interest to
the history of Florida.
Q Now, you said these advertisements, you ran
across then routinely in newspapers and
magazines In Florida: is that correct?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A Yes.
Q How many decades of newspapers and
magazines did you look at?
Page 22
sorry Did you ask me to compare the advertising
space between cigarettes and cigars on other
forms of tobacco or between tobacco product and
cigarettes and other forms of advertising?
A I've looked at certain Florida newspapers
through much of the 20th century, Probably be-
ginning in the 1820's. My memory here is not ex-
actly precise as to the nature of our investigation. Q Okay. I'm sorry. Let me rephrase the question.
In fact we looked at some newspapers, for ex-
ample, the Tampa Tribune, for a period that was
even earlier than that, because Tampa was the
center, as you know, the center of the cigar in-
dustry in Florida that began in the 1880's. THE WITNESS: I apologies.
So the Tampa newspapers wars talking about the
importance of cigars to the growth of the City of
Tampa even before the 20th century began.
So we looked at newspapers from the Tamps area
that went back even as early as the 1890's.
Q You looked at newspapers all over the state of
Florida: is that correct?
A Well, yes. We've tried to be thorough in our ex-
amination of newspapers, and so we have looked
at -- we have looked at a representative sample of
the major dally newspapers that have been pub-
lished In the state of Florida through much of the
28th century.
Q Did you count how many cigarette advertise-
ments that were in any newspaper?
A No. We didn't make a statistical enumeration of
the frequency of newspaper ads in any of these
papers.
Q Did you ever count how many newspapers ads
and an?? of space in the newspaper ad for cigar-
ettes as compared to the amount of space for oth-
er Information ??ding or tobacco?
MR. GERAGHTY: John it was hard to hear that
last question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q It's not your fault. It's the transmission partially
and it was probably partially the question that I
asked also.
Have you ever done a comparison of the number
of advertisements, cigarette adve??enents particu-
larly, which includes the amount of column space
or column inch that's taken up by the cigarette ad-
vertisements and compared them to the amount of
space or column inches for straight newspaper
articles concerning cigarette smoking and health
Issues?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the from.
THE WITNESS: The answer to the question is
that I have not done that kind of test.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q If you were asked to do that, you would be cap-
able of doing It, correct?
A I would be capable of doing It, but I wouldn't
do it.
Q No one asked you to do that, correct?
A No.
Q So if someone paid you $100 an hour to do
that, you wouldn't do it: is that correct?
A May I ask for clarification? You said cigarettes
as compared to other kinds of tobacco? Was that
the end of your question? MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. That's argumentat-
ive.
Q Cigarettes and tobacco? BY MR. HOAG:
A Oh, as compared to -- I'm confused, sir. I'm Q Is that correct?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A Yes. It's a speculative answer on nu part, but I
feel -- I would not likely want to do that kind of
work.
Q Why would you not want to do that kind of
work?
A Because I think It's a waste of tine. I think It's
useless as a method of inquiry. I don't think it
tells you anything.
Q Would an analysis of the content of cigarette
advertisements in the state of Florida tell you
anything as a historian, In your opinion?
A Well, It depends on what, sir, you mean by
analysis of content.
Q Well, for example, cigarette ads In the 193's or
the 1940'e that say In large print, full page ads --
(Thereupon, there was a pause in the proceed-
ings).
BY MR. HOAG:
Q For example, if there were advertisements in
Florida In the 1930's and the 1940's for cigarettes
that in fairly large print, full page ads, stated, as
regarding a cigarette brand, in quotes. “Not a
cough in a car load.” would It. In your opinion,
have any kind of historical significance?
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm going to object. I think
Dr. Burns is not an advertising expert and we
haven't put him out to be an advertising expert, so
I think this is really beyond the scope of whet we
need to be talking about here.
Q And regardless of how many times that particu-
lar ad appeared and regardless of how many pub-
lications it appeared in in the state of Florida, you
wouldn't find that to be of any kind of historical
significance when measuring, for example, the
health impact of tobacco on the citizens of Flor-
ida is that correct?
MR. MCCONNELL: Object to form.
MR. GERAGHTY: Object to form and beyond
the scope.
THE WITNESS: The significance of any ad
would have to be measured against the much
broader context of the information that is avail-
able in the state of Florida that is associated with
the debate and the public discourse about tobacco
and the use of tobacco products and the concerns
that may or may not have been expressed at the
time about the use of tobacco products.
It would be -- it would not be -- it would be not to
Just extract one piece of information out of that
context, and to give It a significance that doesn't
conform to or is not consistent with the ??storical
context in which it appears.
It's not something that a historian would be likely
to do.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q As a historian, then, you would have to look at
all of the communications, not just one piece of
the communication, in order to reach any kind of
reasonable conclusion: is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection vague.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Mischaracterizes
previous testimony.
Q You can answer.
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. The question is
vague.
THE WITNESS: I night note the words, but I'm
not an advertising authority and I would Just note
that this was an advertisement that one could find
in a Florida newspaper.
BY MR. HOAG:
Page 23
THE WITNESS: I'm not clear what you mean by
the word “communication in that sense.”
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, for example, if you were going to testify
concerning the degree of information that was
made available to the public in Florida, in order
to be able to testify about that accurately, you
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 24
would also have to testify about, well, not also,
but sou would have to testify about all of the in-
formation that was out there to the general public,
including those routinely published advertise-
ments that you saw ?? your review of ??rs and
magazines: correct? MR. GERAGHTY: John, we're coning up on the
noon hour, we were wondering, do you want to
break for lunch or do you want to Just go through
lunch? I mean, obviously, it depends on how
much time you need, but we wanted to find out
where you are.
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm ?? to object, John. That's
beyond the scope of what we've asked Dr. Burns
to discuss In this case. MR. HOAG: I don't know how much longer it's
going to take me, but you guys will probably at
some point want to stop and get lunch, we can
make It short If you want to. It's up to you. Do
you want to take lunch now and take --
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Okay. Let me state again, that I, In this case, I
haven't been asked to provide testimony here rel-
ative to the idea of public awareness, hat I'm talk-
ing about in this case, what I've been asked to re-
search and to investigate, is the integral role that
tobacco has played in the history of the state of
Florida.
MR. GERAGHTY: Let me ask you this question.
Do you think you have more than about two
hours worth of material left?
MR. HOAG: I can't saw for sure until I go over It
and see what the answers are and what the objec-
tions are. It's just hard to tell, until I see how it
goes. You guys --
MR. GERAGHTY: Why don't we --
So that in reference to the question that you have
posed, the answer is, that you would have to look
at those ads in the context of everything else that
is in the public discourse at the tine, and then you
would have -- people would have to determine on
the basis of that very broad and very extensive
examination, the degree to which those ads had
any influence, if they had any influence at all.
And you would have to ask, also, what kind of in-
fluence they night have. This is not something
that I have been asked to do, and it's not
something that I have investigated in the specific
sense in which you pose the question.
Q I assume that also means you haven't been
asked to do any historical review or any kind of
review concerning whether or not the tobacco
companies specifically targeted certain types of
advertisements to specific groups such as women
or minorities: correct?
MR. HOAG: It's probably not a bad ides to take a
30-minute lunch break right now.
(Thereupon, a discussion ensued off the record).
(Thereupon, a short lunch break was taken).
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Earlier in the deposition, you used the word
“routinely” to describe the frequency with which
you observed advertisements for cigarettes In
magazines and newspapers. When you said
routinely, did you mean, was it in every dally
newspaper?
A It wasn't in every -- no, not in the newspapers I
saw.
Q It wasn't in every newspaper each day?
A Correct.
A Well, once again, I'm not an expert I'm advert-
ising or In marketing, and so the research assign-
ment that I was given was not a research assign-
ment that would lead me Into a consideration of
those kinds of concerns.
Q It was in each newspaper that you saw at least
some days is that correct?
A To the best of my recollection, that's correct.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q And the advertisements you saw, were they
from numerous bands of cigarettes?
A As I sit here, I don't have specific recollection
of the ads, so I can't tell you explicitly that they
were, but I do think they were, yes.
Q Were any of these advertisements for cigarettes
in color?
A I don't recall seeing then in color. There may
have been some in color. As I say, I don't recall
seeing then in color. I don't recall seeing color
ads in newspapers.
Q About hoy many time per week during your
observation of these newspapers did you happen
to see advertisements for cigarettes?
MR. MONICA: Objection to from.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q In a given seven-day week, how many times
did you run into an advertisement for cigarettes in
a newspaper?
MR. MONICA: Objection to from.
THE WITNESS: I didn't keep a tabulation so I
can't tell you specifically now many times I noted
these ads. They appeared on a regular basis, de-
gree of regularity in any sort of specific sense, I
don't recall and I didn't as I say, I didn't note then
in that manner
Page 25
A Well one of the items of interest to a number of
these papers is the progress of the crop as it is be-
ing planted grown, and harvested. Another Im-
portant element is the price that the crop brings
when it is brought to market.
This is especially important to the newspapers of
North Florida, and also, to the Tampa newspaper,
which follows the progress of the tobacco culture
of Florida with great Interest.
The newspapers are also covering the efforts un-
dertaken in the state legislature to enact various
kinds of legislation that are associated with the
use of tobacco in Florida and with tobacco as a
commercial crop.
The newspapers are also interested on a regular
basis and a continuing basis with the question of
the health risks which are being associated with
the use of tobacco as a product, and with the on-
going medical and scientific debate about the
consequences and the possible implications for
people who use tobacco products, of their usage
of the product.
Those are some of the things that I recall that are
constantly under examination in the newspapers
of Florida over the period of time in which I con-
ducted this stud.
Q When does that period of time end or is it still
ongoing?
A Well, in a sense --
BY Mr. Hoag:
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the form. Vague.
Q What were you looking for when you did this
review of newspapers?
A I'm looking for several timings. I'm looking for
the attention and the coverage that the newspaper
is giving to questions related to the ?? of tobacco
in Flor and all of its important ramifications.
THE WITNESS: Well, in a sense, it continues,
but my primary range of interest here is In the
wears up until -- I don't have a specific cutoff
point actually, but I have looked at some materi-
als that extend as far forward as 1997.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And all of its important ramifications, is that
that you said?
A that's what I said, yes.
Q What were its important ramifications?
Q And began when?
A Beginning in, well, some of the materials relat-
ive to the use of tobacco as a commercial product
go back to the 1820's and '30's when Florida was
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
still a territory, and then there are discussions of
tobacco as a commercial crop In Florida in the
1850's that I have examined, and coverage in a
number of the periodicals that were published in
the American South In those wears, that were
concerned with the economic well-being of vari-
ous forms of southern agriculture.
Q And what year did you first, when you were
doing this review, what wear did you first start to
see cigarette advertisements?
A I can't recall a specific year. Certainly cigarette
advertisements would be noted in the 1920's, and,
of course, in the 1938's as well.
Q When you looked at or reviewed these newspa-
pers in Florida, did you look at every page of
every issue of every newspaper, or did you have
some way to do a random look rather than look at
every single newspaper?
A As a historian, when you begin the process of
reading a newspaper, and you need to read It
across a number of ears, you begin by reading the
whole newspaper.
Rather, let me say, you begin by scanning It, and
you learn to scan newspapers so that you can get
through a paper and note the contents without
reading all of the contents in a fairly efficient
manner.
And so as you scan papers, most of which is done
on microfilm, as you scan papers, you begin to
notice the placement of the articles of interest for
you on the subject you are investigating.
And the placement of those articles in each dally
publication tend to be rather consistent as to sec-
tion and as to subject natter. And you familiarize
yourself as well with the names of the reporters
who are assigned these stories on a continuing
basis.
So you recognize -- you have several cues that
you can employ to identify the location of this in-
formation which enables you to get through this
examination in a ?? fashion without having to ac-
tually read each word of each article.
Page 26
Q Are you saying that at some point, you started
to just go to certain sections because you know
that's where what you're going to be interested in
was going to be placed in the newspaper, rather
than read through or scan through the entire pa-
per?
A No. But, let me give you a couple of examples.
You know immediately that you don't need to
read the classified section. You know ??ately that
there are other parts of the paper that you can
scan very quickly, out you can scan the paper in a
thorough fashion, and do It -- that's how you do
it.
Q Without looking at every single page in the pa-
per; is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: John. you've go to let him fin-
ish his answer. I don't think the doctor was done
yet.
THE WITNESS: Excuse me. I didn't say you
could do it without looking at every page of the
paper. What I said was, that you learn how to go
through a paper in a ver?? manner without having
to ignore important parts of the paper.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So did you look at every issue of every news-
paper in Florida for that period of time or did you
look at selected issues, maybe once a week or
once a month, something like that?
A We identified, ??st's say six or seven newspa-
pers, which have been and remain the most influ-
ential and widely circulated newspapers in Flor-
ida, and us chose those papers. We chose those
papers to examine.
Let me add as well, and we read those papers. My
assistants and I read those papers. Let me say as
well, that a fey of the papers in Florida have been
indexed, and so you can check your own thor-
oughness in reading these papers by comparing
what you find over a specific period of time with
the index that has been complied to make sure
that your coverage and your examination of these
papers is thorough.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 27
That's -- and it's an important check on how you
do this kind of work. Times, we didn't read that paper in its entirety,
but we read significant portions of it.
Q Is the answer that you actually reviewed, even
if you didn't read everything in it, all 365 days'
worth each year of each newspaper, or did you
skip some days and not actually review certain
days' newspapers of the six that you used in Flor-
ida? We read some of the Palm Beach newspapers, the
Palm Beach Post. We have read some of the Or-
lando Sentinel as well. As I sit here now, those
are the major papers that we have examined, but
I'm not sure that I have mentioned all of then.
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Mischaracterizes the
witness' testimony and asked and answered.
It's hard to think about that and be sure that I
have been completely thorough, but I believe, as I
sit here now, those are the major papers that we
read.
MR. GERAGHTY: You can answer.
THE WITNESS: Well, some of the papers -- the
examination of these papers, I think, was, as I
have described It. Some of the papers, we read
the entire run. Others we read -- I mean, we night
read then for a 10-year period or a five-year peri-
od.
As an example, we got interested in the Talla-
hassee Democrat from the early part of the cen-
tury, because that is one of the centers geograph-
ically of the cultivation of tobacco in Florida
throughout the history of that subject.
So, and as you have indicated, the Tampa paper
has always given significant coverage to all
things associated with tobacco, which, by the
way, it continues to do, because of the longstand-
ing conviction or editorial policy of the paper that
the progress of tobacco cultivation and marketing
and production in Florida is a very important ele-
ment in the economic history of the state.
So I can't tell you as I sit here today that we read
every day's paper of every newspaper of the ones
we examined. Our coverage was more selective
than that, but even so, It was, I would character-
ize it as thorough.
Q From the 1920's to the present, during that re-
view of those newspapers, you routinely saw ci-
garette advertisements: is that correct?
A Cigarette advertisements would be in those pa-
pers, yes, on a routine basis.
Q Now, when you listed the various ??s that you
deemed to be related to tobacco, did you break
them down into separate categories? For example,
did you have a separate category for smoking and
health?
A There is some selection that has to take place.
You have to separate then according to subject In
some sense, yes.
Q Did you prepare any written report about the
re??its of your review of these newspapers?
A Not specifically of the newspapers, no.
Q You prepared some kind of a written report that
wasn't specifically newspapers?
A Yeah. I did prepare at one point in my work for
the Attorney General's case a written report.
Q You didn't prepare any written report in your
work for the Engle case?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So the papers were the Tallahassee Democrat,
the Tampa Tribune, the Miami Herald, and what
other papers?
A The Florida Times Union, the Gainesville Sun,
we read significant portions of the St. Petersburg
A I have not prepared any written report at all for
the Engle case, no.
Q Now,you said in your review of these newspa-
pers, you characterized it as some kind of debate
concerning smoking and health: is that correct?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A Yes. That's how I characterize it.
Q From 1964 to the present time, were there any
physicians in the state of Florida who were
quoted in any of these newspaper articles as stat-
ing it was their opinion that cigarette smoking
was anything other than a cause of disease?
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm ?? to object as beyond the
scope of the disclosure for Dr. Burns In this case.
We haven't disclosed him as an awareness expert.
You can answer.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A I can't sit here and tell you an exact answer to
that question. I can't recall out of my memory the
full ?? that occurred on this question after 1964.
So I can't recall whether there were specific phys-
icians who were skeptical of the current state of
the debate over the relationship between cigar-
ettes and health or whether there were not.
Q Were you finished with your answer?
A Yes. I was. I apologize.
Q That's okay. Based on your review of these of
these newspapers, in your opinion, what you
characterize as a debate, has the debate ended or
does it still, in your opinion, exist in newspapers?
Page 28
rent state of the debate. I have investigated the
discussion of this subject as it has occurred in
public discourse over the last 50 years before, as I
said, about 1995.
But, as a general rule, questions like this continue
to remain a part of the public discourse even if
the terms of the debate change.
Q Is it your testimony that from the tine you star-
ted to review smoking and health issues as ex-
pressed in newspaper articles, all the way to
1994, there were still articles and information in
the newspaper that created the impression that, in
your mind, there was a debate about whether ci-
garette smoking causes disease is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Object as beyond the scope of
his expertise.
THE WITNESS: Again, I'm not a medical expert.
And I'm not an authority on the subject of how
this medical debate is informed by medical au-
thority and medical opinion.
What I am saying to you is that the question of
how tobacco is to be used in this society and what
kinds of rules and regulations are going to attach
to its usage, and the question of the general
broader issue of the use of tobacco products in
American society is part of an ongoing debate
that has scientific and medical dimensions to it.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm going to object again.
John, this is beyond the scope of his disclosure.
You went into this area at length before lunch and
I think we ought to really move on.
BY MR. HOAG: Q So those scientific and medical dimensions that
you are referring to, are those scientific and med-
ical dimensions related in any way to whether or
not smoking causes disease, based on your review
of newspapers in 1994?
Q You can answer. MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form, vague.
A Really, I need a clarification on what exactly
you mean by the concept of a debate here. MR. MONICA: Confusing.
Q Well, I'm using the expression that you used in
a prior answer. What you characterized as a de-
bate regarding issues of smoking and health.
THE WITNESS: The question of whether
smoking causes disease and exactly how this pro-
cess occurs, again, I'm not a medical authority,
and I'm not a medical expert, but that has been at
the heart of this discussion for many decades.
A Well, I am not -- I'm not an expert on the cur-
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And It's your opinion that that still existed in
all of the newspapers that you reviewed in Florida
even in 1994: is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY; Objection. Form. Vague.
MS. KESSLER: Beyond the scope or his expert
report.
THE WITNESS: Not In the same form. The ques-
tions changed. The context changes, but your
question to me was, is this subject still under pub-
lic discussion, which to me, is another tern for de-
bate. It means the same thing.
The answer to that question would be, yes, it's
still being discussed. The answers are different.
The focus is different. The focus is different. The
context changes over time.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, other than people who work for the to-
bacco Industry, who in any of these articles that
you're referring to that you saw in ?? in 1994 re-
ferred to it as a debate, as to whether or not cigar-
ette smoking causes any disease?
MS. KESSLER: Objection Form and beyond the
scope.
THE WITNESS: I didn't say that was the nature
of the debate in 1994.
BY MR. HOAG:
Page 29
the issue of the role of tobacco in the history of
Florida and In the history of the sf??e's assess-
ment of the importance of that product, and its
concerns about the state's influence and control
over various aspects of the history of tobacco in
Florida.
So the question that you'rs asking me is outside of
the preparation and the Investigation that I've
made for this case.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So at the Engle trial, if you testify at trial,
you're not going to provide any opinions that are
in any way related to whether or not members of
the Engle class were aware that smoking causes
disease or is a risk for disease: is that correct?
A No. I didn't saw that. What I said was, that the
degree to which this is a subject for me is associ-
ated with the issue of the state's role in the history
of tobacco in Florida.
Obviously, the state, as part of its role here, exer-
cises a role in determining how the concerns that
the state expresses about tobacco as a possible
harmful force in health in Florida, how the state
is going to make this information known to the
citizens of the state.
Q Did you say as a possible harmful force?
MR. MONICA: Would you re-read the answer,
please?
MR. HOAG: Is that what you said?
Q Based on your review of the newspapers, is
there a known debate in 1994, is it clear and is
there ?? consensus that cigarette smoking does
cause disease?
MS. KESSLER: Please read the answer back.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
answer).
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Form and beyond
the scope of the doctor's d?? and expertise. BY MR. HOAG:
THE WITNESS: Well again, Mr. Hoag, I'm not a
medical expert, and in this case, I haven't been
asked either to address specifically the questions
of public ?? aness issues. Q The documents that you reviewed from health
authorities, many of those documents made the
clear, unequivocal statement, that cigarette
smoking causes, doesn't possibly cause, but actu-
ally causes disease correct?
What I've been asked to do instead Is to address MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Argumentative.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
THE WITNESS Yes. Some of those documents
do, yes, some of those documents make the
claims and make the assertions that you say they
do. That's correct.
Page 30
Q Let me ask you this. You've spent a lot of time
reading whet you refer to as this debate related to
cigarette smoking and health: correct?
BY MR. HOAG: MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Mischaracterizes
prior testimony, and form.
Q Why did you use the word “possibly” causes? BY MR. HOAG:
A Well, speaking historically, if we're talking
about the debate that occured in Florida at the
turn of the century, the use of the word “possible”
?? an appropriate tern because the scientific ??
for these concerns was not nearly as well estab-
lished at the turn of the century. Q Is that correct?
Even though I'm not a medical authority, I know
that the debate that has occurred has been a re-
flection of scientific disclosures and medical in-
vestigation as It has been ongoing throughout
most of th?? century.
Q You said the turn of the century, that's 1900,
right?
A That's pretty close.
Q You used the word “possible” in reference to
what was known in 1900: is that correct?
A In the earlier decades, Yes.
Q Okay. Well, when do you move the word up to
“known” rather than possible? What decade do
You need for that?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Scope of expert-
ise.
A That's one part of the research that I have un-
dertaken. But again, I keep emphasizing that I'm
not a medical expert, I'm just not, I'm a historian,
and the subject to which I've been assigned in this
case is a subject to examine the history of tobacco
in Florida and the importance of the tobacco in-
dustry to Florida and the growth of tobacco cul-
tivation in Florida, and the efforts of the state to
involve it?? in this process on many different
fronts, with many different concerns.
Q Based on everything that you've read, do you
have an opinion as a lay person, who has done a
lot of reading an the subject, do you have an
opinion as to whether or not cigarette smoking
causes, and I'm using the word “causes,” any dis-
ease?
MS. KESSLER: Objection to from.
MR. GERAGHTY: Outside of his area of expert-
ise.
MR. MCCONNELL: Inappropriate lay opinion.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
MS, KESSLER: And form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Okay. People who look at the subject are not
completely in agreement as to when this moment
occurs when the debate shifts to the point that
there is a greater assurance. It depends in part on
hoy you track the debate and how you identify the
sources that have been developed here that en-
gaged in this discussion.
A Let me preface my answer by saying, I'm not a
?? expert. I'm not a scientist. I don't do scientific
Investigation into medical casualty. So the opin-
ion that I have here is that cigarette smoking and
the use of other tobacco products as well have
been identified over the years by medical and sci-
entific researchers in the United States as a prac-
tice that significantly increases the risks for the
uses of these products, that they will contract --
that they are at risk for contracting a long series
of diseases and other medical problems.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q I didn't ask you about risk, I asked you about
cause. Let me ask you the same question again.
Based on your experience and your reading of
many articles concerning smoking and health,
many articles, pros and cons, smoking and health,
do you have an opinion as to whether or not
smoking causes any disease?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, argumentative,
and asked and answered.
MR. GERAGHTY: Beyond the scope of the doc-
tor's expertise.
Page 31
Q No. I didn't ask you as a medical certainty. I
asked you based on everything you've read and
reviewed and your level of education, whether or
not you have an opinion as to whether cigarette
smoking causes any disease?
MR. MCCONNELL: You're asking him for an
expert opinion or law opinion?
MR. HOAG: Lay opinion. I've already said that
many times.
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Inappropriate
law opinion.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Well, I'm going to repeat the answer that I gave
you before, which is, that insofar as casualty is
concerned. I don't have an expert opinion.
Clearly. I'm satisfied that smoking cigarettes and
using other tobacco products is a practice that
puts one at risk for a host of diseases and it poses
a risk of such significance that I'm not interested
in using tobacco products myself, and I strongly
discourage members of my own family from us-
ing tobacco products.
Q As you sit there today, do you know whether or
not cigarette smoking causes any disease?
MR. MONICA: Objection. Asked and answered.
You can't keep asking him the same question be-
cause you don't like his answer.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I can ask it if the witness doesn't answer it. I'm
using the word “cause.” If you don't know, that's
fine. If you do know, that's fine. I Just want to
know. Do you know whether or not cigarette
smoking causes any disease? I'm not asking about
risk.
A I understand.
Q I'm asking about cause.
A You're asking me, do I know as a medical cer-
tainty. You're asking me a question that is beyond
my expertise.
THE WITNESS: What I have told you is that my
opinion is that smoking is a practice that is poten-
tially injurious to the health of people, that it is a
practice that I strongly discourage people from
engaging in, and that it is a practice which I do
not engage in myself.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Potentially injurious, but you don't know for
sure whether or not it really injures anybody: is
that correct?
MR. MONICA: We object to You cutting the wit-
ness off in mid sentence.
MR. HOAG: Were you finished.
THE WITNESS: Mr. Hoag, I'm truing to answer
this question as best I can for you. And to be can-
did with you about my answer here, and the an-
swer to the question is the one that I have given
you.
BY Mr. Hoag:
Q The most that you know right now is that it po-
tentially is injurious but you don't know for sure
that it actually has ever injured anyone that
smokes cigarettes; is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Mischaracterizes
his previous testimony.
THE WITNESS: Mr. Hoag, I didn't say that.
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q Do you know for sure that cigarette smoking
has injured at least some people who smoke ci-
garettes?
Page 32
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you equate the word “risk” as being the
same as cause?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Do you mean do I have a per-
sonal experience with people who have been In-
jured smoking cigarettes I don't understand your
question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you, as you sit there today, have an opinion
that cigarette smoking has been responsible for
injuring Smokers?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection Lacks foundation
and it calls for an inappropriate lay opinion.
THE WITNESS: You're asking me now if I have
a personal opinion that's not medically based and
it's just my private personal opinion as to whether
smoking has ever injured anybody? Is that your
question?.
A No. Risk is risk. It's different, but It means that
you engage in a practice from which a statistical
profile of this group suggests that some of these
people are going to be affected by this practice in
a harmful way.
Q So when you talk to friends or relatives about
the reason that you don't think they should
smoke, do you ever say to then, you shouldn't
smoke because it causes lung cancer?
MS. KESSLER: I'm just going to make a general
objection now that this is getting way beyond the
scope of his expert report. It's getting argumentat-
ive, asked and answered, repetitive, and I think
you should move on.
MR. MONICA: Lay opinions is not the subject of
his testimony.
BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR HOAG:
Q You can answer.
Q Based on your review of the documents.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. That's not what
you were asking him. Nov you're changing the
question midstream.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I have already asked it many times, based on
his review of the literature that he has reviewed.
A It is widely reported that smoking does have
that effect.
Q Do you believe that cigarette smoking Injures
Individuals who smoke cigarettes?
MR. MCCONNELL: Same Litany of objections.
THE WITNESS: My answer to you is that It is a
practice that I strongly discourage people from
engaging in, and that if risk exists, then the mean-
ing of risk is that some people who engage in this
practice will be harmed.
A When I have discussions with friends about
smoking, the discussion is usually on a more gen-
eralized basis, as to the possible disadvantages
and negative effects of using cigarettes. Certainly
we talk about the likelihood that people, more
people who smoke are going to develop cancer of
the lung than people who do not.
Q Based on your review of newspaper articles
and magazine articles and other documents, ap-
proximately how many people die prematurely
each year as a result of smoking cigarettes in the
United States?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, beyond the
scope of his expert report.
MR. GERAGHTY: It calls for speculation on
anybody's part.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 33
A Well, Mr. Hoag, I'm not sure, first of all, ex-
actly how we would define premature death. It
seems to me that's not a concept that I fully un-
derstand. The other point is that, again, you're
asking me for a medical opinion which I am not
able to offer because I'm not a scientist and I'm
not a clinician, and I'm not a biologist and I'm not
a biological statistician, and so I don't have at my
command here the statistical Information that you
seen to want me to offer to you. ilies during the great depression.
Q Are you familiar at all with this class-action,
the Engle case? THE WITNESS: I don't know.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And what, if anything, does that have to do
with the Engle class, the members of the Engle
class who have been harmed as a result of
smoking cigarettes?
MR. MCCONNELL: Object to the extent that it
calls for a legal conclusion.
BY MR. HOAG:
A Yes, I have some familiarity with it.
Q You're not the only one.
Q What do you know about it?
MR. MCCONNELL: YOU'll find out.
A I know that it is an action that has been brought
by a group of people, I guess the designated
members of the class or some such tern, I'm not
familiar with the legal terms here, on behalf of
people in Florida who use cigarettes, who are
claiming that the use of this product has caused
then injury, and for that Injury, they seek com-
pensation from the cigarette companies.
That's the limit of my understanding of this suit.
Q When you talk about the economics of tobacco,
what do you -- well, let me rephrase -- when you
refer to the economics of tobacco, do you include
the medical costs of treating those people who
have been injured as a result of smoking cigar-
ettes?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. From vague.
THE WITNESS: Well, let me say again, that I'm
not a medical statistician, and I'm not an authority
on the specific claims that have been made as to
the medical costs of the use of this product.
The state of Florida, in contrast, the state of Flor-
ida, for example, in the 1938's and the 1940's,
was much more interested in the economic bene-
fits that came from the cultivation of the crop and
the sale of this crop at market for the tobacco
farmers in the state who were growing this crop
and ware finding, In a difficult economic tine, a
predictable and reliable manner to feed their fam-
MR. HOAG: You'll find the judge doesn't know
either.
MR. MCCONNELL: That's a different Issue en-
tirely. John.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So other than the economic consequences of
tobacco that occurred in the 1938's and the
1948's, do you have any other testimony concern-
ing the economic consequences or economic im-
pact of tobacco in the state of Florida?
MS. KESSLER: Objection, form.
THE WITNESS: The state of Florida's interest in
the economic benefits to be derived from tobacco
has never abated. It persists to this day.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And what does that have to do with whether or
not the members of the Engle class have been in-
jured as a result of smoking cigarettes?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, asked and
answered, and object to the extent that it calls for
a legal conclusion.
THE WITNESS: Again. Mr. Hoag, that is beyond
the range of my expertise. I'm simply giving you
an outline here of what I have been asked to do In
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
this case.
Page 34
Q But that's not going to be part of your testi-
mony in the Engle case: is that correct?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So you're not going to testify at trial that the
economic impact as you've defined it of tobacco
has anything to do with th whether or not cigar-
ette smokers in Florida were harmed by smoking
cigarettes: is that correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm sorry, John. We couldn't
hear you very clearly.
BY MR. HAG:
Q That is not going to be part of your testimony
In the Engle case; is that correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, mischaracter-
izes his testimony, and objection to the extent that
it calls for a legal conclusion. MR. GERAGHTY: What is that? What do you
mean by that?
BY MR. HOAG: MR. HOAG: Is this the witness?
Q Is that correct? MR. GERAGHTY: I'm sorry. That was Bill Ger-
aghty peaking.
A The explicit details of my testimony are still
not exactly fixed, so I'm not, you know, based on
the work that we've done so far, other than what
we've said, you know, I'm not sure exactly how to
answer your question. MR. HOAG: Bill. I'm not asking you the ques-
tion, so as long as the witness understands the
question. I want him to answer it.
Q When you say the explicit details of your testi-
mony are still not exactly fixed, what do you
mean by that?
A It means that I'm just simply doing the historic-
al work that I've been asked to do at this point,
and to conduct the inquiry that I have conducted,
the historical research project that I have engaged
In.
Q Do you have any opinions concerning whether
or not school Children in Florida were provided
any information concerning smoking and health?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, vague.
MR. GERAGHTY: Beyond the scope of the ex-
pert disclosure.
THE WITNESS: I've not been asked to provide
public awareness testimony in this case, but it is a
matter of historical record that the state educa-
tional institutions and the state educational agen-
cies have been concerned about informing chil-
dren in the state about tobacco consumption and
its associated risks for many decades.
MR. GERAGHTY: All right. As far as I'm con-
cerned, the question is vague. Objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A The effort of the state to inform its school chil-
dren on this subject is part of the history of to-
bacco in Florida, and it's part of the history and
the effort of the state to regulate and inform, to
regulate tobacco and inform its citizens, espe-
cially its children in this instance, as to the risks
that the state identifies, or the inadvisability that
the state, through its educational institutions, in-
advisability the state maintains of having children
smoke.
Q So I'm confused. That answer sounds like it's
directly opposite of your prior answer, which in-
dicated that's not an area in your disclosure and
you're not going to talk about it.
Now it sounds like you're sawing you are going
to about whether or not any school children were
provided information in Florida concerning
smoking and health? You are going to testify
about that?
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MS. KESSLER: Hold on one second, Gus. Objec-
tion. Mischaracterizes the witness' testimony, and
you're getting argumentative.
MR. HOAG: I Just want to clarify this because it
is very confusing.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Could you answer the question, please?
A I have suggested to you, stated to you, that I
have investigated and researched the history of
tobacco in Florida, and part of that history is the
effort of the state through its public school sys-
tem to Inform the school children of the state of
the inadvisability of children in Florida using to-
bacco products.
Page 35
Q Well, does the history of tobacco include the
history of tobacco advertisements?
A To the extent that that is a part of the history of
tobacco, recognition of the fact that cigarette ad-
vertisements and other forms of tobacco advert-
isements have been part of the history of tobacco
In Florida, the answer would be yes.
Q Well, does the history of tobacco Include the
fact that it kills hundreds of thousands of people
each year in the United States?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Argumentative.
MR. GERAGHTY: Form.
MR. MONICA: Foundation.
Excuse me. Okay. You can go ahead, please. BY MR. HOAG:
Q Part of the history of tobacco is about
everything and anything that's in any way related
to tobacco: correct? Q You can answer.
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Argumentative, mis-
characterizes the witness' testimony.
A Again. Mr. Hoa??, I'm not a medical expert,
and the history of tobacco certainly includes the
efforts of the state to inform its citizens of the
risks of using the product, and of the concern that
new attach to that usage.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Let me ask you this. Is there any aspect of to-
bacco, including the health consequences and the
advertisements and what someone In the legis-
lature night have said about tobacco, is there any-
thing about tobacco that is not included under the
tern history of tobacco'?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Vague. And mischar-
acterizes the witness' testimony.
Q Well, hypothetically, if tobacco products, and
especially cigarettes -- let me rephrase -- hypo-
thetically if cigarettes, which are a tobacco
product, result in the premature deaths of hun-
dreds of thousands of people in the United States
each year, hypothetically, if that's true, would that
be part of the history of tobacco, in your opinion?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, argumentative.
MR. MONICA: Objection. Compound question. MR. GERAGHTY: John, I think you're getting
hung up on semantics here. Let me help you clari-
fy.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure that there is. I'm not
sure exactly -- what do you mean by anything?
That's a tern that, I mean. I don't know what any-
thing means. MR. HOAG: You don't need to. I want the wit-
ness to answer my question.
Again, it's a vague question and I'm not clear as
to how to answer it because I don't really under-
stand the specific intent of the question.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY: Well, let me just clarify this
for you. John --
MR. HOAG: This is taking so long because you
keep making very, very lengthy speaking objec-
tions. Hot just one of you, several of you.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 36
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm not trying to make a
lengthy object on. I just want to read to you one
sentence from his expert disclosure so that It
night help to clarify what it is we're talking about. Q As a historian, have you done any research into
the internal documents of the tobacco Industry In
order to ascertain the Industry's Involvement in
what you refer to as the debate?
The second paragraph of his disclosure reeds as
follows. “Dr. Burns is expected to testify about
the history of tobacco as agricultural product and
the history of tobacco usage in the state of Flor-
ida.” MR. MCCONNELL: Objection, scope.
THE WITNESS: My research focus has been on
the public debate that occurred and the public
policy process relative to tobacco in the history of
Florida.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q That doesn't clarify it for me. It makes it real
broad. Could you please answer my question?
A I'm going to ask that it be read back if I may.
MR. HOAG: Sure.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the
Last question).
And so in the pursuit of that historical project, of
that project, research project, I have been focused
on the sources within the state of Florida that
would reveal the information that I would need to
research that project, and that would not include
internal documents of the tobacco companies.
BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR. HOAG: Q As a historian, you are aware that the activities
of the tobacco Industry on a national basis have
an impact on things that occur in the state of Flor-
ida: correct?
Q You can answer. MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Vague.
A Okay. The health about cigarettes is certainly
part of this story. That's the best answer I can
give you. MR. GERAGHTY: Calls for speculation.
MS. KESSLER: Same objections.
Q And It's your opinion as a historian that there is
?? a health debate about the health consequences
of smoking is that correct?
MR. MONICA: Foundation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Correct?
A That they have an impact?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection to form, and
asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: There certainly has been
throughout the 20th century.
Q Yes. You're aware of that: correct?
A I'm aware that they have an Impact. The nature
of the Impact is what would be of interest to a
historian.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And that's including right now; correct?
A I'm referring primarily here to the historical
evolution of this whole area, that the discussion,
historically, that went on from the late 18th cen-
tury has been what any historian would identify
as an intense debate over the health risks associ-
ated with using tobacco products.
Q And you haven't done anything at all to look at
the nature of that particular Impact, meaning, the
impact of the behavior of the tobacco industry it-
self, correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
MR. MONICA: Vague.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 37
BY MR. HOAG: Q Is that correct?
Q Right? A No, it isn't correct. There are several assump-
tions in your premise there that aren't valid for
me, what I have done is to track this discussion as
it has ?? in the documentation that I have ex-
amined, and in that process, I have looked at --
seen the different perspectives of may different
groups and individuals who have been a part of
this discussion.
A That's not the focus of my research.
Q In fact, you haven't done anything at all to look
at the history of the behavior of the tobacco in-
dustry: correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: The tobacco industry, in the
same way a tobacco farmers have been Involved
In this debate in Florida, and to the degree that
the public record and the record of the agencies in
the other source materials that I examined dis-
close that record, I have looked at it. Q Do you know which of those groups were un-
der the con??ol of or paid by the tobacco in-
dustry?
BY MR. HOAG: MR. MONICA: Assumes facts not in evidence.
Q But you haven't looked at any of the Internal
documents for the industry in order to ascertain
how and if the industry made efforts to influence
public opinion: correct? THE WITNESS: Well, we would have to enumer-
ate the groups at first before we could answer that
question with any degree of specificity.
MS. KESSLER: Objection, From.
MR. GERAGHTY: It calls for speculation.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. MCCONNELL: Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: I have not looked at the internal
documents of the tobacco companies, no.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Have you asked to look at those?
A No. I have not.
Q Has anyone asked you to look at those?
A No. No one has asked me to look at then.
Q So, as a historian, you have no idea whether or
not the tobacco industry made a concerted effort
to mislead the American public in showing the
health consequences of smoking; correct?
Q How about specific researchers who were
quoted in nav?? articles, do you know if any re-
searchers quoted in the newspaper articles were
paid by the tobacco industry?
A I'm aware that the tobacco industry supported a
wide range of research activities. However, I only
have a general knowledge of this, and as I sit
here. I can't recall specifically the answer to your
question in any explicit manner.
Q So you have not done a thorough Investigation
of the history of the tobacco industry as it regards
whether or not they made a systematic effort to
mislead the American public concerning the
health consequences of smoking; correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form, argumentative.
MR. GERAGHTY: Beyond the scope of the dis-
closure.
BY MR. HOAG:
THE WITNESS: Well, as I have stated, Mr. Ho-
ag, that wasn't my research assignment. That's not
the project that I have investigated. I'm more in-
terested -- I have been interested in the history of
tobacco in Florida and that is a very broad topic
which involves many people and many different
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 38
groups, including the tobacco companies, cigar
companies, and a whole host of other -- ware-
house groups, people who sell tobacco, people
who grow it, people who assist the Industry, who
are government officials and various other kinds
of people. BY MR. HOAG:
State-elected officials, like the secretaries of agri-
culture and others, who have an interest, e vital
Interest In this subject. A No, I haven't seen it.
People who head the state board of public health,
a wide, wide range of people here, both public
and private in the state.
And that has been the focus of my research effort.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is the focus of your research effort primarily on
those individuals who make a profit from to-
bacco?
A Well, not exactly, but -- those people would be
e very numerous and wide-ranging group of dif-
ferent interests and people.
MR. MCCONNELL: It might even include
plaintiff's attorneys.
Q Now, referring, Doctor, referring to the docu-
ment, “The Immorality of the United States To-
bacco Industry,” have you read this document be-
fore?
Q This document, at the bottom. It says document
authored by Dr. Smith in ?? mond Beach, secret-
ary of the Florida Medical Association.
A Yes.
Q This was among the four boxes of documents,
four or five boxes of documents that were
provided to you, that we were told you reviewed
and/or rely Upon.
I Would like you to look at the document, read It,
and then let me ask you questions about it.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. We'll take a two-
minute break for him to read it.
(Thereupon, there was a pause in the proceed-
ings).
MR. GERAGHTY: John?
MR. MONICA: Could we take a five-minute
break by any chance? MR. HOAG: Yes.
MR. HOAG: Yeah, that's fine. MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. The witness has read
the document.
(Thereupon, there was a pause In the proceed-
ings). BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Let me start with the document that's titled, It's
a two-page document, It's called (reading): “The
Immorality of the United States Tobacco In-
dustry”?
MR. HOAG: I would like to get that one marked
as Exhibit 1.
for
A Yes.
Q And in what way does it refresh your recollec-
tion?
MR. MONICA: Objection.
(Thereupon, marked
Plaintiff's Exhibit 1).
Q Okay, Have you read this document to refresh
you recollection as to whether or not it was one of
the comments reviewed and/or railed upon for
purposes of your expert testimony in Engle?
identification
was
A Well, I do recall having seen this document. It
is one of the documents I Sent you.
Q And you picked this our yourself?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A Yes.
Q And this is from the Florida Medical Associ-
ation dated April of 1990, correct?
A Yes.
Q Why did you particularly pick out this article
from the Florida Medical Association Journal of
April of 1990?
A Well, It's one of many articles that were extrac-
ted from the journal of the Florida Medical asso-
ciation, It was intended Primarily for inclusion in
the work that I did on the Attorney General's case
as a way of discussing the issue of public aware-
ness of the risks of using cigarettes and other to-
bacco products in the United States.
Page 39
graph, he says. In the first paragraph In the
second sentence (reading), Smoking ?? our most
dangerous and most expensive and most serious
preventable health habit; correct?
A That is a correct restatement of what he says
wee.
Q Well, based on your review of all of the docu-
ments you reviewed on this topic, as of April of
1990, can you point to a single document that
contradicts the statement that smoking is our
most dangerous, most expensive and most serious
preventable health habit?
MS. KESSLER: Objection Form, beyond the
scope.
BY MR. HOAG:
And, of course, that goes beyond the scope of the
work that I was asked to do in this case, but I in-
cluded it because it was, along with the many oth-
er documents included in those file boxes, it was
one of the places that we identified and added to
our collection.
Q Well, this particular document is certainly rel-
evant to the history of tobacco usage In the state
of Florida, isn't it?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: Well, In a sense It is, but It's ob-
viously an opinion piece about the impact of the
use of tobacco in the United States generally
more than confined to the issue in Florida.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q This is something that's been authored by a
medical doctor who practices medical oncology
in ??mond Beach. Florida: correct?
Q You can answer.
A Well, Mr. Hoag, as I sit here today. I can't pull
out of my memory all of the documents that I
have examined and that I have assembled in the
collection that I have produced for you. So I can't
give you a specific answer to a question like that
on the basis of having seen this piece for three
minutes, you know, in the context of a deposition.
Q Well, If at some point in the next month or two
or whenever, you do find a document that you
rely on that contradicts that statement as of April
of 1990, would you lat me know, please?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Argumentative.
MR. HOAG: I'm asking a legitimate question. I
would like to know so that we can re-depose you
and talk about that document.
BY MR. HOAG:
A Yes. That's how he's identified. Q Will you let me know?
Q It's Published in the Florida Medical Associ-
ation, the Journal of the Florida Medical Associ-
ation: correct? MR. MONICA: Are you making the representa-
tion that there are no documents in the materials
provided to you?
A That's correct. MR. HOAG: Pardon me? I'm asking the doctor a
question. I'm asking if he has any documents.
You know what I'm asking.
Q And the author of that article, in the first para-
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MR. MONICA: I don't.
THE WITNESS: Honestly, I'm not clear as to
what you're asking.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I'm asking if you do run across a document that
you rely on and/or have reviewed that contradicts
the statement that smoking is our most dangerous,
most expensive and most serious preventable
health habit, contradicts that as of April of 1990,
would you please let me know hat document that
is?
MR. MONICA: Counsel, you have his reliance
materials. To the extent that you don't believe you
have then, you should address those questions to
counsel.
MR. HOAG: So are you instructing the witness
not to answer that question?
MR. GERAGHTY: You're not asking him a ques-
tion. You're giving him an order, and frankly,
you're not permitted to do that, Mr. Hoag. We've
given you all of the reliance materials, and they
are there at your dispose and if you want to
search through them, you can do that and --
Page 40
MR. HOAG: That's because you didn't tall him to
bring then. But to the extent you intend to use any
of those reliance materials In any way at trial, I'm
going to object to their use If you can't provide
me with the Information that I'm asking for prior
to trial, if such information exists.
MR. GERAGHTY: John, I think both of our posi-
tions are clear on the record, and I think that that
is satisfactory for both of us. Why don't you move
on and ask him a question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q The next sentence in that document says
(reading); Nicotine is our leading addictive sub-
stance.
Now, my question to you is, as of April of 1996,
have you found anything that contradicts that in
any of the documents that you reviewed, that con-
tradicts the doctor's statement that nicotine is our
leading addictive substance?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form. Beyond the
scope of his expert disclosure.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
MR. HAG: It's not my job to find what work be
relied on. I'm ask in if there is anything that con-
tradicts that, and he doesn't have any knowledge
of that today.
What I'm saying is if ?? does have any knowledge
of it in the future, I would like to know so I have
a chance to re depose him on that topic. Are you
going to provide that information to me if he
comes across it?
MR. MONICA: If there are additional reliance
materials, you'll be provided then. Your have his
reliance materials as you sit there in your office.
MR. HOAG: He has then, too. That's my point.
The witness has those and he can't identify one
that contradicts that statement.
MR. MONICA: I don't believe ha has then here to
this room.
A Well, let me say first of all, that I'm not a med-
ical expert, and I'm not an expert on addiction,
and so whether or not -- and furthermore, I cannot
sit here and recall document by document the in-
formation that I have assembled in the work that
I've done.
And so for you to sit there -- for you to ask me to
extrapolate from that body of materials a specific
piece of evidence or specific document that dir-
ectly contradicts a sentence in an article that you
have -- that you have pulled out of one piece is an
impossibility.
No one could do that.
Q Well, It's the kind of thing that defense wit-
nesses are asked for all the time. I'm surprised at
your response.
MS. KESSLER: Objection, argumentative. Just
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 41
ask the witness questions. Q You can answer.
BY MR. HOAG: A Well, again, I can't tell you, I can't pull out of
inc documents that I have made available to you,
from my memory, as I sit here, documents which
may repudiate or may ?? on or challenge the
claims that are mads in this particular piece.
Q So anyway, nicotine is our leading addictive
substance is whet he's stating here. Let me ask
you this. Do you recollect that any of the docu-
ments that you've looked at, that are from April
of 1990 forward, that any of than contradict that
statement, that nicotine is our leading addictive
substance, even If you don't recollect which spe-
cific document it was at this point?
MS. KESSLER: Objection, form. Beyond the
scope of his expert disclosure.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that they either
confirm it or deny it.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Moving to the second column on the first page
of Plaintiff's Exhibit 1, the second paragraph,
second sentence says (reading): Greater than
150,000 new cases of lung cancer will be dia-
gnosed this year. The mortality is 87 percent. At
least 83 percent of the deaths are secondary to
smoking.
Now, based on your review of all of the docu-
ments that you've seen, did anyone say in any
document that you've reviewed, even if you can't
specifically identify It, anything that contradicts
that sentence?
MS. KESSLER: Again, objection, form. Beyond
the scope, and we are spending a lot of time. Dr.
Burns has made it clear, ha's not here as a medic-
al doctor, a medical expert, and this is clearly
beyond the clear scope of his limited expert dis-
closure, and I think you should move on.
Q Moving to the second page of the document,
first column, second full paragraph, second sen-
tence, it says Treading): No other industry is al-
lowed such great latt?? in advertising and market-
ing of a lethal substance.
And then it goes on to ?? a sentence after that is
the next paragraph (reading) Tobacco advertising
is illegal on TV. However, you would never know
it. We dally see the Winston see, vanguard S??f,
Virginia slims Tennis, et cetera.
Now, based on your review as a historian, is in-
formation concerning sports sponsorship of tele-
vised events by the tobacco industry, is that part
of the history of tobacco usage in the United
States?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
MR. MCCONNELL: Beyond the scope of Dr.
Burns' expert disclosure.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Okay. Again. I'm not an expert on advertising
or on marketing, and it may have some at attach-
ment. It may be included in the very broad um-
brella of the history of tobacco, the history of to-
bacco in Floria and the United States, but it's only
one element in a much mor?? complicated and
much more broad-based field of inquiry.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
MR. MCCONNELL: I'll also object to the extent
that the documents provided to you speak for
themselves.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q The next paragraph of the document says
(reading), We know and the tobacco industry
knows its advertising does not cause in great
numbers committed smokers to change brands. It
proselytizes our young to become addicted.
My question to you related to that paragraph is, as
a historian, if, in fact, what the medical doctor is
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 42
writing in the journal is correct, does It have his-
torical significance as far as the tobacco usage is-
sue is concerned, that the tobacco industry pro-
duces advertisements that proselytize for the
young to become addicted? MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. That completely
mischaracterizes his testimony.
MR. MONICA: Objection. Vague, compound,
and confusing. THE WITNESS: I didn't characterize what he
says here as correct or incorrect. I simply said
that based on the work that I've been asked to do
here, I can't characterize -- I can't characterize his
commentary.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. MONICA: Completely outside the scope of
his disclosure.
Q You can answer.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. MONICA: It's also beyond the scope of his
expert disclosure. You can answer it, If you can.
THE WITNESS: Well, again. I'm not an expert
on advertising. Furthermore, the hypothetical “if”
that you propose here is not the kind of proposi-
tion that historians generally accept. We don't
deal a lot in hypotheticals.
Q Because the work you have to do here has
nothing to do with whether or not the cigarette in-
dustry addicted children and intentionally mar-
keted its products: correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Argumentative.
MR. GERAGHTY: Form.
So I'm at a loss as to how to try to answer this
question because It's so vague, that I Just, I just
don't know what to tell you about It, other than
that I'm not an expert in this area, and I simply
can't answer that question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you have to be an expert in advertising to
do a historical analysis of advertising in a certain
area?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Asked and answered.
MR. MCCONNELL: Vague.
THE WITNESS: I haven't been asked to do a his-
torical analysis of advertising. That was not the
subject that I was asked to Investigate, nor is it
the subject that my disclosure statement clearly
Identifies as the area or my expertise and the area
of my investigation of the historical research in
this case.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Is that correct?
A No, that's not correct.
Q What did what you have to say have to do with
whether or not the cigarette industry Intentionally
marketed its product to children?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form and argument-
ative.
THE WITNESS: That's not the focus of my re-
search, That's not the focus of my disclosure
statement, and it's not a question that I can an-
swer.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You just don't know whether the cigarette in-
dustry did that: correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR. HOAG:
Q So based on your own analysis, as far as you
know, the medical doctor writing this article is
correct?
Q You just don't know whether the cigarette in-
dustry intentionally marketed its product to chil-
dren: correct?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 43
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form. You can an-
swer If you know. MS. KESSLER: Objection. Asked and answered.
Argumentative, form.
THE WITNESS: No. I con't know. THE WITNESS May I ask --
BY MR. HOAG: BY MR. HOAG:
Q And you Just don't know whether or not cigar-
ettes are addictive: correct? Q I didn't ask what people claimed or said over
time. I asked you, I said, you don't know whether
cigarette smoking is addictive, do you?
A Well, you haven't asked me that before. You
are presuming that I have already answered that
question. You said you Just don't know.
MR. GERAGHTY: Well is that your answer,
though?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
MR. MONICA: Also outside the area of his ex-
pertise.
BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I guess the answer is you don't know, correct?
Q I asked you a question. Just answer the ques-
tion. You can say that's incorrect if you want to.
MR. GERAGHTY: John why don't you rephrase
it just so the record is c??r.
MR. HOAG: I'll just have her repeat it. It's a clear
question. I don't need to rephrase it.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question).
THE WITNESS: The claim that cigarettes are ad-
dictive is as old as the use of tobacco products
since Columbus first visited the Western hemi-
sphere.
But the meaning of the term “addiction” does not
have a uniform meaning. People have attached
different meanings to the word “addiction” across
the decades as this subject has been discussed,
but to claim that cigarettes are addictive is a very
old clam.
BY MR HOAG:
A How do you define addictive?
Q How do you do define it, sir?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Outside the area of
his expertise.
MR. MCCONNELL: He just told you there are
lots of different definitions.
THE WITNESS: The tern has been given a num-
ber of different meanings over the decades, so
when you ask me if cigarette smoking is addict-
ive, I will tell you that it has been claimed over
the years, first of all, that It creates -- the tern has
been used synonymously with the word
“habituation.”
It has been used with the word that it induces a
craving, and it has been claimed that it is addict-
ive -- that it is an addictive substance because it
creates a strong dependency from which absten-
tion from tobacco products is a difficult process
to achieve.
Q All right. I move to strike that answer because
It doesn't have anything to do with my question. I
asked, what I asked you, you don't know whether
cigarette smoking is addictive, do you? As to whether I personally think that tobacco is
addictive or not, I'm not an expert on addiction.
MR. MCCONNELL: Judge O'Connell denies
your motion. Q You're not going to testify about addiction, cor-
rect?
BY MR. HOAG:
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
A I'm not going to testify as e scientific expert
about whether cigarettes are addictive or not.
Q And nothing that you have to say as an expert
has anything to do with the issue of whether or
not cigarette smoking is addictive correct?
A To the degree to which the state of Florida has
used the concept of addiction, and to the degree
to which it has cautioned the people of the state
that the use of cigarettes is an addictive habit that
is injurious or potentially injurious to their health,
to that degree, I may offer testimony on that sub-
ject, but I have no personal opinion, no medical
opinion, as to whether or not cigarettes are ad-
dictive.
But to the degree that this has been a subject of
public discussion in the state of Florida, that is
within the area of my investigation and my histor-
ical research.
Page 44
public record to Florida, to that degree it is an ap-
propriate source for me to look at within the state
of Florida in the context of all of the other docu-
ments and all of the other people who are talking
about this issue, to that degree, the answer would
be that I have looked at it within the state of Flor-
ida.
Q And did you make a thorough search for all the
times the tobacco industry of individuals paid by
the tobacco industry made statement indicating
that cigarette smoking was not addictive in the
public media?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. From.
THE WITNESS: A specific research on that par-
ticular topic was not part of my research assign-
ment.
BY MA. HOAG:
Q And the degree to which the tobacco Industry
denied that cigarette smoking is addictive, and the
number of times the cigarette Industry made such
statements publicly are a part of your historical
research? Q So you didn't do it, correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form. Q So you didn't do It, correct?
THE WITNESS: My research is in the history of
tobacco in Florida, and my concern is on how the
state has addressed these questions. That has been
the focus of my concern. A I didn't do the research assignment that you
suggested in your previous question.
MR. GERAGHTY: Asked and answered. He just
told you what he did.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You did the one that you were paid to do, cor-
rect?
BY MR. HOAG:
MS. KESSLER: Objection, Argumentative.
Q Now, would you please answer the question
that I asked Could you read it back?
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the
particular question).
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Would you please an?? that question.
A To the degree to which the tobacco industry or
the ?? of various tobacco com??s has been a part
of the public discussion in Florida one ??rt of the
MR. GERAGHTY: Mischaracterizes his testi-
mony.
THE WITNESS: I have done the research assign-
ment that I have tried to enumerate to you, that
was my research assignment throughout the
course of this discussion we've had today.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And that's the one you were paid to do, cor-
rect?
A Yes.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q On the first column of the second page of
Plaintiff's Exhibit 1 or the article entitled
(reading): “The Immorality of the United States
Tobacco Industry,” by Dr. Smith, a medical onco-
logist in ??mond Beach, referring to the fifth full
paragraph, the first sentence saws (reading): The
industry's immorality and unethical behavior
were clearly demonstrated in the campaign to at-
tract the black smoker.
Have you done any historical research to look in-
to the issue of the campaign to attract the black
smoker that is referred to in this paragraph writ-
ten by Dr. Smith?
Page 45
A I'm not a marketing expert. I'm not an advert-
ising expert, so I have not investigated those sub-
jects as specific research tasks because that is not
my research assignment.
Q In your research assignment, you would have
been capable of doing it as a historian correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form, beyond the
scope.
THE WITNESS: It wasn't my assignment.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. GERAGHTY Objection. It assumes facts not
in evidence. Calls for speculation. Q But if it had been your assignment, as a histori-
an, you would have been capable of accomplish-
ing that task if you chose to do it, correct?
BY MR. HOAG: MR. MONICA: Objection. Speculative.
Q You can answer. THE WITNESS: It's hard to say with certainty,
but I probably, yes. I could probably do such an
assignment.
A No, I have not.
Q If, in fact, the tobacco industry did conduct a
campaign to attract the black smoker, that would
have historical significance as to the usage of to-
bacco in Florida correct?
MR. MONICA: Objection. Assumes Facts not in
evidence. It calls for speculation.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
THE WITNESS: It's not clear to me how that
would have an impact on the subject I was asked
to investigate.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q The next sentence in that paragraph written by
Dr. Smith in April or 1990 states (reading): It has
also targeted the blue collar and the more so-
cioeconomically disadvantaged in whom the Ill-
nesses produced by tobacco are More devastating.
There is incontrovertible evidence that ?? cancers
are increasing at an alarming rate in women, but
the tobacco industry continues to target them.
BY MR. HOAG: My question to you is this. Have you done any
historical research to look into the extent to
which
the
tobacco
industry
targeted
??conomically disadvantaged groups and/or wo-
men in order to sell its products?
Q Is It clear to you how that would have an im-
pact on tobacco usage in Florida? MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. From and beyond
the scope of the disclosure.
A It would require a confirmation of the claim
that you've made for me to be able to answer that
question. THE WITNESS: Again, I'm not an advertising
expert, and I haven't done that study.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You've made no effort to make such a confirm-
ation; correct?
Q But if asked to do so, you are capable of having
done that type of historical study, if you chose to
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 46
do it, correct? time?
MR. GERAGHTY: I'm going to object to the
from. MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. I think --
BY MR. HOAG:
THE WITNESS: No one asked me to do it, and
It's beyond the scope of my research assignment.
Again, I'm not an expert in marketing or advert-
ising.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q As a historian, you ?? have to be an expert in
either of those things to do a historical analysis in
to ascertain whether, in fact, the tobacco industry
specifically targeted socioeconomically disad-
vantaged ?? correct?
A Well, within the general framework of historic-
al research,such work could be done, yes.
Q And, as a historian, you could also do work to
find out whether or not the tobacco industry spe-
cifically targeted women In order to sell its
products: correct?
A Again. I'm not e marketing or an advertising
expert and I haven't done research in this area.
And so I really don't know whether I could do
that research or not.
Q During your review of newspapers, do you re-
call whether or not you saw any advertisements
from Virginia Slims cigarettes?
A No. I don't recall specifically. I can't recall,
specifically recall that I saw advertisements for
Virginia Slims.
Q Do you recall the slogan, “You've cone a long
way, baby”?
Q In existence at that time?
MR. GERAGHTY: Calls for speculation.
THE WITNESS: The feminist movement in
America is over 100 years old, In fact, It can be
traced all the way back in son ways to the Amer-
ican Revolution, the era of the American Revolu-
tion.
So the answer to your question is, in a broad
sense, yes, but in a specific sense, I'm not clear as
to exactly what you are referring to.
BY HR. HOAG:
Q Well, historically, let's go back to 1969. Histor-
ically, the women's liberation movement, was
there anything that was occurring in the women's
liberation movement that was different In 1969 as
compared to what was happening in the 196's?
A Well, I haven't been asked for this project to re-
search the history of the women's liberation
movement in 1969, so I'm not clear at all as to ex-
actly what events you have In mind In an area in
which, which I have not done any research in re-
cent years, and no research relative to this
project.
Q So you don't know whether or not the tobacco
industry and specifically the Virginia Slims brand
did anything to take advantage of events that
were occurring in the women's liberation move-
ment in the late 1960's and the early 1976's is that
correct?
A Yes. I have heard that slogan.
A That's not a subject that I have researched.
Q Do you know that that slogan is from Virginia
Slims cigarettes?
Q And you haven't been asked to research it; cor-
rect?
A Yes.
A No. I haven't been asked to research it.
Q Now, at the time that Virginie Slims first used
that slogan, from a historical perspective, was the
women's liberation movement in effect at that
Q If you were asked to research it, it would be
something you would be capable of researching
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
as a historian if you chose to do ?? correct?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection. Speculative.
THE WITNESS: Mr. Hoag, you're asking me to
speculate about all of these projects I Could re-
search. I can't give you e definitive answer to
those questions, to tell you that these are things
that I would be able to do that I haven't done.
I can tell you that I don't know the answer to that
question.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You would be able to do thorough research of
the women's liberation movement as it related to
the period of the late 1960's into the 1970's; cor-
rect? You could certainly do that without any
doubt; right?
A Well, in order to investigate that question, first
of all, I would have to formulate some questions
for inquiry, but I could certainly do research into
the history of air feminism in the post-World
ware II period if I chose to do so.
Q And you could certainly compare the cigarette
advertisements and look at them and have some
kind of an opinion historically as to heather or not
they were related in any way to the events that
were occurring at the same time such cigarette
advertisements were appearing: correct?
Page 47
THE WITNESS: The only opinion -- the only an-
swer that I can give to you to that question is,
having not done the research, is to say perhaps I
could. But it would be entirely contingent on the
research that I did, and what the research that I
did disclosed.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Now, hypothetically, if your research disclosed
that the number of women who were smoking ci-
garettes increased during the same period of time
that the Virginia Slims cigarette was introduced,
would that indicate to you in any way that the
Virginia Slims cigarette advertisements were hav-
ing any kind of an effect on the purchasing habits
of women?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form, beyond the
scope.
THE WITNESS: Based on the fact that I haven't
done that research, I cannot give you an answer to
that question. I simply can't do it. It's impossible.
I cannot speculate on what my opinion might be
based on research that I haven't done. I don't
know what the record would disclose.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You wouldn't know until you actually did the
research, right?
A That's correct.
MR. GERAGHTY: Object, I think that's beyond
the scope of the disclosure.
Q And you haven't done that research, correct?
THE WITNESS: That's a speculation that I can't
make. You're asking me to speculate on the opin-
ions that I would have on research that I haven't
done. A That's correct.
BY MR. HOAG: A No.
Q I didn't ask you what opinion you would have.
I asked you if you would be able to formulate an
opinion after having compared the advertisements
to the events that were occurring during a given
period of time? Q You don't know; correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: He could certainly formulate
a lay opinion. You have BY MR. HOAG:
Q You just don't know one way or the other; cor-
rect?
A Correct.
MR. MCCONNELL: How many times did you
Just ask that same question?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q You mentioned earlier that at least part or your
testimony was in some sense concerned with
whether or not school children in Florida received
any kind of information concerning the health
consequences or smoking; correct?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. ??ischaracterizes his
earlier testimony.
THE WITNESS: My Interest Is In the state's
activities and what actions the state implemented,
and what action local school districts implemen-
ted in this matter.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q But you can't testify as to whether or not any
school children were actually provided with in-
formation concerning the health consequences of
smoking: is that correct?
A I can testify to the materials that the school dis-
tricts were provided, which were intended to in-
struct the state's school children.
Q Can you testify as to whether or not those ma-
terials were ever used?
A I can testify that the school books were adopted
and made available for classroom instruction.
Q Can you testify as to whether or not the chil-
dren ever received any of the instruction?
A not in the sense that I can recreate what was
done in any classroom on any day.
Q So you assume that they must have received
the instruction because the materials were avail-
able?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form, mischarac-
terizes his test ??imony.
THE WITNESS: What I can say is that the state
obviously identified this as an area of importance
and concern, and implemented policies intended
to address this concern.
Page 48
received the instruction; is that correct?
MR. MCCONNELL: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't testify to what was being
done in the schools of Florida on a daily basis. I
can testify to the curriculum materials that teach-
ers were provided and the instruction that those
materials included and the information contained
in those materials.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q And do you know whether the teachers teach
everything that's in their curriculum?
A No, sir. I don't know that.
Q And do you know how many cigarette advert-
isements and promotions that children are ex-
posed to during the course of their childhood in
Florida?
A I do not know.
Q Do you know if it's more or less than the
amount of information that's provided to them in
the school?
MR. MCCONNELL: Objection, Vague, how do
you quantify the amount of information?
MR. HOAG: I'm just asking him if he knows. If
he doesn't know, he can tell me.
THE WITNESS: I haven't made a quantitative
analysis, sir, of that issue.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Have you made any kind of analysis of that is-
sue? By that issue, I mean comparing the amount
of exposure to advertising images and promotion
of cigarette products to children as compared to
other information concerning ?? smoking that
children receive?
A No, I haven't.
Q Have you aver smoked cigarettes?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q But you can't actually testify that a single child
A Yes.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 49
Q When did you smoke cigarette? quit smoking.
A I smoked cigarettes when I was a college stu-
dent. Q What was the reason you started?
Q What year was that? A Primarily as a social convention. Influenced by
the practices or my college friends.
A Actually, I was in college for four years. I en-
rolled in college In the fall of 1957 and graduated
in June of 1961. Q Other than smoking because your friends did it,
were there any other reasons that you continued
to smoke for at least a certain length of time?
Q Did you smoke all four of those wears? A None that I can recall.
A To the best of my recollection, I'm not certain
that I smoked in all four of those years, but cer-
tainly for two of those four years at least. Q Did you derive any pleasure from smoking?
Q Other than that period of time between 1957
and 1961, have you ever smoked cigarettes?
A I've smoked a few cigarettes sporadically after
that, but I never smoked cigarettes regularly
again.
Q Why did you stop smoking cigarettes?
A There were a number of reasons why I quit, in-
cluding a recognition on my part that there was a
growing awareness that cigarettes were a practice
that could pose serious health risks, and that con-
vinced me that it was a practice that I should
abandon.
Q How much did you smoke at the time you quit?
How many cigarettes per day?
A Smoking for me was ?? associated with social
events. I would smoke probably 18 to 28 cigar-
ettes a day. Sometimes, many days less. I can't
tell you with certainty how many cigarettes I
smoked each day.
A I presume that in some ways, snaking was
pleasurable for me, yes.
Q Did you have any difficulty in quitting at all?
A None that I recall, no. I did not.
Q You don't recall having any symptoms of with-
drawal at all, like nervousness or anything?
A No. Smoking -- quitting smoking for me was
very easy.
Q Referring to, the next exhibit I want to have
marked is a one-page document that has August
31st at the top. It starts with (reading): The Flor-
ida Committee on Smoking and Health meets
today --
(Thereupon, a discussion ensued off the record).
MR. HOAG: -- at the bottom of It, It says August
30, 1967.
(Thereupon, marked
Plaintiff's Exhibit 2).
for
identification
was
MR. GERAGHTY: I'll let the witness read this.
Q I'm sorry, did you say 18 to 20 per day?
A Yes. And then I said I can't tell you with cer-
tainty how many cigarettes a day I smoked.
(Thereupon, there was a pause in the proceed-
ings).
THE WITNESS: I have read It.
Q When you stopped smoking, did you quit cold
turkey, did you gradually taper off, or how did
you do it?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You said you have read It?
A I Just decided not to smoke anymore and I Just
A Yes.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 50
Q Referring to what now has been marked as
Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, do you recognize it? this period, you would note that they are very of-
ten replete with typographical mistakes.
A Yes. Q Okay. So even though there is nothing here that
says this is a news release and there is nothing
here that indicates who you contact for further in-
formation, which is typical of a news release, you
would assume this is a news release; correct?
Q What is it?
A It's a press release.
Q Was it one of the documents that you recollect
that you either reviewed or relied on for your
testimony in Engle?
A Yes, it is.
Q And did you select this document yourself?
A I can't recall who selected it. It's possible that I
did, but often, we would go through these materi-
als in the various archival collections, working as
a unit, and if somebody found something that
they thought was notable, we would all look at it,
or we night not look at it.
We might just include it in a group of papers that
we had chosen for photocopying. Whether I
picked it out or not, I can't recall.
Q When you say working as a unit, what do you
mean?
A Well, I might take two research assistants with
me to an archivable collection, and we would
each take a different but related task and we
would begin the process of sorting through the
source materials.
Q How do you know this was a news release?
A It has the appearance of a news release, and it's
obviously, it is obviously in the form of a release
that is made available to the press to announce a
meeting, and it is in the tone and in the format of
a press release.
Q There is nothing at the top that identifies it as a
news release: is that correct?
A It's in the format of a news release.
Q Doesn't a typical format of a news release label
itself as a news release and also have a contact
person for further information?
A Often they do, yes, sir. But not always.
Q That's a standard operating procedure for writ-
ing a news release, though, is to put the contact
person's name and to label it news release; cor-
rect?
A Yes. But you will notice at the bottom of the
page, it says (reading): Andy Anderson for Dr.
Fulghum, August 30, '67. That might have served
as a kind of substitute form here for this docu-
ment.
Q Do you know that or are you guessing?
A Do I know what?
Q Do you know that that's what that means at the
bottom and what it served as, or are you guess-
ing?
A Well, it's a historian's evaluation of the purpose
of this document.
Q You don't know though, correct?
A Well, in the sense that I would know if it were
labeled for immediate release. I don't know.
Q Well, assuming that you're right, that this is a
news release, do you know who it was sent to?
A No, I do not know.
A No, that is correct.
Q And there are typos in this, too, correct? Q Do you know if anyone actually printed It in
any publication?
A Yes. If you look at many news releases from A No. I don't.
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Q Do you know who Dr. Fulghum is?
Page 51
A Yes. I do. whether or not it's accurate to say that smokers
experience more days of disability than compar-
able nonsmokers?
Q Who is he? A No, I haven't --
A He was an employee of the State Board of
Health, a physician, whose task it was to coordin-
ate the activities across the state of Florida. They
were intended to inform the citizens of the state
of Florida of the health risks associated with the
consumption of tobacco products and specifically
cigarettes. MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection as before.
Q This document quotes Dr. Fulghum as saying
that he would emphasize -- this is the second
paragraph, by the way -- quotes Dr. Fulghum as
saying that he would emphasize to the committee
that latest governmental reports show cigarette
smokers tend to die at earlier ages and they ex-
perience more days of disability than comparable
nonsmokers; correct? It says that?
THE WITNESS: No, I have not.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Now, if, in fact, it's true that smokers experi-
ence more days of disability than comparable
nonsmokers, that would be part of any economic
analysis one would do about tobacco usage in
Florida, correct?
MR. MONICA: Objection. Outside the area of
this witness' expertise. He's not an economist.
MR. GERAGHTY: And calls for serious specula-
tion.
A That's a correct reading. BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, based on your understanding as a histori-
an, is it accurate that smokers experience more
days of disability than comparable nonsmokers? Q You can answer.
MR. MONICA: Objection. Outside the area of his
expertise. Just adding the phrase “as a historian”
doesn't change his area of expertise.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A I'm going to have her read the question back.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question).
MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: That is what the document says,
yes.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, my question was -- I wasn't asking you
this time what the document says it was -- as a
historian, have you done research to indicate
A Well, you asked me earlier in the deposition if
I was an economist, and I said that I was not. In
reference to that observation, the answer to your
question is that I haven't done a study of that
type, so I don't know the answer to the question.
Q Are you going to testify or do you plan to testi-
fy in the Engle trial in any way about the eco-
nomic impact of tobacco usage in the state of
Florida?
A The primary focus of my testimony is going to
be on the history of tobacco in Florida, and the
various ways in which the economic -- yes, the
ways in which the state has been interested in the
economic activities associated with tobacco cul-
tivation in Florida, and that includes many differ-
ent areas.
It includes the amount of monies that have been
generated by the products' cultivation and sale. It
includes the amount of monies that have been
generated by taxes on various cigarette products,
various tobacco products, and it includes a host of
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 52
other economic considerations. Q What is it?
Q Does it include the economic impact of lost
days of work due to disabilities from smoking? A This is a press release.
A The analysis that I have done here is focused
primarily on the efforts of the state to identify the
economic costs and benefits to the state of to-
bacco cultivation and tobacco production in Flor-
ida.
Q What do those efforts by the state have to do
with whether or not members of the Engle class
were injured as a result of smoking cigarettes?
A That's a speculation on my part. I'm not sure I
can answer that question.
Q So. In other words, you don't know what it has
to do with, whether or not members of the Engle
class were injured as a result of smoking cigar-
ettes; is that correct?
A Well, I think that's beyond my range as an ex-
pert. I'm not -- that's not my research assignment.
Q Referring now, moving to another document
that's dated December 19th, 1975. the Department
of Health and Rehabilitative Services at the top,
two pages long. Can we get that marked as Ex-
hibit 3?
A Yes.
(Thereupon, marked
Plaintiff's Exhibit 3).
for
identification
Q Okay. And how do you know it's a press re-
lease?
A Well. I don't know with finality, but it's dated -
- it has a deadline -- it has a point of identifica-
tion on it, and it has a contact name at the top of
the page with a telephone number.
Q Assuming this is a news release, do you know
who the news release was sent to?
A No.
Q No, you don't?
A I do not know.
Q Do you know if any newspapers or other pub-
lications printed any portion of this news release?
A No, I don't.
Q Do you know if any member of the general
public read anything that's in this news release?
A No, I don't.
Q You also are aware that when news releases are
sent out. If the news release is, in fact, used by
the newspaper, for example, they will not neces-
sarily print the entire news release; correct?
was
A That's correct.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q In fact, most often, a newspaper will not print
verbatim a news release; correct?
Q Do you recognize Plaintiff's Exhibit 3?
A They often do not print the entire news release.
MR. GERAGHTY: John, he hasn't had a chance
to read it yet. Let him read it.
THE WITNESS: Okay.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. John.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Do you recognize Plaintiff's Exhibit 3?
A Yes.
Q Now, this particular news release, let me just
ask you in general on news releases, out of all of
the news releases that you've located and have re-
viewed, do you know whether any of those news
releases were actually printed in any newspapers?
A I have seen on some occasions verbatim repro-
ductions of news releases that I recognized as re-
productions Of the news release that I had seen in
an archivable holding. So yes, the answer to the
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
question is, I do know that some of then were re-
printed.
Page 53
Q Hello?
A Yes.
Q And now frequently did you observe that oc-
curring?
A What do you mean by now frequently?
Q Well, did you see it once, twice, 10 times, a
??ed times, where you saw a news release ver-
batim printed in a newspaper or other publication
for public dissemination?
Q So someone who worked for the state of Flor-
ida in December of 1975 included in a news re-
lease the statement that the scientific data are
clear that a great majority of the common cancers
are unnecessary, they are preventable, the rela-
tionship between smoking and lung cancers is
well-known; correct?
A That's a correct -- yes, that's what it says.
A Certainly more than 10. but as you said earlier,
the news release, it's not often printed in its en-
tirety. Q That's basically about all you can say about this
document; correct?
Q Are you saying you saw portions of some news
reissues printed in some newspapers? MR. MONICA: Objection. Mischaracterizes his
testimony.
A That is correct. THE WITNESS: Do you want me to answer?
Q But it is fair to say, out of all of the newspaper
articles that you've reviewed, this was just a tiny
percentage of the total newspaper articles that
you rey?? that were related in any way to
smoking and health; correct? BY MR. HOAG:
THE WITNESS: That the press releases were a
tiny portion? Q Let me ask you this. I'll withdraw that question.
Based on your historical analysis of records, in
your opinion, was there, using your terminology,
a debate in the public media concerning whether
or not the scientific data was clear that a great
majority of the common cancers are unnecessary,
they are preventable, and the relationship
between smoking and lung cancer is well-known?
BY MR. HOAG: MS. KESSLER: Objection, form.
Q Can you recollect which news release or news
releases you identified that, in fact, were printed
at least in part in an actual newspaper in Florida? MR. GERAGHTY: What period of time are you
talking about?
A As I sit here today, I cannot. MR. HOAG: The period of time that this docu-
ment was purportedly written, which was 1975,
December 19th, 1975.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the form.
Q Referring to the fifth paragraph of this docu-
ment which is Plaintiff's Exhibit 3, it says
(reading): The scientific data are clear that a great
majority of the common cancers are unnecessary,
they are preventable, the relationship between
smoking and lung cancer is well-known; and this
was printed -- this news release that you've iden-
tified as a news release is dated December 19th,
1975; correct?
A Yes.
THE WITNESS: Would you read that back? I'm
going to ask her to read that back.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question).
MR. GERAGHTY: Same objections.
THE WITNESS: It's hard for me to answer the
question as you've posed It. Let me say that there
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
is a lot of evidence that researchers are making
the claim that the case against cigarettes is very
strong by 1975.
Page 54
broad terms, the issue continues to be a subject of
vigorous public interest.
Q And what issue are you referring to?
BY MR. HOAG:
A Excuse me?
Q But during your review of the newspaper art-
icles and the magazine articles in that period of
time, you did run into quotations from the to-
bacco institute and other tobacco representatives
who publicly disagreed with that assessment; cor-
rect?
A Well, I'm not a medical expert here, and the
nature of this discussion at this point as it reflects
in the record is a discussion, as I recall it, as I sit
here, about the issue of scientific causation, and
again. I'm not a medical expert.
Q So did you see, in the 1978's, in the mid 1970's,
did you see articles where representatives from
the tobacco industry, including but not limited to
the Tobacco Institute, were quoted as saying that
it had not been scientifically proven that cigarette
smoking caused any disease?
A Yes. I have seen articles that made that asser-
tion.
Q And it's those kind of articles that lead you to
conclude that there was and/or is a debate using
your terms concerning smoking and health; is that
correct?
Q What issue were you referring to when you
used the word “issue”?
A The broad issue of the relationship between to-
bacco usage and public health and the --
Q Go ahead.
A -- and the associated issues which are very
complicated about the measures that society
should implement in the face of these concerns as
measured against the other considerations that are
important to the community -- to the interests of
society.
Q Did you keep any kind of tabulation of the
number of times the Tobacco Institute or Tobacco
Institute's spokesman was quoted in articles re-
lated to smoking and health in the state of Flor-
ida, what kind of newspapers and magazines in
Florida?
A No. I did not keep a tabulation.
Q But you know there was a frequent occurrence
that a spokesman for the Tobacco Institute was
quoted in those articles; correct?
MR. MONICA: Objection. That absolutely mis-
characterizes his prior testimony. MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the form.
BY MR. HOAG: THE WITNESS: There is often a statement from
some representative of some tobacco company or
some other agency, yes.
Q You can answer.
A Would you read that back?
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question).
MR. HOAG: The next one that I want to have
marked is called (reading): Position Paper. Flor-
ida Public Health Association, Inc., adopted
April, 1985.
(Thereupon, marked
Plaintiff's Exhibit 4).
BY MR. HOAG:
for
Identification
was
Q You can answer.
A Okay. Debate as the word is used to character-
ize a public discussion suggests simply that, in
MR. HOAG: Do you need to read that one or
have you read it?
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
Page 55
MR. GERAGHTY: What are you going to ask
him? Let's hear your first question. basis for any opinion that you're going to, or you
plan to give in the Engle case?
BY MR. HOAG: A I can't say with certainty, but I think I've ex-
pressed to you the context in which this document
has importance, in that it is one of the documents
of many that was generated by the discussion that
was conducted in the state of Florida at the time
of the passage of the Florida Clean Air Act of
1985.
Q Do you recognize Plaintiff's Exhibit 4?
A Yes.
Q What is it?
A It's a position paper as offered by the Florida
Public Health Association.
Q And was this one of the documents that you
rely on or have reviewed in preparation for your
testimony in the Engle case?
A Yes.
Q And do you rely on it?
MR. GERAGHTY: Well, let him read the docu-
ment, then.
MR. HOAG: Why didn't he tell me he needed to
read it.
MR. GERAGHTY: Well. we said we wanted to
hear your first couple of questions. Hold on.
(Thereupon, there was a pause in the proceed-
ings).
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay, John. Go ahead.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Okay. My question was, do you rely on this
document?
A It's a document which is of some interest in ref-
erence to the passage of the Clean Air Act of
1985, which was at the time this position paper
was released, was under debate in the Florida le-
gislature.
Q So do you rely on this document in any way?
A The document is more in the form of a docu-
ment that I have reviewed.
Q Is this document going to form in any way any
Q To your knowledge, was this document ever
published anywhere. I mean, in the news media
where it would be publicly available?
A I'm not aware that it was ever published.
Q Referring to the first paragraph of the docu-
ment, the first sentence. I mean, the second sen-
tence, it says (reading): Smoking, once merely an
idle symbol of sophistication, is now officially re-
cognized as the single largest preventable cause
of death and disability in our society, exceeding
the death and disability caused by accidents, alco-
hol, homicide, suicide, and communicable dis-
eases, and by all other preventable conditions.
Now, my question to you related to that statement
contained in the position paper, which is labeled
as Plaintiff's Exhibit 4, In your review of news
media articles, were there individuals who repres-
ented the tobacco industry or tobacco companies
who made statements in the media published in
Florida during this period of time that contra-
dicted in any way the statement that smoking is
now officially recognized as the single largest
preventable cause of death and disability in our
society?
MS. KESSLER: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: I simply don't know, in terms of
the explicit way in which you have posed that
question. I don't know the answer to that ques-
tion.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Well, you do know that the tobacco industry
and its spokesman, who are quoted in the news
media, continue to deny to this day that cigarette
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
smoking causes death; correct?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to the form.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Correct?
A I am aware that on the issue of scientific causa-
tion, there is still an argument that is made that
that linkage has not been proved scientifically.
Q And that argument is made publicly by repres-
entatives of the tobacco industry; correct?
A Yes.
Q Moving to the second page of this document,
under Smoking and Preventable Deaths. Under
there, the second sentence, it says (reading): In
1983, an estimated 340,000 persons died prema-
turely from diseases caused by cigarette smoking.
Page 56
icles and magazine articles published in Florida,
that the tobacco industry and/or tobacco industry
spokesmen denied that cigarette smoking --
denied that it's been proven that cigarette
smoking has resulted in the premature deaths of
anyone?
A I can't name a specific date for that, in order to
answer your question. I don't have that informa-
tion here in front of me, and I simply don't have it
within my memory.
Q Has there ever been a time that a member of
the tobacco industry, other than from the Liggett
Company recently, where any tobacco industry
representative of spokesman has stated that cigar-
ette smoking does result in the premature death of
at least some individuals who smoke?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to form.
My question to you, based on your review of
newspaper and magazine articles published in
Florida, isn't it true that the tobacco industry
spokesmen continue to this day to deny that it's
been established that even one h?? being has died
prematurely from diseases caused by cigarette
smoking? THE WITNESS: I don't know the answer to the
question. I have not been investigating or examin-
ing that area. What I have been interested in more
than anything else, as I have said before, is the
history of tobacco in Florida and the way in
which that debate has been conducted in Florida,
and I don't know the specific answer to the ques-
tion that you have just asked me.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Form. BY MR. HOAG:
BY MR. HOAG: Q So in Florida, do you know of a single instance
where a tobacco representative has ever admitted
and been quoted in a newspaper that cigarette
smoking has resulted in the death of anyone, even
one individual, and that is with the exception of
the Liggett Company?
Q Could you please answer the question?
A You'll have to read it back.
(Thereupon, the Court Reporter read back the last
question).
MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection.
BY MR. HOAG:
Q You can answer.
A Okay. I really don't know the answer to that
question, whether they do or not.
Q Well, what is the latest date that you know as a
historian, based on your review of newspaper art-
A No, I don't.
MR. HOAG: I would like to get marked as
Plaintiff's Exhibit 5 a document that, in the right-
hand column on the first page, says (reading): To-
bacco Addiction and Other Drug Abuse Among
American Youth, at the bottom, It's dated April,
1984.
(Thereupon, marked
Plaintiff's Exhibit 5).
for
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.
identification
was1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MS. KESSLER: How many pages is the docu-
ment?
Page 57
pieces of information that I sent you.
BY MR. HOAG:
MR. HOAG: Two pages.
Q This is dated April of 1984; correct, at the bot-
tom?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q Referring to Plaintiff's Exhibit 5. which is a
document that is titled (reading): Tobacco Addic-
tion and Other Drug Abuse Among American
Youth, a two-page document, do you recognize
that?
A Correct.
A Yes. Q And the authors of this article are Dr. Rawen-
holt, who is an M.D., assistant director for epi-
demiology and research, and William Pollin, who
is an M.D. at the National Institute on Drug Ab-
use; correct?
Q What is that? A Correct.
A It's a place from the Journal of the Florida
Medical Association, April, 1984. Q Do you know either of those individuals?
A No. I do not.
Q The Journal of the American Medical Associ-
ation, who is that distributed to, if you know?
A The Journal of the Florida Medical Associ-
ation?
Q Who is that distributed to?
A It's distributed primarily to physicians in Flor-
ida who subscribe to the Journal.
Q In the first paragraph of the article, the last sen-
tence in the first paragraph says (reading): In the
U.S., there are S6 million current cigarette
smokers and more than 350,000 excess deaths per
annum from smoking -- approximately 1,000 to-
bacco deaths per day.
A Yes. My question to you is, based on your review of
newspaper and magazine articles in Florida, is
there any representative of the tobacco industry
or tobacco company, with the exception of Lig-
gett, that ever publicly admitted that cigarette
smoking kills 1,000 people every day in the
United States?
Q And why did you select this document? A Not to my knowledge, no.
A Because it was -- it contained some informa-
tion of interest. Q What, if anything, does it have to do with your
testimony in Engle? Q Well, to your knowledge, has any representat-
ive of the tobacco industry stated in the mid
1980's, In any newspaper or magazine, that it has
not been scientifically proven that cigarette
smoking causes any disease?
MR. GERAGHTY: If you know. A I don't know.
MR. HOAG: Pardon me? Q You do know that it's a common statement for
representatives of the tobacco industry and other
individuals who are paid by the tobacco industry,
to state publicly that it has not been proven that
cigarette smoking causes any disease; correct?
Q And this was among the documents that you
have relied on and/or reviewed in preparation for
your testimony in the Engle case; correct?
THE WITNESS: As I sit here and look at this
document, I'm not sure exactly how it's -- how it
will affect my testimony in the Engle case. It's
one piece of information of several thousand
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I know that they have continued
to claim, as the public record has revealed it, that
they question the cause of the scientific link
between the specific diseases and smoking.
But I'm not a medical expert, and so I can't testify
as to the medical certainty of any of this, or as to
the reliability of it in a medical context.
Page 58
written about in the newspapers and magazines
published in the state of Florida st the time?
A I know that it was on television in Florida.
Q Based on your review of newspaper and televi-
sion articles published in the state of Florida, do
you know whether or not there were articles writ-
ten which quoted the C.E.O.'s of the major to-
bacco companies as stating that cigarette smoking
was not addictive?
BY MR. HOAG:
Q I'm not asking you to do that. The next to last
paragraph on the second page of this document
says (reading): Finally, one should note that the
majority of regular smokers in the United States
have developed this behavior pattern during their
teen years. Thus, we see an addiction has become
established before the age of even meaningful or
legal informed choice.
A I can't recall specific articles that said that, as
we sit here today. I just don't know the answer,
but I know that this was a subject of considerable
public discussion at the time.
Q And it was of considerable public discussion in
the state of Florida; correct?
A Yes.
My question to you related to that statement is,
based on your review of newspaper articles and
magazines in the state of Florida, has any repres-
entative of the tobacco industry, other than Lig-
gett, ever publicly stated that cigarette smoking is
addictive? MR. HOAG: I don't have any other questions.
A My answer is that I don't believe they have. I'm
not sure that they have. I have not seen that in the
public record. MR. MONICA: John, I think I spoke too soon.
Give us five minutes.
Q Based on your review of newspaper articles
and magazines published in the state of Florida,
has any representative of the tobacco industry or
any person paid by the tobacco industry ever
denied publicly that cigarette smoking is addict-
ive?
A I'm not sure whether they have or not, frankly.
Q Well, do you recollect in 1994 that all of the
C.E.O.'s of the major tobacco companies swore
before Congress and said to their knowledge, ci-
garette smoking was not addictive? Do you recol-
lect that?
A Yes. I saw that.
Q Do you recollect that being publicized and
MR. MONICA: We don't either.
MR. HOAG: Thank you very much for your time.
Doctor. I would like to order a copy of the tran-
script, a miniscript --
MS. KESSLER: We may have a couple of ques-
tions. I don't know. Can we have five minutes?
MR. HOAG: Okay.
MS. KESSLER: Thanks.
(Thereupon, a discussion ensued off the record).
MS. KESSLER: John we don't have any addition-
al questions, so we're finished.
MR. HOAG: Okay. So again, thank you, Doctor.
for your time, and I'm ordering the copy of the
transcript, the disk and the miniscript, and I guess
that's about all I'll take.
(Thereupon, at 3:55 P.M., reading and signing
was reserved and the deposition was concluded).
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.1998 WL 35273084 (Fla.Cir.Ct.)
END OF DOCUMENT
© 2015 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.
Page 59
