Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Original Image of 1997 WL 34667222 (PDF)
1997 WL 34667222 (Miss.Ch.) (Expert Deposition)
Chancery Court of Mississippi.
Jackson County
Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of Mississippi Tobacco Litigation.
No. 94-1429.
March 19, 1997.
Deposition of Charles D. Lowery
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Jackson County, Mississippi
Name of Expert: Charles D. Lowery
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances:
Charles Mikhail, Esq.
Scruggs, Millette, Lawson, Bozeman &.Dent
734 Delmas Avenue
Pascagoula, Mississippi 39567
Representing Plaintiff.
Joe R. Colingo, Esq.
Stephen W. Burrow, Esq.
Colingo, Williams, Heidelberg, Steniberger & McElhane
711 Delmas Avenue
Pascagoula, Mississippi 39568-1407
Kathleen T. Mullery, Esq.
Kirkland & Ellis
655 Fifteenth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C., 20005
Representing the Tobacco Defendants.
Deposition Taken at the Instance of the Plaintiff In the Offices of the Pittman, Germany, Roberts & Welsh Jackson, Mississippi
On March 19, 1997 Commencing at 9:30 a.m.
REPORTED BY: CHERIE G. BOND
Registered Merit Reporter
CSR #1012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Style ... 1
Appearances ... 2
Table of Contents ... 3
Examination by Mr. Mikhail ... 4
Certificate of Reporter ... 184
Certificate of Deponent ... 185
Correction Sheet ... 186
EXHIBITS
Number ... Page
1 ... 5
2 ... 33
3 ... 71
4 ... 86
5 ... 88
6 ... 88
7 ... 102
8 ... 127
9 ... 177
CHARLES D. LOWERY, having first been duly sworn, testified as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Would you state your full name for the record, please.
A Charles Douglas Lowery.
Q And where do you reside, Dr. Lowery?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A 609 Sherwood Road, Starkville, Mississippi.
Q And how long have you lived in Starkville?
A Since 1966.
Q And where are you employed?
A Mississippi State University.
Q Are you currently employed there?
A Yes.
Q And in what capacity at this time?
A As professor of history and chairman of the department of history.
Q How long have you been chairman of the department?
A Since 1985, I believe.
Q Before that were you a professor?
A Yes. Before that I was associate dean of the college; but I was also a professor of the department.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, before I go any further with the questions, as far as any stipulations for the deposition, I just want the
record to reflect we're going by the agreed case management order as to what it provides so there won't be any confusion.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, I'm going to hand you and ask the court reporter to mark as the first exhibit --
MR. MIKHAIL: Could you mark this please.
(Exhibit 1 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I'm going to ask you, Dr. Lowery, if you would take a look at this document that has been marked as Exhibit 1 and ask if
you have seen this document before.
A Yes.
Q All right. Would you take a look at the itemization of certain documents that are listed in the notice, and just very quickly
I'm going to go over them. Item number 1, we asked in connection with your deposition today that you produce the following
documents: First set is, “All documents reviewed by the witness in connection with his or her work in this case.” Have we been
provided, to the best of your knowledge, with items listed in number 1?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. BURROW: I'm going to raise .an objection at this point and state that the defendants have refused to provide documents
which -- every document reviewed by the witness. The defendants have agreed to provide documents relied upon by Dr. Lowery
and other experts in reliance upon -- which they relied upon in forming their opinion, but we have a standing objection to
producing documents -- every document reviewed by the witness in connection with the testimony. Having said that, you can
answer the question; but I think I know what the answer is going to be.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me qualify that by saying there are many documents that are available to us in the public domain and
obviously --
MR. COLINGO: That's the purpose.
MR. MIKHAIL: -- you didn't have to produce those. That's not what I meant. Let me rephrase the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Have you, to the best of your knowledge, produced all documents reviewed by you upon which you will rely which are not
available in the public domain?
A Yes.
Q Item number 2 asks for all documents relied upon by the witness in connection with his testimony. Of course, we have covered
that. It says, “Including a copy of every study or work authored by another on which the witness relies.” Have you provided
this information, again with the same understanding as number 1?
A Let me read and make sure.
Q Okay.
A Yes.
Q All right. Let me just quickly -- I'm sure your counsel have explained to you -- you have very capable counsel -- that any
time you don't understand a question or I seem to be getting ahead of you, please don't hesitate to stop me. Have you been
deposed before?
A No.
Q Have you not?
A No.
MR. COLINGO: Never.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Well, I hope that this will not be an unpleasant experience for you. I'll try to be a gentleman.
MR. COLINGO: I've assured him that it won't.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Of course, Joe and Stephen are here. They will make sure, Dr. Lowery, that I behave.
A They have attributed you to being very much a gentlemen.
Q They will make sure I behave if I get out of line. Item number 3 asks for all documents prepared in connection with your
testimony. We've received a number of documents --
A Yes.
Q -- that you prepared. Is there anything that you have prepared in connection with this litigation upon which you're going to
rely that has not been produced?
A No.
Q Okay.
MR. COLINGO: Let me -- let me correct that. There may be some of his personal notes that he may rely on, depending on
the questions, that were not furnished to you.
MR. BURROW: They are notes of documents that have --
MR. COLINGO: Have been furnished. I don't want there to be any confusion about that. Certain graphs and charts have been
made and backup information that he may rely on in responding to questions. He has notes on that, and we felt like that they
shouldn't be produced.
MR. MIKHAIL: Okay.
MR. COLINGO: It's no big secret to any of them.
A I interpret documents to mean finished product more or less.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Let me make sure I understand Joe's objection and certainly understand what he's saying. But are there any particular
handwritten notes or typed notes that you have prepared such as an outline or handwritten report of some sort that you will rely
on that reaches certain findings and conclusions that will support your opinion that you haven't produced?
A Yes. There are -- I, for example, have made notes on books that I have read that bear on this particular case or theses or
other works that are a part of the public domain.
Q Books that you have either furnished or identified because they in the public domain?
A Yes.
Q Have you -- as you read the material, for instance, you would take notes so that you will refresh your memory?
A That's --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Is that what you're talking about?
A Correct.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, do y'all have any objection of us receiving copies of those prior --
MR. COLINGO: At this particular time. I haven't reviewed them myself.
MR. MIKHAIL: I would make a request -- and I understand your objection, but I would make a request that those notes be
produced to us or copies of those notes be produced to us. And your counsel and I can discuss that at a later time.
MR. COLINGO: I think you've been furnished with a copy of the end result of everything that he will probably testify to,
certainly with the documents that would probably be listed as exhibits to any testimony that he may or may not give on behalf
of the defendants. And the only thing that I wanted to make sure of is that you weren't of the opinion that we were trying to
possibly mislead you in some way by not furnishing scribbling that Dr. Lowery may or may not have to use in this deposition.
Again, I prefaced it with the fact that depending on the question that you ask him, he may have to -- while he will have a finished
product, if you go further, he may have to rely on a note or so, a legal pad full of stuff. I don't think that it was documents that
needed to be furnished. It wouldn't make any sense to you or me.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I hope you know, I was not in any way suggesting that there was any impropriety in not producing them.
MR. COLINGO: I didn't want to mislead you either. You asked a question and he said no. Then I wanted to make sure in case
he has to reach back and get a note today that we don't start off, “Well, wait a minute. I asked you this right off the bat and
you didn't tell me that.”
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm not going to quarrel about this. I don't want to make a mountain out of a molehill.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, let me ask you in connection with those notes, do you believe that those notes would be helpful in understanding
the import of your testimony?
A I'm not sure I can answer that yes or no. Let me give you an example. I have a book, a biography that I wrote of Jeffersonian
Virginia of 3- or 400 pages. I have notes, probably four boxes like that on that. ‘The book itself is based on all those notes. My
testimony, my -- the documents that I have produced, graphs and charts and so forth, are based upon compilation of notes like
this, some of -- most of which would probably be meaningless to anyone other than myself.
Q I understand.
A Now, I have those notes. Many of them I simply disposed of because they were scratch notes, and I --
Q I've been through that, Dr. Lowery. That's not what I'm referring to. I'm referring to, let's say, you went back to your book
about -- that you mentioned and reviewed it for this litigation, if you did.
A Yeah.
Q And without looking at ten boxes of notes that you have accumulated about it over the years and in your research and writing,
I'm talking about if you pulled it out for this litigation, looked through it and made a few sheets of notes as to what you thought
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
would be relevant to your testimony here. I am not talking about all notes you've ever compiled about that book. With those
notes, have you done that?
A I have not. To the best of my ability to answer that question, I have not.
Q You have not done it for that purpose?
A Right.
Q That's fair enough. Item number 5 on the second page, if you'll take a look at it, all correspondence with counsel in connection
with this case, including invoices and billing records. Mr. Burrow provided me with documents that you furnished that contained
correspondence and billing records. Does that consist of the entire set of correspondence and billing records?
A Yes. It's complete with the exception that I have had one item of correspondence since then with one -- with Brown &
Williamson.
Q What was the nature of that?
A It had to do with processing a bill that I had submitted to -- you have a copy of the bill, but the bill had not been paid, and
it was a matter of for --
Q Sending a dunning letter to pay it. Did Joe write it for you?
MR. COLINGO: I haven't seen it.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q That's fine. And mentioned also in item number 5, drafts of the expert disclosure statement. And I'm sure you know what
I'm talking about when I refer to the expert disclosure statement.
A Right.
Q I have not been provided with any drafts, just the final version. Were there ever any drafts of the disclosure statement?
MR. BURROW: Again I interpose an objection that the drafts of experts statements -- I think we have a standing objection to
that. One of the reasons is that it's work product. But, I mean, you can ask him whether he's seen it. I mean, go right ahead.
I'm interposing an objection for the record.
MR. MIKHAIL: You may interpose an objection, but drafts of disclosure statements were an item that every single lawyer
on the defense side adamantly insisted they were entitled to and were provided of our expert witnesses. So I would enter an
objection on the record for you not making what's good for the goose being good for the gander and claiming it's work product.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I would ask, Dr. Lowery, are there drafts of disclosure statements?
A There was a draft. I do not have a copy of it. I was provided a draft. I made some modifications in it and returned it.
Q Who prepared the document that was furnished to you to which you made modifications?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Leslie Whorton in Washington with Arnold & Porter. When I say she prepared it, she asked me what will you -- what is your
statement -- what will you be testifying to if we are called -- if we call upon you?
Q She prepared a draft based on conversations you had --
A She prepared a draft based on the conversation we had. She sent it to me. I looked at it. I made a few changes in it. They were
minor, but there were several changes that I did make. It was returned to her. I didn't keep a copy of the draft.
Q Do you have any objection of us being provided with drafts of the disclosure statement?
MR. BURROW: I object.
MR. COLINGO: That's not proper, Charles.
MR. MIKHAIL: First of all --
MR. COLINGO: I can't even interpose an objection to a question like that.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I'm going to insist respectfully under the case management order the only objections allowed are based
on information that is privileged or trade secret.
MR. BURROW: That's incorrect.
MR. COLINGO: That's incorrect, Charles. Absolutely it's incorrect and --
MR. MIKHAIL: What other objections are allowed?
MR. COLINGO: Harassment for one thing. And we'll go to it, if you want to.
MR. MIKHAIL: No, I would just ask, Joe, why it would be harassment to ask Dr. Lowery if he had any objection to me
receiving a draft?
MR. BURROW: We object on the form of the question.
MR. MIKHAIL: All right.
MR. COLINGO: Form.
MR. MIKHAIL: He can answer it.
MR. MIKHAIL: He can answer it.
MR. COLINGO: You can answer.
MR. BURROW: I didn't tell him not to answer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Do you have any objection to providing or us being provided -- you said you didn't keep a copy yourself -- of the draft of
the disclosure statement?
A I have no objection.
MR. MIKHAIL: All right. I would like to make a request on the record, Joe and Stephen, that that be provided to us.
MR. COLINGO: We'll take it under consideration.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, under item number 5, we talked about all correspondence with counsel. Other than the correspondence that have
been provided in connection with billing and setting up appointments and meetings and that sort of thing which are pretty much
trying to work out logistics of travel and that sort of thing, were there any letters that contained substance of your testimony,
what you're going to testify about and what you're going to use to testify and that sort of thing containing substantive information
about your expected testimony?
A No.
Q Have you had any correspondence with other defense expert witnesses in this case?
A No.
Q Have you had communications by telephone or in-person conversations with any of defense expert witnesses in this case?
A Yes.
Q And who would those be?
A Ray Skates.
Q Who else?
A Pardon me?
Q Who else?
A That's all.
Q That's it. And what was the nature of those conversations?
A I was asking for some copies of I believe it was revenue bills that I did not have, and he was working on that. It was my
understanding he was working on producing those for the defense. And I asked for copies of certain revenue bills that I did
not have.
Q Did he provide you those bills?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Did you review those documents?
A Yes.
Q Will you be relying on those documents for your testimony?
A Yes.
Q Last item is number 7. It asks for all documents the witness received from or sent to defense counsel in this case. You
furnished us with correspondence in connection with billing, and you've testified about other correspondence. What, if anything,
did defense counsel provide you in connection with your being an expert witness in the case? Can you itemize for me or give
me an idea what was furnished by defense counsel?
A I received copies of various depositions of Buddy Medlin and various other lobbyists involved. I received -- I went through
collections of material in Washington that one of the law offices which had to do with health -- the health care industry,
particularly American Cancer Society, American Heart Association, American Lung Association, the Mississippi chapters of
those that had compiled material relating to their lobbying activities.
Q Okay. And what else did they provide you? You --
A I received some response to interrogatories from Philip Morris, Tobacco Institute, maybe Reynolds and Hill & Noelton
Advertising firm.
Q I'm not sure and I don't remember right offhand whether the list or the index itemization was in connection with Dr. Sansing
or Dr. Lowery, but let me look for a moment and see if there's -- I think it was in connection with Dr. Sansing. There is a list
of an index of the documents. Can you think just offhand of any additional material that was supplied by defense counsel?
A That's all I can think of.
Q You said you reviewed the deposition of Henry Turner.
A Yes.
Q And who else? Buddy Medlin?
A Buddy Medlin, Ron Morris. There were two, Harkins and Corlew, I believe, who were deposed, Mike Wallace. That was
a deposition that Mike Wallace did.
Q Let me ask you about that. I saw that in one of the itemizations. Was Mike Wallace actually deposed --
A Yes.
Q -- in this case?
A Right.
Q In the Moore litigation?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Okay. You read that deposition?
A I tried, with two lawyers posturing.
MR. MIKHAIL: I may be missing something, Joe. I thought there was an objection and the court ruling that the deposition
would not be taken. I don't remember whether it was taken.
MR. COLINGO: I think Mike's was taken. I know Corlew's was taken. Nick Harkins' was taken. Mike Wallace finally was
taken, I think.
MR. BURROW: He didn't get it from me. I thought it was the deposition where he basically didn't answer any questions.
A That's correct. As I say --
MR. COLINGO: Off the record.
(Off Record)
A As I say, it was two lawyers posturing and one trying to find a way to ask the questions.
MR. COLINGO: Nobody answered anything, I don't think. I haven't even read it. Didn't want to read it.
MR. MIKHAIL: I object to the use of the term lawyers posturing. We never posture.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, were you furnished by defense counsel with any internal tobacco industry documents in connection with your
testimony?
A No.
Q Did you ask to be provided with any internal company documents in connection with your testimony or in connection with
material you're going to review?
A No. But let me qualify it by saying that I did not specifically ask. I -- one of the conversations that I had with the -- a group
of lawyers in Washington, the question was asked did I know a bit of information that I could only have known had I had
access to those documents. I said I do not have those documents. In the absence, I can't give you an opinion. But I did not
ask for nor were they proffered.
Q All right. Could you explain to me or give me a reason why you did not specifically ask to review internal company
documents?
A No, I can't.
Q Do you --
A I don't remember with enough specificity what the particular question was. It seemed to me something that was out of the
mainstream of what I was working on.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Okay. If you don't know the answer to this, obviously you can say you don't know. Do you know why defense counsel did
not provide you with internal company documents?
A No.
Q Did anyone explain to you or tell you why they were not providing you with internal company documents?
A No. It was just a casual comment, sort of an aside. I said, “Look, if I had access to the internal documents, I might know the
answer to that question.” But it was an incidental aside, really.
Q Would you have liked to have the benefit of reviewing internal company documents in preparation for your expected
testimony?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q That's fine, you may answer.
A I may answer?
MR. COLINGO: You may answer.
A No. I'm sorry. Please repeat the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Would you have liked to have the benefit of reviewing internal company documents on the subject that your expect --
A No.
MR. BURROW: Same objection.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q What was the answer?
A No.
Q And what is the reason that you would not have liked it?
A Because I had had more to look at than I could look at already just on a narrow focus on what is happening in Mississippi.
Q Is it fair to say that it was primarily because of the volume of information that you already had to review?
A Yes.
Q Did you review the expert witness statements of other experts designated by the defense in this litigation?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q There haven't been very many depositions, but have you reviewed any depositions of expert witnesses in this case, defense
expert witnesses?
A No, nothing that I can think of. I mentioned those depositions. I think all of the depositions that I have looked at and none
of them -- well, I mean is Ron Morris, for example?
Q Those are fact witness depositions and you've listed those.
A I have not.
Q Do you know professor Paul Dommel D-o-m-m-e-l?
A No.
Q Have you spoken with any defense counsel about testimony given by Dr. Dommel in Washington, D.C., last Friday?
A No.
Q Have you talked with Dr. David Sansing about your expected testimony?
A No, not about that. I have talked -- he is a colleague.
Q About your expected testimony here.
A No.
Q You're dealings in preparation for this case, I understand, from the documents that were provided by your counsel and from
you dealt primarily with other than Mr. Colingo and Mr. Burrow with the firm of Arnold & Porter and Kirkland & Ellis. Is
that correct?
A That's correct.
Q Any other firms that you have dealt with?
A No.
Q Other than some correspondence with Brown & Williamson?
A No, no, and their firm. And my dealings with them have been of late. Early on it was with Kirkland & Ellis and Arnold
& Porter.
Q Who -- does one particular attorney -- was there a particular attorney from Arnold & Porter that you dealt with in preparation
for your testimony?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Who was that?
A Leslie Whorton.
Q You mentioned her.
A She was the principal one. There was others in and out.
Q The principal one was Leslie Whorton. What about at Kirkland & Ellis?
A Kathleen Mullery M-u-l-l-e-r-y.
Q I met her. When were you first contacted about becoming an expert witness on behalf of the defendants? I'm talking about
year and month.
A My first contact was probably in June of this past year, 1996.
Q Who contacted you?
A David Sansing.
Q And what did he tell you?
A He asked if I had any time or interest in possibly serving as an consultant for, I believe he said, Arnold & Porter or Kirkland &
Ellis. I don't remember which firm. And he explained very briefly that he was doing some work and that there was the possibility
that they would want someone to work on the question of lobbying, and would I be interested in doing that.
Q And what did you say to him?
A I gave an equivocal response. I said possibly, depends. And I recommended a colleague.
Q Who was that?
A Bob Jenkins.
Q At Mississippi State?
A At Mississippi State. This was -- it was a brief conversation. That was the gist of it.
Q Obviously you have become an expert witness designated by the defense in this case. After speaking to Dr. Sansing, who
subsequently did you speak to --
A Kathleen Mullery was the first. I spoke with her. I was -- and this would have been in probably July because I was in
Richmond, Virginia, doing some research and she came down and met with me there. She came down from Washington and
met with me and talked with me.
Q Dr. Lowery, did they -- they meaning defense counsel -- and I don't necessarily want to narrow it to one specific counsel. But
if you can answer collectively from the defense side, did they specifically ask you what type of testimony they were looking
for, or did they ask you what type of testimony you could offer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A What they did was pose the question that they wanted to have answered.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q What was that question?
A What influence did the tobacco lobby have in the Mississippi legislature, how active was-it, what level of influence did it
have on passage or what level of influence did it have on passage or nonpassage of legislation?
Q All right. When that question was posed to you, did you have an opinion at that point to answer that question?
A Yes. And my opinion was that -- well, the answer is yes.
Q What was that opinion?
A It was that --
Q They have trained you well. What was that opinion?
A The opinion was that the tobacco lobby in Mississippi was not very active. That, in a nutshell, was my opinion.
Q Did you convey that opinion when the question was posed to you?
A Yes.
Q And that was before you had done any of the research that was described in any of the review of documents?
A Right.
Q And any of the studies that you have done in connection with your testimony?
A That was based upon my existing information at the time and what little work I had done in contemporary politics.
Q You already that had opinion before you began going through documents --
A Yes.
Q -- and formulating --
A Right.
Q -- or -- strike that.
A I think it was a relevant opinion. I had lived in Virginia and other -- in Florida and other states; and compared to other states
that I'm aware of, it was my impression that the tobacco industry has had a rather nominal presence in Mississippi, that it is
not a powerful lobby.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q When you gave that opinion initially to the counsel, did counsel concur with you on that opinion?
A By concurrence, did they affirm, yes, we think that too?
Q Yes.
A No, they did not.
Q Did they say one way or the other?
A No. As a matter of fact, from the outset, they -- defense counsel was very careful, I thought. Maybe they were -- maybe
having dealt with people out of academe before, they were very cautious. But they simply said, “We want to know the answer
to the question.” And I said that is -- that is a historical problem that history can examine and look at.
MR. COLINGO: Let the record clearly reflect that the defendants in this particular case do not try to influence their expert
witnesses one way or the other as is evidenced by the testimony you're getting, Charles, in that our true motive and desire is
to find the truth.
MR. MIKHAIL: I will let the record reflect Mr. Colingo is smiling when he was making that comment.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, what, if anything, was told you about the nature of this litigation about the nature of the case, what it's about?
A I don't recall anything being told by counsel. I may have asked questions, but I was -- I read about the filing of the suit and
was generally aware of what it was about.
Q Before speaking to defense counsel, did you understand the nature of the case?
A Yes.
Q Just very, very briefly, what is this case about?
A Well, it's an attempt on the part of the state through Attorney General Mike Moore to recover damages incurred for the
treatment of patients from tobacco-related illnesses.
Q Do you understand that it's on behalf of the state and not on behalf of any individual smokers?
MR. BURROW: Objection. Calls for a legal conclusion.
MR. MIKHAIL: He can answer that.
MR. COLINGO: I don't know whether he can. You're really getting into legal issues, Charles, not what he's here designated for.
MR. MIKHAIL: Whether or not he knows whether it's on behalf of the state and not on an individual smoker case is not a
legal question.
MR. COLINGO: It most certainly is.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. MIKHAIL: Are you directing the witness not to answer the question?
MR. COLINGO: No. If he knows, go ahead.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you know, Dr. Lowery?
A Restate the question.
Q Do you know whether this lawsuit is on behalf of the state and not individual smokers?
A It's my understanding that that is the case, yes. That is the way I understood it from the beginning.
Q Okay. Dr. Lowery, you may already have this in front of you; but just for convenience, I'm going to give your counsel --
MR. MIKHAIL: And, Stephen, I am sorry. I don't have an extra copy for you. I brought one for the lawyer and one for the
witness.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me have the court reporter mark it first.
(Exhibit 2 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I've handed you what has been marked as Exhibit 2, I believe, your curriculum vitae. And I ask you under the heading
education, it shows that you earned your Ph.D. in history at the University of Virginia in 1966. What was the topic of your
dissertation?
A James Barbour. It was a biographical study of the Jeffersonian Republic.
Q Did it have anything to do with lobbying?
A No.
Q Did it have anything to do with tobacco industry lobbying?
A No. Well, he was a tobacco planter, but it had nothing to do with lobbying.
Q Or tobacco industry lobbying or tobacco lobbying?
A Right.
Q In 1961, you received an M.A.. in history from Florida State University. What was the -- did you write a thesis in connection
with that master's?
A Yes, I did.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q I know today -- I don't know about the time you did, but today some people get away with doing a master's without a thesis.
A That's correct.
Q I never could understand that.
A Yeah.
Q What was the topic of --
A It was a study of the territorial period, Mississippi history, great migration to the Mississippi territory.
Q Did that have anything to do with lobbying?
A No.
Q Did it have anything to do with tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q And then you received your bachelor of arts degree in English in 1959 from Huntington College -
A That's correct.
Q -- in Montgomery, Alabama. Correct?
A Yeah.
Q Were you a double major or was history your minor?
A Essentially it was a double major. I needed one survey course in history to have a major, and I had taken all the upper division
courses. There was no point. But since I did not have the specified requirements, I didn't get the history major.
Q That kind of stood out to me as to how you jumped from a bachelor's degree in English to a master's degree in history. And
apparently you had enough courses.
A I had a double major or in effect except for the one course at a survey level, and I chose not go back and take that.
Q Did you do a -- I guess the best thing to do is a senior paper for your major?
A No.
Q You did not. If you will look under professional experience for 1981, it has January through September. You were the acting
head of the department of sociology --
A Right.
Q -- at Mississippi State University. Was that just for that short period of time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Yes. It was basically for a year.
Q Do you have any educational background in sociology? Let me ask it this way: Do you have any degrees in sociology?
A No.
Q Do you claim any expertise in sociology?
A Yes, some.
Q In what way?
A A limited major. I have been on programs, chaired sessions at the Southern Sociological Association, primarily as a result
of interests rather than education.
Q Would you consider yourself an expert in sociology in the same way that you are an expert in history?
A No.
Q Are you -- do you consider yourself an expert in political science?
A Depends on how you define expert.
Q How do you define expert?
MR. BURROW: Objection.
MR. COLINGO: No.
MR. MIKHAIL: That's fair enough.
MR. COLINGO: No. You define it and let him say whether or not he agrees.
MR. MIKHAIL: Are you instructing him not to answer?
MR. COLINGO: Yes, until you define it appropriately.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm not going to define it appropriately. I'm going to ask the question this way.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, you have been designated and agreed to serve as an expert in this case. Is that correct?
A That's correct.
Q And what is your understanding of what an expert is?
A Someone --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: Hold on. I object. I think that Dr. Lowrey's 26(b)(4) statement has been given to you. If you don't have it, I'll be
happy furnish another copy of it. I think that that is the area in which Dr. Lowery intends to testify. We're not offering, Charles,
and I'm certainly not implying or trying to short-circuit you, but this witness is going to testify about lobbying in Mississippi.
He's not going to testify or be called upon to testify to anything else that I'm aware of.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand that, Joe. I'm entitled to eliminate areas of expertise.
MR. COLINGO: I understand that. But I'm -- I do understand that, and I'm trying to let you know in advance that there's no
need to sit here all day and go through, are you an expert this, are you an expert in that, because this 26(b) (4) answer is what
he's going to testify to. I don't have any problem with you questioning him all day long about his expertise in this area.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I understand everything you're saying, but I'd like to ask the questions the way I want to ask them.
MR. COLINGO: Sure, I understand.
MR. MIKHAIL: I think it's entirely proper for me to ask him the questions I'm going to ask him. I cannot do anything about it
if you instruct him not to answer it today, but I'm going to ask if he is being proffered as an expert in this case.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I want to ask you, Dr. Lowery, again, what is your understanding of what an expert is?
A An expert is someone more knowledgeable than most people, certainly more knowledgeable than the average citizen on a
particular topic. An expert is one who others would go to for an opinion. There are levels of expertise, degrees of expertise,
which is why I raised the question about sociology. I am not an expert in sociology by comparison with someone who is a full-
time professor and teacher in that area. I am an expert to a person off the street in matters of sociology.
Q Your understanding is and intention is not to serve as an expert in sociology in this case?
A Of course not.
Q Would that be the same for political science?
A Yes.
Q And psychology?
A Yes. But not in political theory because political theory crosses over into history and to political science.
Q To try to accommodate your counsel and not to take too long, is it your understanding that you're going to be an expert or
being offered in this case as an expert in political theory?
A No.
Q Psychology?
A No.
Q Human behavior?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q Philosophy?
A No.
Q Public relations?
A No.
Q Communications?
A No.
MR. COLINGO: Off the record.
(Off Record)
A Although let me say by way of explanation that most of those are in some way involved in the larger issue that I'm dealing
with of lobbying.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you hold yourself out as an expert in those fields --
A No.
Q -- other than history?
A I do not.
MR. COLINGO: Off the record.
(Off Record)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q If you'll turn to page 2 of your -- actually it's marked page 2. You see where it says courses taught?
A Yeah.
Q In the interest of time, Dr. Lowery, I'm going to try to do this -- I do have a lot to cover today, but I want to try to make
this as short as possible. Without taking each of these courses that you've taught one at a time, let me ask the same question
I'm going about all of them and maybe you can help me break it down. In any of these courses that you have taught, do any
of them have anything to do with lobbying in general?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Do any of them have anything to do with tobacco industry lobbying in general? I'm sorry, tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Tell me what Honors U.S. History is?
A It was simply a course, U.S. History course for honor students in the honors college.
Q You assisted them or supervised them in writing research papers. Right?
A Correct.
Q Try to wait until I finish the question. I know it's hard. In any of the Honors U.S. History students whom you supervised, did
any of the research of any of those students have anything to do with lobbying in general?
A No.
Q Did any of it have to do with tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q You also had to have worked with graduate students working on master's theses in history and possibly even dissertations
-- correct --
A Yes.
Q -- over the years?
A Yes.
Q Did any of those students specialize or focus in their graduate work in lobbying in general?
A No.
Q Tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Again in the interest of time, I'm going to ask you the same general question for the publications that you have listed on pages
2, 3 and 4. I have reviewed these publications, and please correct me if I'm mistaken, but none could properly be classified as
concerning lobbying in general, can they?
A That's correct.
Q And none can be classified as involving tobacco industry lobbying?
A That's correct.
Q And that applies for both the sections on books and articles, book chapters and others. Is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A That's correct.
Q And the same question as to the reviews. Is that correct?
A Yes.
Q Your answer would be the same?
A Yes.
Q Okay. Under on page -- I believe it's 6 for honors and awards, the honors and awards that you have received, did any of them
have anything to do with any work on lobbying in general?
A No.
Q Any on tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Other than what is listed here as honors and awards, have you received any honor or recognition either in the state of
Mississippi or nationally in any work in lobbying?
A No.
Q On lobbying?
A No.
Q On tobacco industry lobbying?.
A No.
Q And the same question for grants. Anything having to do with lobbying in general?
A No.
Q Tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q And the same thing for papers and professional presentations. Anything having to do with lobbying in general?
A No.
Q Tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q The public -- I'm sorry, page 9, the public and community program speeches and presentations section, did any these have
anything to do with lobbying in general?
A No. s
Q Did any of them have anything to do with tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q I noticed beginning on page 10 under the service section, I have reviewed a very impressive service record, Dr. Lowery. I
say that sincerely to you as well as your résumé, focusing on the area I'm talking about.
A Thank you.
Q Have there been any committees or commissions that you have served on that deal with lobbying?
A No.
Q That deal with tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Have you been on any task forces either on a state level or national level examining or studying or focusing on lobbying
in general?
A No.
Q On tobacco industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Is there a field or a recognized specialty -- I think that's the best way I can ask it -- of lobbying history?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You can go ahead and answer.
A I'm sorry?
MR. BURROW: Go ahead and answer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q When they object to the form, any objection can be taken up later unless they instruct you not to --
A The question is: Is there such a field as lobbying history?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Or an area of specialty that you as a historian would consider a field --
A Not in history as a teaching or --
Q As a discipline?
A -- major field. It is not something that would be taught. One might be -- it might fall under the rhetoric of business history or
might fall under the business of public opinion. But you find it -- it's much more likely to be in the area of political science than
in history, although historians have written books, scholarly books on lobbying and lobbying history. You find both political
scientists and historians interested in the area of lobbying.
Q What would you say your area of expertise is or specialty -- let me use the word specialty not expertise -- in the discipline
of history?
A I am a specialist in Southern history.
Q In that --
A However, at my institution, I am considered -- at least I list myself as a specialist in the early republic, the period -- the period
course that I routinely teach is very constitutional up through the age of Jefferson. That's the area that I am responsible for
for teaching advanced classes and graduate classes, although I am more of a generalist than a narrowly focused early republic
person. I teach -- I have taught in a wide variety of areas basically, but I consider myself a specialist in Southern history.
Q Southern history?
A But you see, if I went and claimed to be primarily a Southern historian, we have -- we have on my faculty someone who is
considered the Southern historian. In fact, we have a lot of overlapping fields. We have two or three -- even our medievalist
from Chapel Hill has a teaching competency in Southern history.
Q I understand how that works. Okay. And this is a question that I think you've answered, but I want to make sure the record
is clear. You don't know of anyone in the field of history or specializing in the field of history that can go out and get a degree
in lobbying history specifically?
A No.
Q If you look at page 11 under consultant activities, the law firm of Kirkland & Ellis is listed. Do you see that?
A Yes. I see it.
Q Other than the Arnold & Porter -- and obviously you've worked with Mr. Colingo and Mr. Burrow and this encompasses
working with law firms in connection with this case, but have you worked as a consultant or a designated expert with any other
law firms other than in this tobacco litigation?
A Yes.
Q And what were those cases?
A Not in recent years, but I think I probably listed just the last five years here. Let's see. Chadbourne & Parke, I believe, in
New York.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q How long ago was that?
A '86, '87, somewhere in there. The mid to late '80s. I worked with a local Jackson firm. Is there one called Jellison & Biggs.
Q Jelliffe -- Edmonson, Jelliffe & Biggs?
A That's it.
Q I know those lawyers.
A Edmonson, Jelliffe & Biggs, I believe.
Q I knew they at one time had represented some tobacco interests. Did you work with them in connection with any tobacco case?
A Yes.
Q And Chadbourne & Parke --
A The same.
Q -- in connection with a tobacco case?
A Right.
Q Was it the same case?
A Yes. It was at the time that the Horton, Nathan Horton, case was pending, had been filed.
Q You did not testify in the Horton case, did you?
A No.
Q Did you serve as a consultant?
A I served as a consultant.
Q A nontestifying consultant?
A Right. What they -- what I did was I met with attorneys from around the country working with tobacco litigation, and I talked
with them about Mississippi history, Mississippi politics and what was known about smoking, the hazards of smoking in the
general public, what the environment was.
Q Awareness. Would that be fair?
A Right. And I did seminars basically for groups from around the country.
Q Did your work for these two law firms, Chadbourne & Parke and Edmonson, Biggs & Jelliffe, have anything to do with
lobbying history?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No. I was focused more on the environment, the awareness level of the public.
Q Have you ever served as a consultant, nontestifying expert or as a testifying expert in the area that you're being proffered
in this case as a lobbying history expert?
A No.
Q Dr. Lowery, you have furnished and your counsel have furnished an itemization of a list of various documents that they have
provided that you have relied on. I don't want to go through every set. I did want to ask you -- and if I'm missing something,
please correct me. I'm not trying to trick you in this regard. I notice in Mr. Burrow's letter and in one of the indexes it talked
about articles, newspaper articles and periodicals that you have reviewed from 1950 to 1990.
A Uh-huh.
Q Is that correct?
A Well, I think it should be '95 probably to present.
Q That's what I was going to ask you. Have you reviewed anything beyond 1900?
A Yes.
Q One place it says collection of articles up to 1990.
A I miscommunicated if I cut it off at that -- at '90 because I have really looked up to present.
Q I really want to clarify it. It doesn't matter. One document says you have reviewed something up to '95 or '97, and one said
to 1990. I just want to know --
A They were depending on what I would have communicated. And if I put '90, it was simply a mistake on my part.
Q But is it fair to say you have reviewed newspaper reports and periodical material?
A Yes, absolutely.
Q From -- let me finish the question. We'll work together. From 1950 to 1995?
A Yes.
Q Have you looked at anything more present than 1995? Anything --
A Yes.
Q -- in the last year or two?
A Basically it should be to present.
Q Okay. In any of the reviews, it is my understanding you have not looked at any internal company documents?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No. May I clarify?
Q Sure.
A I'm thinking that that 1990 designation may have been for one part of the material, that is, the documents that had to do with
the lobbying reports in the archives.
Q Okay. What would the material on the public record at the Secretary of State's office or in other offices in the state
about contributions, political contributions by the tobacco industry and tobacco lobbyists, what would that tell you about the
effectiveness of their lobbying in Mississippi?
A Their effectiveness?
Q The effectiveness of the lobbying activity, the success or failure of it, the actual listing of contributions and money spent.
A Would it not had --
Q In and of itself, would that tell you anything?
A No.
Q Would lists of political action committees, various interest groups that lobby, various organizations and associations of the
different industries and different businesses in Mississippi provide you with any information -- and I'm talking about just the
lists themselves -- of the effectiveness of tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi, success or failure of that lobbying?
A No.
Q Would those two categories of documents -- and so the record will be clear and I don't confuse you, the list of contributions
and money spent and the list of political action committees and various groups that are involved in lobbying, would those
tell you as a historian reviewing this material whether or not the tobacco industry prevented legislation from being passed or
implemented in Mississippi in relation to smoking?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q What was your answer?
A No.
Q In your review of periodical material and newspaper articles -- and I've looked at quite a few. I think we had several boxes
delivered this weekend courtesy of Mr. Burrow -- did you review and study newspaper reports and periodical literature about
covering -- information that has come out in the public domain or has become known to the public in that literature and in the
newspapers about alleged tobacco industry conspiracy, coverup, withholding information, that sort of thing?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form of that question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Was that part of the material that you reviewed?
A Yes. I saw that, but I'm not sure what you mean when you ask covering information.
Q Included in the material that you reviewed, were there articles about alleged conspiracy on the part of the industry to withhold
information that the industry had -- and for the sake of your counsel and for the sake of not getting into an argument -- alleged
conspiracy to withhold what the industry knew about the link between smoking and disease, for instance?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A Yes.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Did you review articles and periodicals in connection with what is alleged the industry knew about the pharmacological
effects of nicotine?
A No.
Q All right. You don't recall reviewing --
A No, I did not review such literature.
Q Are we talking about both the length of smoking and disease or just pharmacological effect of nicotine?
A Let me respond by saying that the focus of what I did was not on this. It was rather on lobbying, lobbying activities; and that
is what I focussed on. I may have read on earlier occasions or incidentally something about smoking and health issues.
Q Ran across some articles?
A Right.
Q Is it fair to say that articles covering alleged conspiracy to withhold information about the link between smoking and disease
and the pharmacological effects of nicotine was not the focus of your examination or study?
A That's correct.
Q That's fair?
A Yes.
Q In connection with the study that you are to conduct and the conclusions that -- findings that you are to make as an expert,
do you believe that information that the industry allegedly had about the link between smoking and disease and about the
pharmacological effects of nicotine would be important for you to evaluate in reaching those conclusions?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Can you restate that?
MR. MIKHAIL: Could you read it back.
(Off Record)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q In conducting your study and in arriving at findings and conclusions about lobbying activity, tobacco industry lobbying and
activity in Mississippi, do you believe it was important to examine information about what the tobacco industry allegedly knew
about the link between smoking and disease and about the pharmacological effects of nicotine?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q And why is that?
A Because I was focused on the level of lobbying and the amount of -- the number of lobbyists, the amount of money being
spent from the documentary record, from the public record. And the motives, you know, of what motives the lobbyists may
have had or the industry may have had were really not crucial to what I was examining.
Q How would you define -- how did you define or how do you define lobbying in the context of what were you studying,
tobacco industry lobbying? What does that term mean to you, lobbying?
A Well, it is simply the exercise of the constitutional right to address the legislature or to represent a point of view of the
constituent or constituent group to those who make decisions, legislative, executive, administrative decisions, that affect the
particular interest group
Q Is it fair to say that it involves providing information to legislators, lawmakers and regulators?
A Yes, absolutely.
Q Have you reviewed the Tobacco Institute's certificate of incorporation?
A No.
Q Do you know what the purpose is of the Tobacco Institute?
A In a very general way, yes.
Q What is it? What is that?
A It is to provide a service to the industry and to the -- well, to communicate information about tobacco to represent trade
interests, sort of a clearinghouse for the industry as a whole, as I understand it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q You have not reviewed the purpose statement in the certificate of incorporation?
A I have not seen that.
Q One of the purposes of the tobacco industry, I'll represent to you, was to collect and disseminate information about the medical
and scientific information about tobacco, relating to tobacco.
A The medical and scientific?
Q That's correct.
A Okay.
Q Do you believe that in tobacco industry lobbying providing information to lawmakers and regulators that they had a duty or
have a duty to provide those lawmakers in lobbying in Mississippi with information that the industry knew about the medical
and scientific effects of smoking?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form.
MR. BURROW: And also calls for a legal conclusion about duties and obligations of another party.
MR. MIKHAIL: He's proffered as an expert on lobbying. He should be able to answer what he thinks the duties of a lobbyist --
MR. BURROW: He's not being proffered as the expert of law of what some other entity's duties and obligations are under
the law.
MR. MIKHAIL: Your objection is noted.
MR. BURROW: Yeah.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you believe a lobbyist has a duty to provide information to lawmakers that the interest group or the industry that he or
she represents about -- the scientific and medical information about the product that they are involved in?
MR. COLINGO: Same objection.
A Shall I answer?
MR. COLINGO: Yeah, go ahead.
A Okay. You know, I think it depends on how you define duty, and I'm not sure how you are using it. I would not expect an
industry organization to present information to legislators or committees, whatever, that is going to be detrimental to their cause.
On a health issue, that is pretty much a matter of public information. I think that's a part of the general environment of
understanding knowledge. I would not expect that the trade association or Tobacco Institute, whatever you would call it, would
be approaching legislators and say we want -- we want this particular piece of legislation; however, you need to understand that
the scientific evidence says that smoking is hazardous to health or whatever. I think they understand that already. So it is not
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
the duty, obligation or moral responsibility even of the lobbyist working for that to -- let me retract that and say it is not the
duty or obligation of the lobbyist to present that kind of information.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q If the purpose of the lobbying arm of an industry, the Tobacco Institute in particular for the tobacco industry, is to collect
and disseminate information about the scientific and medical effects of cigarettes, then do you believe that there is a duty on
the part of the lobbyists for the tobacco industry to, in fact, disseminate information they possess, the industry possesses about
the medical and scientific effects of smoking on health?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form.
A No. And I thought I had answered the question as best I'm able.
MR. COLINGO: You did.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q And --
A Is that a different question from the one that you just asked?
Q If the purpose or if a purpose is to disseminate that information and they have that information but don't disseminate it, are
they not not fulfilling their purpose?
MR. COLINGO: Object again to the form. If you can understand the question.
A Well, if I understand the question, if there -- if their charge, their mission, is to disseminate information and they don't do
that, then they are not living up to their charge. They are not -- if I'm answering the question that you asked.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Okay.
MR. COLINGO: A hypothetical question.
A Right.
MR. MIKHAIL: It's not hypothetical that that's their purpose.
MR. COLINGO: It is hypothetical. I haven't seen anything to confirm that.
MR. MIKHAIL: You .want to see it?
MR. COLINGO: Go ahead with your deposition.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'll be glad to show it to you. I'm just trying to keep as little exhibits as possible.
MR. COLINGO: Go ahead with your questions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Is it your testimony, Dr. Lowery, that if the tobacco industry had in its possession evidence that it believed was conclusive
about the harmful effect of cigarettes and the pharmacological effects of nicotine, do you believe that it has a duty to furnish
that information to lawmakers as they vote on legislation affecting the use of that product?
MR. COLINGO: I object again, Charles, because that's the third time you've asked him that very question. You've asked it in
little variations, and he's tried to answer it. He answered it the last time.
MR. MIKHAIL: It's a --
MR. COLINGO: This is the third time you've asked right boom, boom, boom.
MR. MIKHAIL: It is a variation.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Can you answer it?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form again.
A I'm not sure I caught the variation. It sounded to me like the question that I had attempted already to answer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Let me ask it one more time and I'll leave it alone. I'm going to try to ask that same question I asked. If the industry, the
tobacco industry, had information in its possession from research it did and from experiments it conducted that in its mind was
conclusive as to the harmful effects of tobacco and about the pharmacological effect of nicotine, do you believe that it had a
duty to furnish lawmakers and regulators with that information?
MR. COLINGO: I object again. That's the fourth time.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I would like him to answer.
A I would say that is not -- I don't think that is its duty. If you ask about a moral responsibility, that's another issue.
Q Do they have a moral responsibility?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A In my view, if they have incontrovertible evidence, scientific and otherwise, yes, they have a moral responsibility, in my view.
Q If they don't --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Not a duty because they are a corporation. It's an industry. It is an industry that is licensed to operate to sell its product. It is
the duty of those who uphold and are responsible for public welfare -- the legislators are elected public officials. That is where
the duty, in my view, rests, not with the corporation or the industry that is selling a product.
Q Are you suggesting that an industry who may know about hazards of its product is justified in not providing information it
has about the hazards of the product when it lobbies for legislation affecting the use of that product?
MR. COLINGO: Object to form.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Is that what you're saying?
MR. COLINGO: I object to form.
MR. MIKHAIL: He's on cross-examination.
MR. COLINGO: You're arguing with the witness.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm not arguing. That's all right.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You can posture, but go ahead and answer it.
A Rephrase the question, please.
Q All right.
A I think the key word was “justified,” but please repeat the question.
Q If an industry in lobbying for the passage or in attempting to defeat legislation affecting the use of its product in Mississippi
possessed information about hazards of its product, do you think it is justified in withholding that information about the hazards
of its product to lawmakers who are going to be voting on laws affecting the use of that product?
MR. COLINGO: Object again to the form.
A Yes, I think it is justified withholding because -- I mean, if that information is already a part of the public record, it is already
understood. If it is a part of the general level of consciousness of the American citizen that smoking is hazardous, what -- I
don't see where any point would be served by the industry saying, “We want this legislation passed; but by the way, smoking
is hazardous.”
Q If --
A It's already a part of the general consciousness.
Q If everybody knew or believed that it was a hazardous --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A At least had been exposed to that information. Now, they may not have believed it, but they had at least been exposed to
that information since the 1950s.
Q I understand that, Dr. Lowery. I speaking specifically about the industry that is engaging in the lobbying, independent of
what is known out there in the public.
A Right.
Q Does it have a moral duty to provide information it possessed of what it knows?
MR. COLINGO: Object. You're just asking the same thing over again.
MR. MIKHAIL: That's fine.
MR. COLINGO: Wait a minute. I'm going to tell you -- I want to be polite --
MR. MIKHAIL: I want --
MR. COLINGO: I don't have any problem with that, Charles. I have a problem with you asking a question six times. If do
you, then I'm going to instruct him not to answer. I don't have any problem with you asking it twice because sometimes I get
confused about the way I ask questions. But this is the sixth time you've asked, and we are asking the same thing. Could we
take about a one-minute break?
MR. MIKHAIL: You may.
MR. COLINGO: May I?
(Off Record)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q At the risk of getting the wrath of Mr. Colingo and Mr. Burrow, I want to ask one final question in that area and hopefully
we can put it to rest.
MR. COLINGO: One more time.
MR. MIKHAIL: But I'm not going to ask it the same way I asked it before.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Is it fair to say, Dr. Lowery, that the basis for your opinion as to whether or not the industry should provide information to
lawmakers about the health effects of the product are based on what information the public already has? Is that fair?
MR. COLINGO: Object again to the form.
A Yes.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Okay. On the lists of information or documents that were provided us --
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, these pages aren't numbered. Stephen may have it. I don't have an extra copy of it.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Under other documents is listed Prometheus data base information 1990 and 1992.
A. Right.
Q Do you recall reviewing that material?
A Yes. I recall.
Q Do you recall that, reviewing that?
A I recall reviewing it. Perusing it would be a better word.
Q Perusing it. We peruse a lot having all of these documents. Was that provided you, I'm assuming, in hard copy?
A Yes.
Q And what was the volume of that material?
A What do you mean volume?
Q Was it in two banker's boxes? Was it two-inch --
A It was in one folder, and its volume was about two and a half inches, I would -- it was about -- I don't know. I don't know
how many pages it was because I did not study it. I looked at it. As I say, I perused it; but I didn't find it very useful.
Q Let me ask just so the record will be clear you said --
A Two and a half inches.
Q Two and a half inches so the record will reflect. Do you remember when that information was provided you?
A Probably September, October.
Q Of 1996?
A Yes.
Q Okay. Do you remember who gave it to you?
A I think Leslie Whorton. Perhaps it was Kathleen, one of the two.
Q What, if anything, was told you about Prometheus when it was provided you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Essentially nothing.
Q Just asked you to review it?
A Well, as I recall, some reference was made to Prometheus when I was in a meeting, and I said well, “What is Prometheus?”
And it was a conversation between the lawyers, and they said it's a data base. And someone said, “Perhaps I ought to see it
so we'll send it to you.”
Q I gather from your answer that prior to that you were not familiar with Prometheus.
A No, I had never heard of it.
Q Dr. Lowery, I'm not going to go through all the bills that were provided us. The documents that were provided us that reflect
your bills, other than this last correspondence that you were -- the dunning, in quotes, letter about your bill, does this consist of
the totality of the billing that you have given the tobacco industry for the services you have provided in this case so far?
A Yes.
Q We don't need to go through it in detail. Dr. Lowery, if I may, I'm going to just take a short while and go over some of the
charts that you prepared, and just ask you just a few questions about some of them.
MR. MIKHAIL: Could you mark this as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 3 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I've handed you what has been marked as, I believe, Exhibit 3. Is that correct?
A Yes.
Q And this is a chart that you prepared in connection with your expected testimony in this case. Correct?
A That's correct.
Q And it was from reviewing various information on the public record in Mississippi?
A That's correct.
Q Let me ask you -- it says at the top, “Number of tobacco lobbyists versus all lobbyists.” In the category group of what you
considered to be tobacco lobbyists, did that include lobbyists for any other manufacturers other than tobacco?
A I'm not sure I understand the question.
Q Let me ask it this way: Did it include lobbyists for other industries whose interests in some --
A Overlap?
Q -- instances overlap with the tobacco industry, or were they strictly tobacco manufacturers and the Tobacco Institute?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Strictly tobacco manufacturers and their trade associations like Tobacco Institute.
Q Okay. It did not include lobbyists for the Mississippi Manufacturers Association, for instance?
A No. Or convenient store owners.
Q Wholesalers and grocers?
A Yes.
Q BIPACT?
A No.
Q Do you know what BIPACT is?
A Yes.
Q What is that?
A Business & industry Pact.
Q EMFAIR?
A No, did not include EMFAIR.
Q Restaurant Association or the Alcohol and Beverage Association?
A No, did not. It included only the tobacco industry and clearly discernible, that is, Tobacco Institute, Reynolds, Philip Morris,
et cetera.
Q The manufacturers and the Tobacco Institute?
A Right.
Q Okay. The chart begins with 1984 to 1985, and it shows in the first column zero for tobacco lobbyists in '84 to '85.
A That's correct.
Q Is that what you gleaned from the public record?
A From the public record, yes.
Q Do you know, Dr. Lowery, why in 1984 to '85 there were zero tobacco lobbyists in Mississippi? I guess the best way to say
is there were no tobacco lobbyists.
A No, I don't know why.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Do you know what was happening on the national scene prior to 1984 and '85 as it related to tobacco industry lobbying?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q On the national scene outside Mississippi.
MR. COLINGO: Object. n
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you know what was happening at the state and local level outside Mississippi prior to 1984 as it related to tobacco industry
lobbying?
MR. COLINGO: Object again to the form.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you know what --
A May I ask -- may I go back? You asked do I know why there was zero tobacco lobbyists in 1985. I have an opinion; but,
I mean, I don't know specifically.
Q What is your opinion?
A That prior to that time the tobacco lobby was simply was not present in Mississippi. I stared with '84-85 as zero base. That
was the last -- that was the last year before the lobby -- tobacco lobby made an appearance.
Q From 1984 backward --
A Right.
Q -- there are no tobacco lobbyists in Mississippi from what you gleaned from the public record.
A With one exception. And that is in 1981 there was one tobacco lobbyist who was really in the wholesaling -- he represented
the wholesale tobacco rather than manufacturing -- who registered in February of '81, as I recall. He never showed up again, and
the session was halfway over before he registered at that point. So I looked at that, and I concluded that prior to this appearance
in '85-86 of the Tobacco Institute's lobbyists, there was really no significant tobacco presence -- tobacco lobbyist present in
the state.
Q Do you know, Dr. Lowery, what, if anything -- public interest groups, health groups, antitobacco advocates were doing on
the state and local level outside Mississippi in the years preceding 1984?
A Generally, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q What was that?
A They were very actively campaigning for regulation of the tobacco industry.
Q What type of regulation were they after?
A Smoking in public places particularly was a simple focus. Regulations, smoking in public places.
Q What else, if anything?
A Well, banning smoking, you know, on airlines, public transportation. That was the primary thrust of the antitobacco groups.
Q Have you seen any internal tobacco manufacturers or Tobacco Institute documents about -- or dealing with the need to now
begin having lobbyists in Mississippi from '85 onward?
A No.
Q You have not?
A No.
Q If you'll look at the same chart, in '91 to '92, it has tobacco industry lobbyists being seven and all lobbyists being 339. Is
that correct?
A That's correct. That's what the chart shows.
Q Do you know how many groups or industries these 339 represents, how many in number or an approximate number?
A I could only guess.
Q What's your best guess?
A But I would say probably 225, 250 maybe.
MR. COLINGO: So I understand, is your question of the 200 -- 339, who all did they represent.
MR. MIKHAIL: Not who, but how many.
MR. COLINGO: I got you. All right.
A It depends on how you define industry. I'm -- that number was predicated on the assumption that Singing River Hospital
in Pascagoula would be an entity different from the Jackson -- the Baptist Hospital in Jackson or Columbus. If I aggregated
them and said, Okay, all of the tobacco industry being one unit, all of the manufacturers another or the insurance companies
another, it would be much smaller.
Q Does this suggest to you -- and I'm asking your opinion. Does this suggest to you that inasmuch as there were approximately
200 or 225 of these groups as you defined them represented by 339 lobbyists and the tobacco industry being one industry
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
having seven, does that not suggest to you that the tobacco industry has a higher proportion of lobbyists working in Mississippi
that year?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A No. The answer is no, and I don't think you and I are on the same wavelength because I said --
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Help me out. Explain it to me.
A What I thought I communicated -- what I intended to communicate was that if we think in terms of 200 to 225, I would
be talking about individual units being separate. The tobacco industry would be not a single unit but it would be four or five
separate units out of that 225, you see. If I aggregated, say, the tobacco industry as a whole -- and I have some charts elsewhere
that shows some of this data -- then it would -- the fact is that those seven lobbyists represent maybe four different tobacco
companies or interests.
Q But it is one industry. Correct?
A Yeah.
Q All right.
A But the health care, if you want to define it as an industry, would have maybe 25 or 30 lobbyists. Or if you looked at the
manufacturing interests in Mississippi, it might have 50 -- or the banking industry or financial interests so that those particular
groups would be far more numerous than tobacco.
Q Okay. From -- I see 1992 and '93 and the same '93 to '94 and 1995 the tobacco -- number of tobacco lobbyists as classified
by you in the chart are four in each of those years. Correct?
A Right.
Q Do you know the reason why they went down from seven in 1991-92 to four in the following three years?
A No.
Q Do you know if that had anything to do with the election of Governor Fordice, him being the governor in the state?
A No. I'm answering in response do I specifically no? No, I do not specifically know that.
Q All right. Do you --
A I have some opinions.
Q Do you believe it has anything to do with the -- Governor Fordice being governor beginning in that year, 1992.
A Well, belief may be too strong. I don't have a firm conviction of that. I have an opinion.
Q What is your opinion?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A I think probably there may be some relationship there possibly, but I really -- I don't have a firm view. Go ahead. That's
as much as I will say.
Q Fair enough. Were you aware that when Governor Fordice was elected, one of the things that he announced he wanted to
do was to increase the tax on cigarettes?
A I have read that.
Q You are aware of that?
A Yes.
Q Are you aware that he actually made public statements that if you're going to tax anything you ought to tax sinful bad things
like cigarettes?
A I agree.
Q You have read that?
A Yeah.
Q Are you aware that he subsequently after making those remarks had a meeting with Henry Turner, the Philip Morris lobbyist?
A Yes.
Q Are you aware that Philip Morris, the Tobacco Institute and other manufacturers began making contributions to his inaugural
expenses? Are you aware of that?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Are you aware that after that took place in time chronologically that he dropped the idea of taxing cigarettes?
A Yes.
Q As an expert in -- propounded as an expert or proffered as an expert in lobbying history in Mississippi, do you attribute the
contacts made by tobacco industry lobbyists and the money given to the inaugural -- to Governor Fordice as the probable reason
for him dropping the idea of taxing cigarettes?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form of the question.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You do not?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q Why not?
A Why not? It would be a cheap turn of opinion because, as I recall, the amount of money that was contributed by the tobacco
industry to his campaign was very small.
Q You are not prepared to make any conclusions as to the reason why he abandoned the idea?
A No. I don't have access to that information. I have not talked with the governor, and that involves my guessing as to why he
did it. My opinion is that he was not converted by a gift of a couple of thousand dollars.
Q Does it not suggest to you from examining lobbying and lobbying history in Mississippi that the contacts made by lobbyists
for the tobacco industry and contributions made had an impact on a change in direction of the incoming governor as to taxing
cigarettes?
MR. COLINGO: I object. You've already asked him that --
MR. MIKHAIL: I didn't ask him that question.
MR. COLINGO: -- in a different way. He's already answered it. He answered it, no, it didn't. In fact, he said, I don't believe
that a small contribution to the governor had any impact on his changing attitude. You just asked the same question.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm asking the questions, Joe.
MR. BURROW: I understand you're asking the questions, but what I'm saying to you, Charles, is that again we go over -- the
questions have become arguments. When he gives you an answer and you don't like it, you ask him the same question with a
little variation to it and try to extrapolate a different answer. He's already stated he doesn't know.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand everything --
MR. COLINGO: You asked him how much money the trial lawyers gave to the Attorney General so that the lawsuit was filed.
Ask him that question. I am sure he can give you an opinion on that.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I understand everything you're saying. It's on the record. It's preserved. Dr. Lowery is being proffered as
an expert on the effectiveness of tobacco industry lobbying. That includes contacts and contributions. I'm asking a fair question.
I would like an answer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you believe as an expert in the effectiveness of tobacco industry lobbying that contacts made by tobacco industry lobbyists
and the contributions made, however the amount, whatever the amount was, resulted or had an impact on change in direction
by the incoming governor?
A No.
Q You do not believe that that suggested it had an effect?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Well, suggest. You asked me my opinion. You ask suggest, you can draw an inference -- you can say that if a person -- this is
the kind of thing that the press regularly does. The tobacco lobby or Mississippi Manufacturing Association spends $100,000
lobbying, and they get the bill that they want.
Q I
MR. COLINGO: Let him finish the answer.
A I would simply say that the literature that I've looked at and my own sense of how people act, how the governor might act,
how a legislator might act is that there is no clear relationship between the amount of money that is spent lobbying and the
outcome of that activity, the desired outcome. There are too many cases, notable cases in Mississippi's political history. For
example, the hazardous waste industry, where FDI and Hughes and USPCI and so forth trying to site hazardous waste plants
in Noxubee County came in '93, '94, spent half a million dollars with 25, 26 lobbyist trying to get those -- trying to get the
legislature to site the plant. Two women from Noxubee County, the Thomas sisters, came in and they were a counterlobby, and
they won. They beat the bi guys. Half a million dollars they spent, half a million dollars, and they still didn't get the site.
I don't see a one-to-one correspondence between -- I certainly don't think that Governor Kirk Fordice -- and I think maybe he
received a n couple of thousand dollars from the tobacco industry. I don't know about the exact year or time, but I'd accept your
word on it. I don't think for 2,000 or $3,000 he changed his mind.
Q I'm not asking if it's true or not. I'm asking if the inference is a reasonable inference to make, whether it's true or not.
A You can make the inference, but its validity is something else.
Q Have you not made many reasonable inferences from reviewing newspapers articles?
A Absolutely. This is one of the things that a historian has to do.
Q Right.
A But it is not an inference that I would make as an expert. May I say one thing?
Q You may.
A This is a mistake on this chart, and I -- it is in 1990-91 there were six tobacco lobbyists rather than --
Q Five?
A -- five.
Q Okay.
MR. MIKHAIL: Be sure to change it on yours, Joe, because it's going to make or break the case. I'm just joking.
A I came across that, and I was trying to get it corrected.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Don't worry about it. I was really just joking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: He's just joshing.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I don't want to go through the same series of questions of every one of these forms, but on the entertainment expenditure
form, which I'm going to hand you --
MR. MIKHAIL: Would you mark this as the next exhibit please.
(Exhibit 4 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I just want to ask the same question very quickly. As far as the entertainment expenditure broken down tobacco lobbyist
versus all lobbies, again the tobacco lobby was manufacturers and the Tobacco Institute, does not include other groups that
may have overlapping interests. Correct?
A That's correct.
Q Would your answer be the same as to what the meaning of all lobbies as it was for the previous exhibit --
A Yes.
Q -- as to what all lobbies represent?
MR. BURROW: They represent all lobbies.
MR. MIKHAIL: Explain what he meant --
A Every client --
MR. MIKHAIL: He did this chart, and he explained what he refers to as all lobbies. I'm trying to get you out of here quicker,
Stephen, if you would.
A All lobbyists who registered, that's what that represents.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Okay.
A Let my clarify because this seems to be some confusion. When I say “all lobbies,” each lobbyist and each client is required
by law to register, and they are assigned a number so that there will be -- in 1995 there will be 521 certificates that are on file.
Some companies or interests may have a dozen lobbyists; others will have only one. But this is every registration.
Q All right. In Exhibit Number 4, do you believe that the amount for 1992, 1993 of 3,041 going down to $489 in 1995 of tobacco
lobby expenditures on entertainment again had any connection with Governor Fordice being governor during those years?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Same question as I asked you on the other one. You do not?
A I don't think so.
Q Okay. All right. The next exhibit --
MR. MIKHAIL: Mark that, please.
(Exhibit 5 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q The next exhibit is marked as Exhibit 5, Dr. Lowery.
A Right.
Q Exhibit 5. Doesn't this chart show, Dr. Lowery, that unlike the chart which was Exhibit -- I want to say Exhibit 2, which
is about number of tobacco lobbyists -- 3 and Exhibit 4 about the entertainment expenditures of tobacco lobbyists versus all
lobbies, that unlike those two charts, this chart shows that total tobacco lobby expenditures stayed pretty much the same from
1991 to 1995. There was a reduction in entertainment expenses, and there was a reduction in the total number of lobbyists that
the actual amount of money spent was roughly the same in those four years.
A Yeah, roughly.
MR. MIKHAIL: Mark this, please.
(Exhibit 6 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You have Exhibit 6 before you, and it should be tobacco lobby versus health care lobby.
A Right.
Q Did you draw any conclusions from what these numbers show on this chart? Is it Exhibit -- again Exhibit 6 as to whether or
not the tobacco lobby was outgunned by the health care lobby in Mississippi?
A My conclusion was that the tobacco -- the number of tobacco lobbyists remained relatively stable over this period of time,
that some of the counterlobbies -- and I group the health care industry as a counterlobby because while they had many items
on their agenda, on their lobbying agenda, one was to get a Clean Indoor Air Act, for example, and to regulate the tobacco
industry. So that in this degree, at least, they were on the opposite side of the fence from the tobacco lobbyist, that compared to
the tobacco industry, the tobacco lobbyists, the health care was a more dominant influence or at least a more dominant presence.
I won't say influence necessarily, but certainly they outnumbered the tobacco lobbyists by a good measure.
Q Are the tobacco lobbyists -- are many of the tobacco lobbyists also health care .lobbyists in Mississippi?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Not as many. Beth Clay at one time in her professional career did a lot of health care lobbying, but -- and she probably still
has health care clients. I'm not sure of that. But as she has moved more toward other interests and become more important in
the tobacco lobbying, I think her role in the health care has diminished.
Q Were you aware in Florida in the spring of 1995 many of the tobacco industry lobbyists were also health care lobbyists, as
a matter of fact percent? Were you aware of that figure?
A No, I was not.
Q Did you read Ron Morris' deposition?
A Yes.
Q Do you know he is the vice-president for the Tobacco Institute?
A Uh-huh.
Q And did you -- do you recall the portion of his deposition where he testified that, in fact, Mississippi does not have regulation
of public smoking in restaurants and auditoriums and public buildings? Actually the only place that by law that it's regulated
-- I know it's regulated in hospitals by voluntary choice of the hospitals but is in --
A Public transit.
Q -- public transit?
A Right. I remember that.
Q And do you recall the portion of his testimony where he on behalf of the Tobacco Institute takes partial credit for not having
that type of use restriction legislation?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form. That's an assumption on your part.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm asking him --
A Yes, I recall that.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q In view of his testimony, does that not suggest to you that the -- despite the numbers that are shown on this chart, which
is again Exhibit 6, that the tobacco lobbyists in Mississippi have, in fact, been very effective in defeating legislation dealing
with use restriction of smoking in public places?
A No. That doesn't suggest -- because lobbyists by their very nature are inclined to claim what they may not be entitled to claim.
They want their employees to think they are doing their job. Yeah, I take credit for that. We did our job. Give me a raise.
Q Do you consider Ron Morris' testimony in taking credit on behalf of the industry for doing the effective job that they did
as suspect?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. BURROW: Objection to the form. Calls for a conclusion as to whether or not the witness is lying, and that's Judge Myers'
job.
MR. MIKHAIL: Stephen, Dr. Lowery is presented as an expert on effectiveness of lobbying and Ron Morris, vice-president of
the lobbying arm of the industry, has made certain admissions, certain statements. And I'm interested in getting Dr. Lowrey's
opinion as to that information given by Mr. Morris. His disclosure statement says he is going to comment on testimony by
the witnesses.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery?
A Restate the question, please.
Q All right. Do you regard what Ron Morris testified about the effectiveness of Tobacco Institute lobbying in Mississippi and
whether or not it's to the credit of the Tobacco Institute suspect as an expert on the effectiveness of lobbying in Mississippi?
MR. COLINGO: Same objection, but go ahead and answer it.
A May I answer it by saying that I think he overstates the credit, Tobacco Institute claims? Suspect: I'm not comfortable with
that word.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Well -- I'm sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt you.
A I was just saying that if he claims or if it was his intent to claim that the Tobacco Institute was responsible for the failure of
the Mississippi legislature to pass the Clean Indoor Air Act, for example, then I think he's dead wrong.
Q Prior to reading Ron Morris' deposition, you had formulated your opinion about the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the
tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi. Correct?
A Yes.
Q Prior to that, prior to reading the deposition, you didn't have any benefit of internal documents or correspondence between
tobacco lobbyists in Mississippi and the Tobacco Institute. Correct?
A That's correct.
MR. COLINGO: Object to form. He's already testified he didn't have any documents now or forever but go ahead.
MR. MIKHAIL: Noted for the record.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You didn't have the benefit of those documents. Correct?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Did you request to see correspondence between Tobacco Institute lobbyists in Mississippi such as Ellis Bodron and others
with the Tobacco Institute as to lobbying activities in Mississippi?
A No.
Q Specific correspondence?
A No.
Q Did you ask to see any of the private papers of the lobbyists?
A No.
Q Did you ask to see any of the private papers of Ron Morris who was the regional vice-president in charge of lobbying in
Mississippi?
A No, no.
Q As a historian attempting to study an area and attempting to reach conclusions about the evidence, did you not consider such
information as an important piece of evidence in your reaching conclusions about the effectiveness of lobbying?
A Yes. If I were going to publish a book on this subject, it would be essential information.
Q It would be essential information if it was to be peer reviewed and published?
A Correct.
Q Not if it was to be peer reviewed and published. Correct?
A My charge was to look at the public record, what does that show; and that's what I did.
Q That was your charge?
A Right.
Q As a historian and familiar with the discipline of history, you would want to look at all available sources to you, including
internal documents, to make conclusions about the effectiveness of lobbying in Mississippi. Correct?
A Right.
Q And the opinions that you would be able to arrive at -- I am ending with a preposition; I'm sorry -- as a historian would be
more reliable when you include such evidence than when you don't include such evidence. Correct?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form of that question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you understand that question?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: That calls, in my opinion, for sheer speculation.
MR. MIKHAIL: He's a historian.
MR. COLINGO: I understand.
A Yes, it would be a more complete picture.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q All right. You're familiar with Watergate, are you not, Dr. Lowery?
A Yes.
Q We read a lot in the newspapers in the early '70s about Watergate. Correct?
A That's correct.
Q We saw a lot on television about it.
A Correct.
Q You read a lot of about it in periodicals and in magazines.
A Yes.
Q Did we get the full import of the coverup by the President before the Nixon tapes and before internal White House memoranda
and internal documents were actually made public?
MR. COLINGO: Wait a minute. Hold it. I'm going to object to that question to the form, to the relevancy, to it being a
hypothetical question. Has absolutely nothing to do with this man's testimony here.
MR. MIKHAIL: It has a lot the do with it and he is a historian, Mr. Colingo.
MR. COLINGO: It has nothing to do with it, in my opinion.
MR. MIKHAIL: Are you instruction him not to answer this question?
MR. COLINGO: Yes.
MR. MIKHAIL: On what grounds?
MR. COLINGO: On the form that it's simply harassment. You've --
MR. MIKHAIL: Harassment?
MR. COLINGO: Yeah.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. MIKHAIL: Would you please, for the record, so that I can understand and the court can understand why it is harassment
to ask a historian, a very noted historian, who has my respect, to make an analogy of whether or not the full import of what truly
happened about a historical event could be had without internal private papers and tapes of the President in making an analogy
of whether or not some conclusions can be arrived at about another historical event?
MR. COLINGO: Charles, I'm not going to argue with you. I just instructed him not to answer. Let's go to the next question.
MR. MIKHAIL: Well, I'm going to ask the question this way.
MR. COLINGO: I'll instruct him not to answer it again.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, are you going to follow the instructions of Mr. Colingo and not answer the question that I posed about whether
or not as a historian, as an expert in history, you could give an opinion about the full import of what actually happened in
Watergate and the coverup --
A Yes.
Q -- reviewing -- let me finish. Reviewing the Nixon tapes and the internal memoranda as opposed to just news reports and
newspaper and periodical accounts of it?
A Yes.
Q You're going to follow his instruction?
A Yes.
Q All right. Mr. Colingo, I would ask -- and maybe you said it and I just missed it. Would you please state for the record how
that objection is permitted under the case management order because it does not include --
MR. BURROW: I think it's a form of harassment; I do. And I think it puts an undue burden on him to get him to give opinions
on areas that he's not been listed as under Rule 26(b)(4). You're going into fields that are not his field of expertise. That's just
a few, and I made my objection.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand that.
MR. COLINGO: It's in the way of annoyance, and you're trying to oppress it, in my opinion. So, therefore, under Section 17
in the case management order, I'm making my objection. That's what it is.
MR. MIKHAIL: I object to your objection as improper.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I would like to ask Dr. Lowery: Do you feel as a historian, as an expert in discipline of history the question that I posed to
you that such a question is a harassing, annoying question?
MR. BURROW: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: I object to that also.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you believe it's a harassing, annoying question?
MR. BURROW: Objection again.
A Am I to answer?
MR. COLINGO: Yeah, you can go ahead and answer that.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You do not?
A No.
Q The only reason you're not answering is because counsel has instructed you not to answer it?
A Yes.
Q You disagree with his basis for it that it's annoying to you and harassing to you. Correct?
A I think, however, that I have answered the question already in the previous question. It seemed to me that I said, yes, an
historian would desire as complete information as possible.
Q So the full import of what tobacco industry lobbying's effectiveness in Mississippi, an opinion about that, would be more
reliable if you had the benefit of internal company documents. Correct?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
MR. MIKHAIL: It's noted.
A Yes.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q All right.
A I'm sorry. Would you repeat that? I'm not sure -- did you say more reliable?
Q Yes.
A Rephrase the question. Repeat the question, please, because I think I may want to withdraw that answer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q That's fair enough. I am not going to make you stick to an answer. As a historian, do you believe that your conclusion would
have more validity had you included -- about the effectiveness of lobbying in Mississippi had you had the benefit as a historian
of reviewing more than just the public record, that you reviewed internal company documents?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A Validity, probably so, probably so. Although, again, I would say that lobbyists are inclined to overstate the value of what
they have accomplished; and I simply believe that legislators and public officials act from a variety of things, very complex
things and that the influence that the lobbyist has upon getting a particular outcome doesn't bear on one-to-one correspondence.
I think it's much more complex than that.
Q Okay.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let's take a break.
(Lunch Recess)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, I hope you had a good lunch.
A I did.
Q what I tried to do, even though these tabs seem like they are many, they are not compared to all the other questions I planned
to ask that I'm going to dispense with. I'm going to try to get you out of here soon. If you would, I need to ask you just very few
questions about your disclosure statement, your 26(b)(6) disclosure statement. I do have an extra copy of it for you.
MR. MIKHAIL: Could you mark this as an exhibit, please.
(Exhibit 7 marked)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q If you would, look at the first paragraph, the first bullet. It says, “Lobbying is an integral part of the American democratic
process that goes back to the earliest days of the American Republic.” Do you see that?
A Yes.
Q For this case, in studying lobbying activity and lobbying activity history, how far back into the days of the American Republic
did you go?
A 1780s.
Q And was it just as to Mississippi or did you --
A No. Mississippi did not become an organized territory until 1798. It was lobbying in the nation as a whole.
Q Okay. Lobbying in general.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Yes.
Q What about --
A But more specifically interest groups and factions in the political process.
Q Yes. Was there a focus on tobacco lobbying?
A No.
Q You also continue to say in that first paragraph -- I'm sorry. Let's move on to the next paragraph. It says, “The nature,
scope and intensity of lobbying has changed considerably in Mississippi over the past 30 years.” Could you briefly give me the
difference in prior to 30 years ago and then in the last 30 years as to the nature, scope and intensity? Can you compare from
1967, I guess, 30 years. I don't want to put a specific date but pre 1967 since it's 30 years from now and post 1967 in nature,
scope and interest. Can you compare the two?
A All right. Prior to the last 30 years, lobbying was very informative. Mississippi tended to be a single political party, tended to
have a fairly homogeneous point of view politically and socially. You did not have the diversity of economic interest, tended
to be agriculture, banking railroad. You simply did not have anything like the level of lobbying.
There were lobbyists, and they were present when the legislature was in, but from, I believe, from 1927 to 1970 or thereabouts,
there were about 425 lobbyists total for that whole time period who actually registered. The lobbying law as written in 1927 or
1924, I believe, was fairly stringent and had some severe penalties, that is, for anyone lobbying. It was -- the law went through
some various revisions over the years, but basically as rewritten in 1977, the law was so strict that if the Starkville Garden
Club wanted to address the board of aldermen for a beautification program on Highway 82, they had to register as lobbyists.
So people -- so the result was that lobbyists tended to ignore and not register at all. But the period prior to the '70s, lobbying
was more old-fashioned type lobbying, I would say, good ol' boy network.
Q Pat on the back?
A That sort of thing. In more recent years it has become much more professional, and particularly the last 10 or 15 years the
thrusts of lobbying has been more to provide information and reliable information studies, how constituents feel about a thing
than it was prior to that time when the good ol' boy system was enough, you know.
Q Is it fair to characterize the post 1970s nature of lobbying as more sophisticated?
A Yes, but I would say the acceleration and sophistication of that has in the last ten years been a quantum change in the level
and the nature of lobbying whereas in the '70s and '80s up to the mid '80s was sort of a bridge between the modern period where
elaborate poles and opinion samples --
Q Surveys?
A -- and surveys and all of that kind of thing are much more the stock and trade of the lobbyist today than they were 15 years
ago, certainly more than 30 or 40 years ago.
Q Is this description also applicable to tobacco industry lobbying, or is that different as far as the pre 1970s and post 1970s
tobacco lobbying in Mississippi?
A You mean as a whole within the country because I don't --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Within Mississippi.
A Well, you see --
Q What's the difference between the nature of any tobacco lobbying --
A According to the information I have, the tobacco companies were not even present before '85, '86.
Q Which we covered earlier.
A Right.
Q All right. Do you know when tobacco industry lobbying even began in the United States?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You may answer. Tobacco industry lobbying?
A I can't given you a specific year.
Q How about a decade? Can you give me a decade?
A Probably very early, probably the '20s or '30s, but I am not sure.
Q Have you studied the history of tobacco lobbying?
A No, not as an industrywide activity.
Q Just as to
A Just as it relates to Mississippi.
Q To Mississippi?
A Right.
Q Do you know of any tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi in the late 1950s, mid to late 1950s?
A There weren't any that I'm aware of, and I've looked at the records that are available, and none of them have listed tobacco
as having a presence.
Q All right. Until the mid '80s that we talked about earlier?
A Right. Including things like the Clarion-Ledger which will have an article, Top Ten Lobbyists in the Legislative Session,
and nowhere does tobacco even show up.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q So your testimony about tobacco lobbying really is not going to involve, I want to say, bullet number 2. They are not numbered.
But the nature, scope and intensity of lobbying changing within 30 years because tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi has
not -- isn't in existence before 30 years ago.
A Right.
Q If you'll skip down to the fourth item that talks about campaign contributions and lobbying expenditure, tobacco interests are
comparable to other groups in the state of Mississippi from the 1970s to 1995.
A Uh-huh.
Q Why do you suppose, Dr. Lowery, that if tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi has been ineffective that the tobacco
industry would continue to employ lobbyists and continue to spend money on lobbying in Mississippi?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You may answer.
A Because -- well, for a variety of reasons. I don't accept -- I'm not saying -- I have not said that lobbying is not effective.
It depends on how you define effective. I think that the tobacco lobbyists have communicated a message that they have -- as
lobbyists they have been effective, as lobbyists. But I think that what we have seen, and particularly in the last 15 to 20 years
among lobbyists is as issues become more complex and as more people feel the necessity, more lobbyists feel or interest groups
feel the necessity of representing themselves, everybody has a sense of being left out. I've got to get into the picture myself, or
the allocation of funds and so forth is going to my rival or competitor rather than to me.
So I think it's not a single answer. I think it's a combination of reasons why.
Q Well, the reason that the tobacco industry employs lobbyists and has them engage in lobbying in Mississippi for the industry
is in order to fight use restrictions and taxes. Correct?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A Well, I would say it's a much more -- much wider focus.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Beyond those two areas, what else are they attempting to accomplish?
A Well, I think they are involved in some PR. Here's what the tobacco industry is involved in. Here are the interests of R.J.
Reynolds, for example. It's not tobacco alone. It's much wider. But basically what they trying to do, I think a principal reason
for their presence is to represent their interest and protect their interests as they see them imperiled by any piece of legislation
or whatever.
Q What is that interest?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A The interest is to sell a product. That is what they are in the business for and to --
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q To make money from selling the product?
A Right. And to guard against any restrictions or taxes or legislation that would seriously curtail or impinge on that purpose.
Q So in fighting use restrictions --
A Yes.
Q I'm assuming you know what I'm talking about -
A Right.
Q -- when I use the term “use restrictions.”
A Laws and regulations that restrict smoking
A Yes.
Q -- in the state such as in public places.
A Yes.
Q That would be an interest. Another interest would be that the industry would oppose any increase in cigarette taxes. Correct?
A I wouldn't say any increase, but by and large as they are opposed to tax increases.
Q And if taxes were increased on cigarettes, the fear is that sales would go down and they would make less profit. Correct?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A Presumably. That's a logical assumption to me.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q That is their interest, to make money in Mississippi.
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A Sure. They are a corporation, and they have stockholders to report to.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q And Mississippi has very few restrictions on smoking. Correct?
A That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q And it has --
A Legally, that is, statutory.
Q By statute. Right?
A Right.
Q And relatively low cigarette tax, cents.
A I think that's -- I wouldn't characterize it as low. I would say it's sort of the middle of the states. It's not as high as some of
the higher states like Wisconsin or Minnesota with 36, 38, Florida.
Q Thirty-three?
A Right.
Q All right.
A But it's not -- it's kind of the middle range.
Q Are you prepared to testify whether or not in the area of use restriction legislation and regulation on cigarette taxes, are you
prepared to testify whether or not tobacco lobbying in Mississippi has been effective or ineffective?
A Yes.
Q And what -- has it been effective or has it been ineffective?
A Well, I would say that the state of Mississippi has passed few regulatory bills where tobacco is concerned, that is, use
restriction has been very limited. I would say that the reason is far more complex than just that the tobacco lobby has been
effective in representing an interest. I think the tobacco lobby has been effective in representing its point of view and protecting
its interest, but I would not say that the reason Mississippi does not have a Clean Indoor Air Act, for example, is because the
tobacco lobbyist did their job, that they were effective. That's not what I would --
Q So there won't be any misunderstanding, Dr. Lowery, I'm not suggesting that tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi is the
sole reason why the state of affairs is as it is in Mississippi; but you are testifying, are you not, and are going to testify that in
part it is due to tobacco industry lobbying effectiveness. Correct?
A I would say -- I would characterize the tobacco lobbyist as an effective lobby.
Q In Mississippi?
A In Mississippi.
Q Are you prepared to testify that that's the reason they will continue to spend money and lobby in Mississippi is to maintain
the status quo and fight off use restrictions and cigarette tax?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form of that question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q That's fine. You may answer.
A It's hard for me to judge what they will do or why they will do it; but, you know, if I had to make an educated guess, I would
say, yes, they will continue to spend that and they will continue to spend it because they think that it is necessary in order for
them to protect their interest to do so.
Q Okay. Dr. Lowery, you made reference in your disclosure statement and I think just briefly made reference in your testimony
about the antiregulation mood. And I may not be quoting just right so forgive me, Joe, something about the antiregulation mood
in the legislature in Mississippi. Did I hear you correctly?
A I don't remember saying that.
Q I don't think you used the word “mood.”
A It is an opinion that I hold.
Q It's in your disclosure statement.
A Yeah.
Q Do you credit that antiregulation mood in the Mississippi legislature of which you speak to the reason or as an important
reason why the state of affairs is as it is as to use restrictions and cigarette taxes?
A Yes, I mean --
Q It's a reason?
A I consider it a major reason.
Q A major reason.
A Right.
Q Are you going to testify that it is a more important reason or a more major reason than tobacco lobbying?
A Yes.
Q How do you explain, then, the fact that there is regulation in Mississippi of many other products such as pesticides, various
foods, additives and contents of medicines and foods and that sort of thing with the antiregulation climate -- it's tobacco that
stands out as not being regulated, isn't it?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question and the improper assumption that you're asking him to make.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me break that question into two and make it easier.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q There is regulation in Mississippi despite this antiregulation stance or state of affairs that you refer to of other products other
than tobacco. True?
A Yes.
Q And does that not suggest that the antiregulation movement or antiregulation stand has not prevented the regulation of other
products other than tobacco?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A No, not in my view because as I -- as I see much of the regulation on railroads or transportation or pesticides, for example,
those are not so much freedom of choice, personal decisions that one makes as with smoking or as with seat belts, use of seat
belts, for example, or whether one attends school or not. For a long time the state of Mississippi did not even have a mandatory
school attendance law, not until William Winter set education reform did we finally get a mandatory school.
I think the mind set of most Mississippians and probably the majority of the legislature is we don't want to be told what to do.
We don't want to be regulated. Smoking is a -- use of tobacco is a freedom-of-choice question, just like use of seat belts is a
personal freedom-of-choice issue.
Q That's a distinction that you make between that and regulation of other products?
A Yeah. That's -- that is an obvious distinction. There may be others, if I were to think about it; but that is the one that comes
regularly to mind.
Q Would you credit the tobacco industry lobbying for couching or presenting the issue as an issue of choice?
A Would I credit them with having --
Q In their lobbying activities.
A I'm not sure I understand the question. Is it -- would I credit to the tobacco industry in their lobbying activities the fact that
freedom of choice --
Q Debate. That's part of the debate.
A No, I think it preceded that. I think the tobacco industry picked up on something that was already there. It was an attitude
that typical Mississippians had.
Q Is it your opinion that they perpetuate and build on whatever existed in that attitude of choice --
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q -- in their lobbying?
A I think they have simply taken a preexistent attitude and built on it. They see it as an appropriate thing to focus on.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Are you familiar with speeches and reports of the Tobacco Institute in which they expressed hope in the 1970s, within this
30-year period that you're talking about, expressed hope for the future as far as their success of their lobbying activity because
they have been able to transform or convert the debate from the issue of the effect of smoke or the debate from the issue of
the effect of smoke or smoking on health to the issue of choice, the issue of human rights, civil rights, the issue of lifestyle,
the issue of antitaxes? Are you familiar with those sorts --
MR. BURROW: Objection.
MR. COLINGO: Object.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me finish the question.
MR. COLINGO: I mean the question --
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, you can object, but I have to finish the question.
MR. COLINGO: Finish it and we can start over and you can go one piece at a time.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'll make them ten questions, if you'd like.
MR. COLINGO: Okay.
MR. MIKHAIL: We'll be here longer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you -- are you familiar with Tobacco Institute's speeches and reports that express hope for the future beginning in the
1970s as to the effectiveness and the success of future lobbying activities due to the fact that they have been successful in
transforming or converting the debate from the effect of smoking on health to civil rights?
A No.
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q On human rights?
A No.
Q On antitax debates?
MR. COLINGO: Continuing objection to all of this.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Let me finish -- you may explain your answer. I just want to go through the list so we won't have to ask the same question
ten times. To lifestyle choices?
A No.
Q To an argument against big brother?
A No.
Q You're not familiar with those -- those sorts of --
A I have not seen any literature or internal documents or anything from the Tobacco Institute.
Q You can go ahead and explain.
A I may have picked up in just the print media some advertisement or something like that, but I was -- to all of those questions,
I would say no because I have not seen any of the reports or documents from TI.
Q Okay. Do you believe that in arriving at the opinions that you've arrived in and expressing the opinions you're going to express
that that type of evidence would be an important piece of evidence for you to consider?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A Let me respond or answer the question by saying that, you know, the opinions that I have formed, based on the evidence
that I have used, the documents et cetera, I think are solid. I have a colleague who has been working on a book. As chairman
of the department, I'm responsible for giving guidance and performance reviews, this sort of thing. I've said to my colleague,
“You've been working on this book for many years now. It is time for you to go ahead and finish it and get it out.” He's got
a contract with a very reputable press.
He said, “Well, I still want to look at such and such, and I want to look at such and such.” I said, “Yes, the historian is never
satisfied that he has seen every bit of evidence, every bit of every source that's possible. But it comes to a point where you
have to say, Look, this is enough. You can make an informed judgment opinion or you can conclude the work without seeing
every possible source.”
I've stated this same kind of thing applies here. There is much that, you know, could be looked at that might inform my opinion.
I'm convinced that I have looked at enough substantive material to say, “This is my opinion based on good, reliable, credible
and fairly complete evidence,” and I'm comfortable with the opinion that I have.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you smoke, Dr. Lowery?
A No.
Q Have you ever smoked?
A Yes.
Q When did you start smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A 1961.
Q How old were you?
A I was college graduate.
Q College graduate?
A Yes. I was -- I must have been 22.
Q Do you have any children?
A Three.
Q What are their ages?
A You're asking a historian.
Q We're going to embarrass him on the record.
MR. BURROW: I want to have a standing objection here. I don't know what this man's personal life has to do with anything in
this case. Are you going to ask him when the last fight he had with his life was, how many women he's kissed in his lifetime?
I don't understand what these personal questions have to do with his testimony. I think you're way outside --
MR. MIKHAIL: Go read the 30 expert depositions of the plaintiffs.
MR. BURROW: I don't care what anybody else says. I care what I'm saying. I don't think this guy has any reason to be talking
how many kids he's got, what he's telling the kids. I know where you're going. I think it's totally irrelevant. Now, if Joe wants
to instruct him not to answer the question, that's fine. I just think this is totally irrelevant to any issue in this case what this
man's personal life is.
MR. MIKHAIL: Your objection is noted. Go read other depositions and see what you've insisted on.
MR. BURROW: I don't care what any other depositions say. I care about what this .deposition says.
MR. MIKHAIL: That sounds real good, Stephen.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you have any children?
A Three.
Q What are their ages?
A Thirty-five, 33 and 23.
Q Did any of them smoke?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q Did any of them ever smoke, to your knowledge?
A Not to my knowledge. One chewed tobacco when he was playing baseball.
Q Is he still doing that?
A No.
Q Not baseball, chewing tobacco.
A No.
Q Are you prepared or are you going to testify, Dr. Lowery, about whether or not tobacco industry lobbying activities in
Mississippi were proper or improper? Is that an area you're going to testify about?
A Yes, I feel competent to do so. I don't know if I'll be called upon to provide that, but --
Q Do you feel you can do that without primary sources such as internal company documents and memorandums and
correspondence about their motives and their intentions and how they plan to go about their lobbying activities?
MR. COLINGO: We object to form. Let me ask this question so I can understand what you're asking him. Is your question to
Dr. Lowery does he intend to testify per se as to whether or not lobbying is proper or improper -- lobbying is a proper function --
MR. MIKHAIL: No.
MR. COLINGO: -- versus an improper function?
MR. MIKHAIL: No. I'm asking whether or not he's going to testify or is he prepared to testify as to whether or not tobacco
industry lobbying in Mississippi has been improper or proper, that the methods of lobbying that they have implemented are
proper or improper?
MR. BURROW: I object to the form of the question. What is improper lobbying?
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm asking Dr. Lowery.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You're the expert on tobacco industry lobbying in Mississippi. I'm asking: Are you going to testify or are you prepared to
testify about the propriety of their activities?
MR. BURROW: Same objection.
MR. MIKHAIL: That's fine. It's noted.
A I am prepared to testify to that question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q And are you prepared to testify about the propriety of tobacco industry lobbying activities without the benefit of primary
sources, that being internal company documents?
A Yes.
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form.
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you feel you can reach valid conclusions without such primary sources?
A Yes.
Q Why do you feel that way?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question. You're asking him why he feels a certain way about a piece of information
that he hasn't been exposed to.
MR. MIKHAIL: Your objection is noted.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Why do you feel that way?
MR. COLINGO: Wait just a second, though, Charles. Realistically there's no way he can answer that unless you show him some
document that you consider to be an improper document and ask him whether or not he in his mind considers that document to
be improper and then let him formulate an opinion because what you consider to be improper may not be considered improper
to him. You follow what I'm --
MR. MIKHAIL: I follow what I'm saying. Are you instructing him not to answer the question?
MR. COLINGO: Yeah, I will and so we'll go on.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery --
MR. MIKHAIL: Could you mark this as an exhibit.
(Exhibit 8 marked)
MR. COLINGO: What is this document, please, Charles?
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me find my copy, Joe, if you don't mind.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: Is this an internal privileged document?
MR. MIKHAIL: It is not.
MR. COLINGO: What is it?
MR. MIKHAIL: I will tell you in a minute. I really would like to find it first, if you don't mind. Bear with me.
(Short Pause)
MR. MIKHAIL: For the record, Joe, to answer your question, this is a document that was part of the public record in the
congressional hearings in 1994 before Congress and published in the reports, the transcripts of the hearings that are in the
libraries all over the country known as the Panzer memo. It is a document from the vice-president of the Tobacco Institute, Fred
Panzer, to the president of the Tobacco Institute, Horace Kornegay.
MR. COLINGO: Is this a document that was part of the documents dealing with Merrill Williams?
MR. MIKHAIL: No, it has not been produced by the defendants. It is something that is outside the protective order in our case
because the protective order covers all documents obtained through discovery.
MR. COLINGO: It has not been produced by the defendants. Has it been produced to the defendants?
MR. MIKHAIL: It's a matter of public record. It's in the congressional transcript.
MR. COLINGO: Has it been produced by y'all in response to any interrogatory requests for production?
MR. MIKHAIL: We have given you copies multiple times.
MR. COLINGO: Of this document?
MR. MIKHAIL: Of this document.
MR. COLINGO: I've never seen it, never heard of it, never heard of the writer, none of us have.
MR. MIKHAIL: It's been provided and it's on the public record of the chancery clerk's office in Pascagoula as an exhibit for
umpteen pleadings.
MR. COLINGO: All right. Well --
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm going to ask him some questions about it.
MR. COLINGO: If you want to ask him some questions about it, I want to first take an opportunity to stop this a second, let
him have an opportunity to read it, let us have an opportunity to read it. I've never seen it before.
MR. MIKHAIL: You're welcome to look at it.
MR. COLINGO: Let's take a five-minute recess or whatever and read it.
(Off Record)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: Charles, before you start asking questions, I want to say that the document that you've handed me dated May
1, 1972, from Horace Kornegay to Fred Panzer is a document that I've never seen, never been privy to, had no knowledge of,
don't see any relevance to the questions that are being asked of this particular witness. Obviously he's never seen it if we've
never seen it. My biggest concern about this is I see it stamped partially “confidential.” I don't know whether any privilege has
been claimed to this document by any of the defendants, whether this document has been objected to. And as such, I'm going
to have to take a position now that I'm not going to allow this witness to give any opinions regarding this particular document.
MR. MIKHAIL: Are you instructing him not to answer any question --
MR. COLINGO: That's correct. If I'm incorrect -- and if I'm incorrect, of course, I won't have any problem with you asking
written questions later of this witness to get him to answer them if the court has determined that this document is not a privileged
document or if -- that's one thing. But I'm not aware of that. We have got a lot of defendants in here, and this is the reason
why I'm concerned. There's a lot of claims that there's documents in the public domain that were illegally obtained. I think you
know what I'm making reference to.
MR. MIKHAIL: These were not illegally obtained. They were turned over to Congress.
MR. COLINGO: Wait a minute. One at a time. As to whether or not they were illegally obtained, that's certainly -- I don't
represent Brown & Williamson, but Brown & Williamson is certainly claiming they were illegally obtained.
MR. MIKHAIL: This is a Tobacco Institute document.
MR. COLINGO: I understand that, but -- I understand what you're saying; but, again, I'm going to object to any response to
any of these documents at this particular point --
MR. MIKHAIL: All right. Let me understand --
MR. COLINGO: -- based on privilege.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand that. Let me understand. I want to resolve this amicably if we can. I can't put a gun to either of
yours head and make him answer the question.
MR. COLINGO: I understand.
MR. MIKHAIL: This document was not obtained from the defendants in discovery. The protective order specifically says that
it governs only documents that are disclosed in discovery and not documents that were obtained by either party from other
sources or available to the parties from other sources, first of all; therefore, this document doesn't fall into any category of
claims of confidentiality from that aspect.
Secondly, it is the public record. Dr. Lowrey's entire testimony is being based on what's available in the public record. For one
reason or another -- and I don't fault him for it, don't fault you for it or the other lawyers who work for him -- he was not privy
to this particular document that's of public record.
Second of all, it's a Tobacco Institute document. It was appended as an exhibit to the vice-president of the Tobacco Institute's
deposition, Ron Morris. The 14 days under the protective order passed, and the Tobacco Institute had under the protective
order that any documents used at a deposition, they have a right within 14 days to come in and designate it as confidential
material. They did not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
I fail to see any basis for your objection; but even further, I think it borders on bath faith for you to instruct the witness not to
answer, especially in light of the fact that I attempted to ask him questions about the propriety of lobbying activities and you
demanded that he not answer questions without being shown a document about such activities, and I am attempting to do that,
and you are blocking me in that regard.
I can't do anything about what you're doing, Joe, but I will have to say I strenuously object, that I think this entire line of
objection on both grounds is entirely improper. And if you're going to maintain that position, that's fine. We'll move on, but
I object. And if that's the case, I'm alerting on the record now that plaintiff will move at the trial to exclude any testimony
whatsoever by Dr. Lowery about the propriety or impropriety of tobacco industry activities in Mississippi.
MR. COLINGO: You can do whatever you want to do. Let me respond by saying I think that Dr. Lowery testified previously
here today that during the early 1970 there was virtually no tobacco lobbying going on here, unless I misread it. In fact, he said
from the late '50s through the '60s into the '70s there were no registered lobbyists in Mississippi. So I fail to see, I fail to see
how a document dated May 1, 1972, can have any bearing whatsoever on lobbyists activities as it regards registered lobbyists
in the state of Mississippi. I certainly don't want --
MR. MIKHAIL: I don't want to argue with that. It describes strategy of lobbying nationwide.
MR. COLINGO: It describes one individual's thought process directed to another. There's no proof that this was ever adopted
by anybody, no proof that this document was ever used by anybody, no proof or establishment that I know of that this document
was ever any guideline to any lobbying done by any person.
MR. MIKHAIL: Under the case management order, is that grounds for prohibiting answering questions about it?
MR. COLINGO: It's grounds that --
MR. MIKHAIL: I just want to understand, Joe --
MR. COLINGO: I will sit here until hell freezes over; but what I'm trying to say to you there is so much speculation as any
question that you ask Dr. Lowery about this document, and it had no bearing on what he did for this particular testimony that
he's going to come forward with at the trial. It has nothing to do with it.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I was not planning to ask him questions about it until you invited it. I am trying to be fair and trying
to give him a piece of paper to work with that deals with lobbying by the Tobacco Institute, the lobbying arm of the tobacco
industry. Now, I just want to understand are you still instructing the witness not to answer questions?
MR. COLINGO: Yes, about this document, yes.
MR. MIKHAIL: And I want the record to reflect that I object strenuously to that, and the plaintiff will move to strike any
testimony and exclude any testimony by Dr. Lowery about the propriety or impropriety of tobacco lobbying activity in this case.
MR. COLINGO: You have to do what you have to do, and we have to do what we have to do. We're not going to have him
testify or speculate because any testimony that he might give would be sheer speculation and conjecture on his part. You know
that and I know that, and there's no way he can -- I don't even have any idea what kind of questions you had asked.
MR. MIKHAIL: Precisely why you shouldn't object --
MR. COLINGO: That's why I'm objecting.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. MIKHAIL: -- before the question is asked.
MR. COLINGO: Ask the question, and I'll object each time you ask, whichever way you want.
MR. MIKHAIL: Standing objection?
MR. COLINGO: No. I'll interpose my objection at the completion of each question.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'll be more than happy to do it that way.
MR. COLINGO: Go ahead.
MR. MIKHAIL: I do want to clarify one thing before I do that for the record. Are you still maintaining or claiming privilege
to this document?
MR. COLINGO: Yes. See, Charles, what I'm trying to tell you -- and it may be ignorance on my part. I don't know whether
or not any of the other defendants are claiming that this document may or may not be privileged. The Tobacco Institute is a
defendant in this case. The Tobacco Institute, as I understand it, has questioned jurisdiction, everything else regarding this.
MR. MIKHAIL: Not anymore.
MR. COLINGO: They did.
MR. MIKHAIL: No. They dropped their challenge.
MR. COLINGO: Let me get through. I don't know whether the Tobacco Institute contends that this is a privileged document.
I haven't talked to anybody from the Tobacco Institute about this document. I've never seen it. My two cohorts that are in here
with me right now have never seen it. We don't know what this document is. We know that it's not relevant at all to the issues
that this man is going to testify to, though, because this document precedes any registered lobbyist in the state of Mississippi.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I recognize that there's some information that you don't have available to you; however, under the order
that you signed, you have 14 days after the transcript is available to you with exhibits to claim privilege. I don't think you have
any basis for it. The Tobacco Institute hasn't claimed privilege to this document. You don't have to accept my representation for
it. But to block use of that document on the grounds it may be privileged, you have the opportunity 14 days after the transcript
and exhibits are received to make that claim, and
I'm not prevented and prohibited under the order that you signed on to ask him questions with it included as a part of the
deposition. I'm frankly finding it very very difficult to understand the positions you all are talking considering the positions you
have taken in the other way around when you deposed our plaintiff's expert. I would say it has not been a situation of what's
good with the goose is good for the gander. It has been totally opposite, and I don't think that that is equitable.
MR. COLINGO: I can't testify about any other depositions.
MR. MIKHAIL: I've been at these depositions.
MR. COLINGO: Because I have not. This is the first one that I've been involved in.
MR. MIKHAIL: I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. COLINGO: Second one. But I have not taken anybody's deposition. Of course, if I would, I would be just as horsy as I
could be, but I haven't taken one. So I can --
MR. MIKHAIL: And we love you for it, Joe.
MR. COLINGO: I can appreciate your aggressiveness. I will -- I was just trying to say in advance what my problem with this
document is. If you want to ask questions, I'm going to instruct him probably at the conclusion of every question not to answer
and so we can go on and do it any way you want to.
MR. MIKHAIL: I don't want to waste Dr. Lowrey's time or your time or mine with a series of questions for you to instruct
him not to answer. Is that how you want to do it?
MR. COLINGO: I don't care how.
MR. MIKHAIL: I want to know --
MR. COLINGO: You're taking the deposition.
MR. MIKHAIL: I wish you would remember that.
MR. COLINGO: You're taking it. I'm just going --
MR. MIKHAIL: I would like to. ask the questions and if you find them objectionable to object and that will be dealt with later.
If you're going to instruct the witness not to answer after every question, we're wasting our time.
MR. COLINGO: I think with regard to this document we have to take that position. Do we agree?
MR. MIKHAIL: Notwithstanding that the Tobacco Institute has not claimed a privilege?
MR. BURROW: I don't know that. That's your representation.
MR. COLINGO: I really don't know.
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, you are liaison counsel.
MR. COLINGO: Unfortunately --
MR. MIKHAIL: You are a recipient of information whether they claim privilege or not.
MR. COLINGO: Unfortunately as liaison counsel I have to confess and concede that there are reams and reams of documents
that come through on a daily basis. I see a bunch of -- this stack of documents in this room right here would not be unusual to
what comes into my office every day. So I can't tell you every little bitty thing -- and your mind is a lot better than mine if you
can tell me every little thing y'all have objected to. I just can't keep up with all that stuff.
MR. MIKHAIL: I can't believe you haven't read every piece of paper in this case.
MR. COLINGO: I have read the majority of it two or three times, but I just don't remember a lot of it. My mind is getting old.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me go ahead and ask some and see how you're going to answer them.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, I asked you -- and I'll repeat the question so we'll know where we were after this entire discourse between the
lawyers -- do you plan to testify or are you prepared to testify about the propriety of tobacco industry lobbying activities in
Mississippi?
A Yes, I am prepared. Now, if I understand your definition of “propriety,” propriety is proper. Is that correct? Is that the way
you're using this?
Q All right. I'll ask a series of questions and ask you to answer them as to whether or not what I'm talking about propriety or
impropriety. I'm talking about the propriety or impropriety of giving a legislator false information, for instance, whether that
would be, in your opinion, proper or improper -- I'm not asking you a question. I'm giving you the information you need --
whether or not withholding certain information from a legislator that would allow the legislator to make an informed decision
on legislation would be proper or improper; whether lying to a legislative body misstating facts to a legislative body; misstating
affiliation of experts testifying before a legislative body would be proper or improper activities. Do you understand what I
mean by proper or improper?
A In that context. But when you say you are prepared to address the propriety of lobbying, that's a very different question. That
goes to lobbying as a whole. Is lobbying an appropriate technique, proper technique versus --
Q I'm talking specifically about do you have plans to get up on the stand and testify that A, B, C, D activities of the Tobacco
Institute, however it went about lobbying Mississippi, was proper or improper?
A No, I'm not prepared to testify to that.
MR. MIKHAIL: That took care of it, Joe.
A I didn't mean to --
MR. COLINGO: That's enough.
MR. MIKHAIL: I will now agree with him that he's instructing you not to answer.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, do you know if there is a code of ethics for lobbyists?
MR. COLINGO: Talking about a written code, Charles?
MR. MIKHAIL: Yes, a written code of ethics.
A I can't answer with fullness. I think there is, but I have not seen the code. Seems that I have had -- have read about there being
such, but I've never seen any correspondence from lobbyists in Mississippi referencing the code.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You don't recall seeing a document that is called a code of ethics?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A I have not seen such a document. I think I've seen a reference to it.
Q I'm talking about not just as to Mississippi but also nationwide. Do you know of anything such as a code of ethics for lobbyist?
A No.
Q Do you know of any associations which lobbyists can become members of?
A No. I think there is such an organization or national organization.
Q But you don't know?
A I don't know what its name is, and I don't know for a certain fact what it does. I think I saw in one of the depositions Buddy
Medlin saying he was at a national lobbying convention. That's the nature of my --
Q Do you know who in the United States would be considered as an expert on lobbying activities similar in the nature of what
you're testifying about in Mississippi?
MR. COLINGO: Other than Dr. Lowery, you mean?
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm sure there's none better.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Can you name me some prominent --
A Jeffrey Bernbalm who did a book on the Washington lobbyists.
Q He's listed in your documents that you've reviewed. Correct?
A I think that he is. And there's a book by Allen Rosenthal, The Third House. He would -- he is considered an expert. Another
by Jeffrey Berry, The Interest Group Society, which was published originally in '84 and has been revised and updated. Those
are three of the foremost authorities on lobbying in the country at present in my estimate.
Q In your estimation. Dr. Lowery, did you know that these individuals were experts in this field and did you -- were you familiar
with their work on your own prior to being approached by the tobacco industry?
A I think I had seen their names and references, but I had not -- no, I was not really familiar with their work.
Q You were not familiar with their work?
A Not specifically, just generally.
Q You --
A I had not read their books.
Q You had not read the works of these what you call the most prominent lobbying experts in the country. Correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Right.
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Have you done any study in connection with your work in this case on the effectiveness or lack of effectiveness of self-
regulation by the tobacco industry?
A Self-regulation?
Q Yes.
MR. COLINGO: Define that please, Charles.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Where they voluntarily, for instance, comply with various advertising restrictions like their voluntary advertising code and
other voluntary restrictions as opposed to having laws and regulations by agencies government agencies.
A No.
Q Have you done any study of the history of self-regulation --
A No.
Q Let me finish the question. I don't want you to answer in the middle of it. It's not fair to you and it's not fair to us. Have you
done any study of the effectiveness or lack of effectiveness of self-regulation by the tobacco industry?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with the history of any efforts on self-regulation by the tobacco industry?
A No.
Q Have you ever served as a lobbyist?
A Not as a paid lobbyist. I have lobbied some, not in the legislature but locally, and perhaps with some executive offices.
Q Was that in connection with dealing with the Department of History and Mississippi State?
A Yeah, that kind of thing or getting funding for some program I was working on.
Q But have you ever served as a lobbyist in the context that we're talking about here --
A No.
Q -- like the tobacco lobbyist would serve?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q Have you ever been a legislator?
A No.
Q Have you ever been in public office where you were the object or subject -- object, I guess, of lobbying by lobbyists?
A Not elected office.
Q But as chairman of the department I am sure you get --
A As chairman of the department I get a lot.
Q -- a lot of pleas of I need a bigger classroom. I need a projector.
A Or more likely a book salesmen.
Q But --
A You hear about this book for our classes.
Q You've never served in a public office where you have been the object of lobbying by lobbyists?
A No.
Q Do you subscribe to any journals or publications dealing with lobbying?
A No.
Q Do you subscribe to any journals or publications or newsletters or reports of any kind of material dealing with tobacco
industry lobbying?
A No.
Q Have you ever subscribed to either of those two categories of documents?
A No.
Q How would you define a primary source -- as a historian trained in the discipline of history as an expert in history, how
would you define a primary source -- and let me clarify that, and I know you know what I'm asking -- as opposed to a secondary
source, for instance?
A A primary source would be, one, a document or data information generated by the subject that is contemporary to the time
whereas a secondary source is something written after the fact about it so that a primary source would be letters or documents
generated by the governor or the legislature. What I might come along later, write about that would be secondary.
Q Diaries would be --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Primary.
Q -- a primary source, would it not?
A Right.
Q Personal notes would be primary sources?
A Right.
Q Correct?
A Correct.
Q Memoirs would be primary sources --
A Yes.
Q Let me finish the question. I'm sorry. It's hard. Autobiographies?
A Yes.
Q Eyewitness accounts --
A Yes.
Q -- would be primary sources
A Yes.
Q Is it fair to say as a historian that in layman's terms we're talking about first-hand sources, first-hand information? Is that
a correct characterization of it?
A Uh-huh.
Q That's what my history professor used to always say.
A Yes.
Q First hand as opposed to second hand. Correct?
A Right.
Q Your conclusions in this case and your study in this case has been based on secondary sources. Correct?
A No.
Q What primary sources have you --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Primary sources have been the reports generated by the lobbyists and the clients, which are Department of Archives and
History and Secretary of State's office. It's on those that I have relied most heavily. The secondary sources that I have employed
have been for context to give me a better context of what's going on in Mississippi.
Q Did you testify this morning that the reports of which you speak don't tell you anything about the effectiveness of tobacco
industry lobbying in Mississippi or am I mistaken?
A I may have said that, but the question of effectiveness is not something that is spoken to in the documents. It is what you
extrapolate from it, the inference that you draw from that.
Q From the documents?
A From that. It is not contained in the documents themselves.
Q But the reports on file that you're talking about don't give you that information?
A They are sterile. They don't give you anything more than a factual account. And what the historian does, as you know, is
takes the data, analyzes it and says, Okay, this in a vacuum doesn't mean anything. But if you put it into some context and
interpret it -- analyze and then interpret --
Q That's what's called historical method, isn't it?
A Right.
Q Why would you want to reach conclusions about lobbying activity without primary sources such as private letters, memoirs,
notes, diaries, internal company documents?
MR. BURROW: Objection to the form of the question. Assumes that they are primary sources for the purposes of his testimony.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Would documents that I just described from the industry be what you would consider as primary sources, Dr. Lowery?
A Yes.
Q Why would you want to reach conclusions without those primary sources?
A Well, it would go back to the question I answered earlier. It's a matter of on the volume of data being almost infinite. At
which point would one stop looking? Every -- I mean, every lobbyist, every person who had been involved in the industry,
every official -- it's an endless variety of sources that one might look at. It's a matter of time and money expense. I was given
when I started out a very limited time frame. I was told that -- I was employed, I think, in August, really was September before
-- and it looked like we were going to trial in November or something like that. No, maybe it was -- I think the time frame I
had was that I needed to have completed my work by the first of December.
So it was a matter of feasibility, how much can one look at. I looked at what was the most important available material to me,
material that far exceeded what I thought might be available when I began because I had initially thought that that would be
a very limited public record.. As it turned out, there was a great deal more, and it was, in my opinion, sufficient to draw a
conclusion from that I'm prepared to defend.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q But notwithstanding the volume, isn't it somewhat unusual not to want to look at any -- not to look -- not to want to, but not
to look at any internal company documents rather than, you know, hundreds of thousands of boxes but any at all?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Isn't that rather unusual from a historian's perspective?
A No, not given the parameters that I just spelled out. You're talking about years of research, years of research. Going to a
corporate office and looking at boxes and boxes and boxes of material is simply not something that occurred to me as even a
possibility in the time frame that we were looking at.
Q But were you saying you wouldn't even look at any, even a small portion of those primary sources? In other words, if you
can't look at all of them, you won't look at any? Is that what you're saying?
A I didn't say that.
Q What exactly are you saying?
A I said that I look at what seemed to me the most important data given the parameters of time.
Q Do you discount the value of this other data, these primary sources?
A Absolutely not. I don't discount it. And if I were doing a scholarly work, which might be a or 15-year project, I would certainly
look at that. But the point is: What I did look at was good solid information, good data that provided me with a foundation for
making an opinion. Now, it may be that if I had another year or two to work on it that some of this other information might
modify some measure and the way I view what was going on in Mississippi. But I don't think at this point that it would have
a significant alteration.
Q Is it fair, Dr. Lowery, to say that you are prepared to modify your opinion if you have the opportunity to see such primary
sources?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A I don't know.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Are you not prepared to modify your opinion?
A I am prepared -- yes, I am prepared to modify my assessment.
Q If you had the benefit of those sources?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A I don't know. You're asking me a hypothetical question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q I understand.
A If it altered the facts that I found to this point. But if I had to answer the question as a theoretical one, I don't think that
there is information out there that would significantly alter what I have already found based on the data that's compiled in those
charts and graphs.
Q I asked you earlier if you knew Professor Paul Dommel.
A Yeah.
Q You said you didn't.
A I do not.
Q Joe will correct me if I'm mistaken unless it's one of the things you are not aware of. He is designated as the industry's national
lobbying expert. He is the expert that the industry has designated on tobacco industry lobbying on the national level, Congress
and federal regulatory agencies.
One of the other plaintiff's counsel, Ron Motley and I asked him last Friday in Washington, D.C., these same questions I just
asked you; and Dr. Dommel testified that in reaching his conclusions that the primary sources which I described would be the
preferable sources. Do you agree with him?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question.
A If the question related to Mississippi?
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q No, it's related to reaching conclusions about lobbying activities.
A In general but not Mississippi specifically.
Q His area was in general.
A Well, I haven't looked at the national thing except in a contextual way so it's difficult for me to answer that.
Q All right.
A But, you know --
MR. COLINGO: If it's difficult -- if you can't answer it, don't answer it.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you think for purposes of your conclusions for Mississippi that the primary sources of which I described would be the
preferable sources?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q And why is that?
A Because I think the sources I have used disclose more than I would find them being in these other records that I don't know
about. I don't think that -- I simply don't think that Mississippi was a major focus of the national industry's activities. It was
sort of a side street. It was backwater almost.
Q What is historical detachment?
A Historical detachment?
Q Detachment. Do you know what that is?
A Yes, of course.
Q What is that?
A That's --
Q For the record, I want you to tell me. I know what it is.
A Historical detachment is one looks at a topic or subject without vested interest, without any preconceived notions or without
any -- not preconceived notions because a historian comes to a problem with a hypothesis, makes an assumption about it and
then looks for data or information that will validate that assumption or modify it in some way or simply refute it. But it goes
to objectivity when one approaches a problem.
Q Notwithstanding the use of historical method and historical detachment, do you believe that any good historian, any competent
historian could make conclusions after study and after research in an area of history that is outside his field, his or her field
of specialization?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form.
A Yes.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I'm sorry. What was the answer?
A Yes.
Q Now, you understand that graduate students in history and history professors who do research and writing in many instances,
if not most instances, are encouraged to, for instance, study the language of the area of history that they are studying, for
instance, if they are experts or are to be experts on Russian history, they would learn the Russian language. Correct?
A Correct.
Q Chinese history, they would learn Chinese?
A Correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q They would want to know and be well versed in the traditions, the history, the culture of the geographic area of which they
are going to be expert. Correct?
A That's correct.
Q Then without that intimate familiarity with the culture and the history and the language and traditions of a particular field
of history, let's say Russian history, how could a historian, even a good historian, a competent historian, in let's say, Medieval
Chinese history be able to make conclusions about some historical event in Russian history?
MR. COLINGO: I object to the form of the question.
MR. MIKHAIL: He's a historian, Joe.
MR. BURROW: I understand. I understand. But we're so far afield.
MR. MIKHAIL: You have no right to object on relevance and on that type of thing --
MR. COLINGO: I do.
MR. MIKHAIL: Your objection is noted.
You have been trying to block me all afternoon.
MR. COLINGO: I haven't.
MR. MIKHAIL: You just don't like the questions. The record will be clear on that.
MR. COLINGO: The questions are so crazy I don't like them. They don't have anything to do with this lawsuit. That's why
I don't like them.
MR. MIKHAIL: They are crazy to you because you don't know anything about this area. That's all.
MR. COLINGO: I'm not a historian, and I grant that. I am a lawyer, and I know that what you're asking doesn't have anything
to do with this lawsuit.
MR. MIKHAIL: I'm not going to argue with you.
MR. COLINGO: Then don't.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, do you feel -- can you answer the question?
A Yes.
Q Could you answer it, please?
A A historian is trained as an historian. There are certain areas of history that are so esoteric. For example, in Chinese history,
you simply have to have the grounding in the language in order to be a scholar there. There are other areas of history that are
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
general. I am a specialist in an area of Southern history. I am also a generalist. I have published in the age of Jefferson, which
is my basic specialty; but I have published in the area of civil rights. I have published in the area of Mississippi history and so
forth. Daniel Borsten, one of the leading historians, who many are undoubtedly are familiar, with, has published on Medieval
history. He has published in science and history, U.S. history and published on a lot of different things.
The historian brings a set of skills to a historical problem. I brought a set of skills of analysis. I'm bringing historical method of
gathering the data, interpreting the data, communicating the data to this particular problem. I think I've done it competently.
Q I don't take anything away from your credentials and your ability, Dr. Lowery. I hope you certainly don't infer that from my
questions. What I really am trying to ask you and I would like for you to answer is do you feel qualified, do you believe you are
qualified to make the conclusions in the area of lobbying history activity despite the fact of what we have talked about today,
your lack of either an academic background in it or a publishing background in it, writing background in it, extensive study in
it prior to being assigned this task from the industry? Do you feel qualified to do that?
A The last -- prior to? Would you repeat that last part?
Q The lack of your work in this area of history of tobacco lobbying before you started doing the study for the industry.
A Yes, I feel competent. If I had not felt competent, I wouldn't have taken on the job.
Q You don't feel it's outside your area of expertise?
A No.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let's take a break.
(Off Record)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Dr. Lowery, going back to the area of what you considered in arriving at your conclusions in the 26(b)(4) statement that you
presented, we have made several references today to the public record or what's available on the public record.
A Uh-huh.
Q Did you read or consider the testimony of -- and I'm going to use the term in quotes of whistleblowers, industry whistleblowers,
in arriving at your opinions?
A No. I mean -- did I consider it?
Q Did you read testimony?
A I did not read it.
Q You did not?
A No.
Q So, I mean, it's fair to say you did not consider it or rely on it in giving your opinion. Correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A Right.
Q Did you review the July 19, 1995, issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association which was entirely devoted to
the Brown & Williamson documents in reaching your conclusions?
A No.
Q Have you done any study or research in connection with the tobacco industry's efforts in the area of youth access laws?
A Would you repeat the question, please.
Q Do you know what youth access laws are?
A Yes.
Q Have you done any study or any research in the area of the industry's work in that field?
A Not the industry's.
Q Not the tobacco industry's?
A I have looked at that question with reference to the '94 act here, that is, I've looked at the lobbying activities but I've not
read the material you referred to.
Q Before reading -- you mentioned that you read Ron Morris' deposition.
A Right.
Q Before reading Ron Morris' deposition, did you know that the tobacco industry in Mississippi did not propose legislation in
the area of youth access prior to the passage of the Synar Amendment?
A You said --
Q Let me ask it -- you read Ron Morris' deposition. Correct?
A Correct.
Q Do you recall his testimony that prior to the passage of the Synar Amendment -- do .you know what the Synar Amendment is?
A I need to have it defined. I've seen references to it in his deposition, and I assumed it had to do with some amendment to
national legislation dealing with --
MR. COLINGO: Excuse me. Why don't you tell him what it is.
MR. MIKHAIL: I want to ask him if he knows.
MR. COLINGO: He said no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. MIKHAIL: You said no.
MR. MIKHAIL: He said no.
A I really don't. I've seen references to it. I made some assumptions about it, but I don't know what it is.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q You can't tell me right at the moment what the Synar Amendment is. Correct?
A Right.
Q Okay. The Synar Amendment was the amendment to the national legislation as you described which tied federal grants or
federal assistance to states in connection with services for mental health to the passage by the states of statutes dealing with
youth access, limiting access by youth to tobacco. Does that jog your memory or sound right to you?
A Yes. That was my assumption. I've simply not seen it as Synar.
Q That's what it was referred to as, the Synar Amendment. Do you recall what Ron Morris' testimony was about any industry
efforts in Mississippi to propose youth access laws prior to the Synar Amendment passage in 1994? Do you recall what he
testified about?
A Can you refresh my mind?
Q Ron Morris testified -- and I certainly will be happy to show it to you. But in the interest of time, I'll ask you to take my word
for it and your lawyers can check it -- that prior to the 1994 Synar Amendment, which required Mississippi to pass a youth access
law, that the Tobacco Institute and to his knowledge the tobacco industry did not propose any youth access laws in Mississippi.
A Yes. I think I remember that.
Q You remember that. Okay. To go back to the question I asked originally, you have not done any study of their efforts, the
industry's efforts, in proposing and supporting or working against youth access laws, have you?
A No.
Q And certainly not in Mississippi. Correct?
A Right.
Q Do you understand what the concept of preemption is in youth access legislation?
A I think I do, but I'd rather have you tell me.
Q Okay. But you do not know? Tell me what you think it is.
A Preemption, as I understand it, is simply a -- an instrument by which, say, a law at the state level preempts any laws or
ordinances more stringent than that at the local level so that the City of Jackson could not pass a code governoring smoking in
public places, for example, that was more rigorous than a state law, if there were such.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Do you know what the industry's efforts were as it related to youth access laws and the preemption provision?
A No.
Q You don't know whether they would be in favor or against preemption in youth access laws?
A I can only make an assumption.
MR. COLINGO: Don't.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Don't guess. If you know.
MR. COLINGO: Thank you, Charles.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I don't want a guess. It doesn't help any of us. If you know.
A No.
Q You don't know?
A No.
Q Did you know that the Tobacco Institute's law firm in Washington, D.C., Covington & Burling drafted the 1994 youth access
law?
MR. COLINGO: Charles, if he didn't know what it was, how could he know who drafted it?
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, Let me ask my questions.
MR. COLINGO: I'm not trying to be obstinate.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me ask my questions.
MR. COLINGO: Geminy Petes.
MR. MIKHAIL: Let me ask my questions.
MR. COLINGO: Go ahead.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Did you know that Covington & Burling, the Tobacco Institute's law firm in Washington, D.C., drafted the Mississippi youth
access to tobacco law in 1994?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Did you know that R. J. Reynolds proposed changes to the proposed law drafted by Covington & Burling?
A No. By way of explanation, I did not know from any -- I read second hand only in the newspaper of Mike Moore's charge or
something like that, but I didn't know from any research that turned up information in the public.
Q You heard what he said in public statements about --
A Well, the general -- the charge generally was made. I was aware that the charge had been made, but I didn't know it for a fact.
Q Do you recall reading it in Ron Morris' deposition that, in fact, Covington & Burling drafted the law and RJR made some
editorial changes?
A I think I recall it.
Q Dr. Lowery, again going back to public sources that you reviewed, did you review Dr. Glance and Slade, Stanley Glance
and John Slade, et al. and others, The Cigarette Papers?
A No.
Q Did you read Dr. Kruger's book -- it's a long title if you'll permit me -- Ashes to Ashes, American's 100 year Cigarette War,
the Public Health and the unabashed triumph of Philip Morris?
A No.
Q Did you read Phil Hiltz's book, Smokescreen: The Truth Behind the Tobacco Industry Coverup?
A No.
Q Did you read the opinion of U.S. District Court Judge Harold Sarakan in the New Jersey case of Haynes v. Liggett?
A No.
Q Have you done any study or research on the tobacco industry's efforts resisting laws regarding regulation of attribution?
MR. BURROW: Object to the form of the question. Doesn't apply to Mississippi.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Do you know what laws or regulations dealing with attribution refers to?
A No.
Q I'll spare you an explanation since you don't know anything about it. Have you conducted any personal interviews with any
tobacco industry lobbyists to arrive at your conclusions other than reading depositions?
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Did you read the depositions after you completed the 26(b)(4) statement or before?
A Some before and some after.
Q But you conducted no personal interviews yourself with any of those lobbyists?
A No.
Q Or any other tobacco industry lobbyists for Mississippi?
A No.
Q Did you conduct any interviews with officials in any tobacco manufacturing company who work in governmental affairs
or governmental liaison offices?
A No.
Q Did you conduct any interviews with any tobacco manufacturer or Tobacco Institute employee? •
A No.
Q Executive?
A No.
Q What can you tell me about the organizational structure of the tobacco industry's lobbying arm, the Tobacco Institute, if
anything?
A What can I tell you about it's organizational structure?
Q Right.
A Basically what I got from the depositions I read on Morris, and I gather they are maybe half a dozen vice-presidents, he being
one of those responsible for five or six southeastern states, a president and perhaps a vice-president, I forget, and a governoring
board and an executive board in which attorneys play apparently a major hand.
Q Before reading his deposition about the structure or organizational setup of the Tobacco Institute, did you know anything
about it?
A I knew what the Tobacco Institute was generally.
Q About the organizational structure?
A No.
Q Have you conducted any study or research about tobacco industry grassroots activities or campaigns in Mississippi? 173
A No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
Q Do you know what the National Smoker's Alliance is?
A I'll have to give a qualified answer. Yes, in a very general way, but not on the basis of having read any major study or work
or article about it. I've simply seen some other advertisements.
Q Do you know what that entity is?
A Yeah. It's a smoker's rights group, I think.
Q Do you know of any affiliation with the tobacco industry?
A No, not -- no.
Q You don't know one way or the other. Correct?
A Unh-unh.
Q Is that correct?
A That's correct.
Q Do you know what TAN is, what the acronym T-A-N is?
A I did know but it slipped my mind.
Q Let me help you. Just hearing the acronym you do not recognize it?
A I recognize it as something I've seen, and I can't recall it.
Q You can't tell me what it is from just hearing the acronym? Correct?
A Right.
Q It stands for Tobacco Action Network. Does that ring a bell?
A Yes.
Q Do you know what that is?
A I am not real conversant with it, but my understanding is it is one of a number of local groups operating under the rubric of
the Department of Health as sort of a youth against tobacco movement.
Q TAN?
A I think. No? Then, obviously I don't know.
Q Do you know what the National ETS, Environmental Tobacco Smoke Advisory Committee is?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
Q Do you know what the Tobacco Tax Council is?
A No.
Q Do you know what the Public Smoking Advisory Group is?
A No.
Q Do you know what the Health Buildings International is?
A No.
Q Do you know what the Center for Indoor Research is?
A No. I can make some guesses about a number of them, but I don't know on the basis of real knowledge.
MR. COLINGO: Don't make any guesses.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q I'm not asking you about that. I'm not cutting you off. I apologize. Have you done any study or research about -- as a historian
-- historical study of the history of the Tobacco Institute?
A No.
Q Have you done any study or done research on tobacco industry efforts to influence the media?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the form of the question.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Have you -- well, let me just go through the list without asking the whole same question again. To influence physicians?
MR. COLINGO: Object again to - - I am going let it be continuous.
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand.
A Re- -- what -- restate the question.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Have you done any study or research about the tobacco industry -- alleged tobacco industry influencing the media?
MR. COLINGO: Allegedly influencing the media.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
MR. MIKHAIL: Allegedly. You're the English expert here.
A No.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Of physicians, influencing the physicians?
A No.
Q Of the advertising community?
A No.
Q Of the entertainment industry?
A No.
Q Do you know anything about product placement by tobacco companies in movies?
A No. But let me qualify by saying that in all of those instances I have read -- I've read charges that have been made, for
example, that Tobacco Institute has employed actors, for example, to use their products. But I don't have it on the basis of any
specific research. That's what I interpret the question to mean.
Q Do you claim any expertise in that area?
A I don't claim any expertise in that area, no.
Q Are you familiar just offhand if I were to tell you of a bill introduced in Mississippi in 1991 referred to as H-87, just by
reference H-87?
A Not by number, no.
Q Let me mark an exhibit.
(Exhibit 9 marked)
MR. MIKHAIL: Joe, I'm going to give the witness a chance to read it before I ask him a question.
(Short Pause)
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Are you ready for me to ask you a question about this document?
A Yes.
Q This document states -- it's from Margaret
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A. Rita from the Tobacco Institute to John G. Corlew. Do you know who John G. Corlew is?
A Yes.
Q Who is he?
A He is an attorney in Jackson who for one year was a lobbyist for, I believe, Reynolds or Philip Morris. I think R. J. Reynolds.
Q He is with Watkins & Eager?
A Pardon?
Q He is with Watkins & Eager, the law firm?
A I don't know what law firm he is with. He and one other attorney were representing Reynolds one year primarily on tort reform.
Q The bill is referred to often as H-87 because of the designation or the number. But in the second sentence of that document
it says, “This bill would restrict courts from issuing protective orders and sealing court records in actions involving public
hazards.” Do you see that?
A Yes.
Q “The industry is very much opposed to this legislation, and Bernie” -- and I don't know who Bernie is. I assume it's Bernie
Robinson. Do you know who Bernie Robinson is?
A No.
Q -- “would like your advice/comments on the most effective way to prevent its passage in the Mississippi legislature. Thank
you.” Do you see that?
A Yeah.
Q Do you know why the industry would be very much opposed to this legislation?
MR. COLINGO: Object to the fort, but you can answer it.
A No. I don't know what the legislation was.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Okay. This document describes it as a bill which would restrict courts from issuing protective orders and sealing court records
in actions involving public hazards. That's what the bill concerned. The question was do you know why the tobacco industry
was as it states in the Tobacco Institute memorandum here very much opposed to this legislation? Do you know?
A No.
MR. BURROW: Charles, before you move on, let me just note about this document, first of all, it's incomplete. It has an
attachment of six pages to it. Also I note that it is designated confidential: Mississippi Tobacco Litigation. I want to make sure
the record is clear we're not waiving that protection. And finally, as everybody in this room knows, John Corlew is an attorney
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
and any privilege that might attach to this document insofar as he was giving any legal advice, I don't know that he was, if he
may have been or whatever, we're not waiving that privilege --
MR. MIKHAIL: I understand.
MR. COLINGO: -- by having it attached to the deposition.
MR. MIKHAIL: I would like the record to reflect you're not out of order in any way, but the Tobacco Institute produced this
document without claiming privilege to it. It is claimed confidential and so it will remain confidential until such time as the
court removes the confidentiality designation. He was acting in the capacity of a lobbyist, though he is a lawyer. And the agreed
case management order and the protective order provides that privileged documents are withheld from production. They are
not produced. This document was produced by the Tobacco Institute.
MR. COLINGO: I'm not arguing.
MR. MIKHAIL: One other thing. I don't want to swear to this because I'm uncertain of the answer. I am almost positive in
my efforts to dig through these boxes that the reason the document refers to six pages is because it has six pages refers to six
pages is because it has six pages attached to it, but that is the way it was produced. I could be mistaken on this. I searched in
the box because it concerned me when it referred to six pages. But we asked for memorandum like that, and I was produced it
this way. So I can't explain why it doesn't include the six pages for the record. And it may have and just may be in a different
box or something. I don't know.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q With that on the record, Dr. Lowery, are you familiar with or do you know what the -- what an acronym referred to as ALEC is?
A No.
Q It stands for American Legislative Exchange Council. Do you know what that is?
A No.
Q Do you know of any affiliation it has with Philip Morris or the tobacco companies?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with an organization referred to by the acronym as NCSL or N-C-S-L?
A No.
Q It stands for National Conference of State Legislators.
A Yes, I know that. I'm sorry.
Q Are you familiar with that?
A Yeah.
Q What is that organization?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A It is just simply like Southern Conference of Legislators. It's a national meeting -- national organization for professional
exchange among legislators. They have national meetings. They talk about issues kind of like the American Historical
Association.
Q Do you know whether or not the tobacco industry makes financial contributions to the National Conference of State
Legislators?
A I don't know for a fact. I have seen in depositions references to contributions they made to like the Southern Conference or
made to the Southern Governor's Conference. So my guess is they probably are, but I don't know it for a fact.
Q Were you aware that in 1995 Philip Morris contributed $150,000 to the National Conference of State Legislators?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with or do you know what the Ramherst Corporation is?
A No.
Q Do you know what the Americans for Tax Reform is?
A I've seen references to it.
MR. COLINGO: I am. I want to join it.
BY MR. MIKHAIL:
Q Can you tell me what the Americans for Tax Reform is?
A No.
Q Do you know of any affiliation of that organization with the tobacco industry?
A No.
Q Are you familiar with or do you know what the National Taxpayers Union is?
A No.
Q Do you know of any affiliation or connection with the tobacco industry?
A No.
Q Do you know a group called the Citizens for a Sound Economy?
A No.
Q Do you know of any affiliation with the tobacco industry?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92Mike MOORE, Attorney General, ex rel, State of..., 1997 WL 34667222...
A No.
MR. MIKHAIL: Dr. Lowery, I hope that your first deposition was not an unpleasant experience. I can't imagine it being
a pleasant experience but not a unpleasant experience. It was a pleasure to meet you. I wish we had met under different
circumstances. I don't have any more questions.
(Deposition Concluded at 3:15 p:m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93
