Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
Original Image of 2002 WL 34935827 (PDF)
2002 WL 34935827 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
Circuit Court of Florida.
Escambia County
Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr.,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY et al.
No. 2008CA002147.
December 17, 2002.
Videotaped Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudes, PhD
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Jurisdiction: Escambia County, Florida
Name of Expert: Louis Michael Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Note: This document was obtained from the above titled case. (PDF information below.)
Court: Circuit Court of Florida.
Title: ALLAN LEVINE a/k/a ALAN LANDERS, Plaintiff, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY, a foreign
corporation; BROWN & WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORPORATION, a foreign corporation; LIGGETT GROUP, INC., a
foreign corporation; ABC LIQUORS, INC., a Florida corporation. Defendants.
Docket Number: CASE NO. CL 95-9876(AA).
Date: December 17, 2002.
VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION of LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, PhD, VOL. II, a witness called on behalf of the Defendant
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, taken pursuant to the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure, before Ranae McDermott,
Certified Merit Reporter and Notary Public in and for the State of North Carolina, at The Carolina Inn Chapel Hill, Hill Room,
211 Pittsboro Street, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on Tuesday, December 17, 2002, commencing at 9:06 a.m.
RANAE McDERMOTT, RMR, CRR
2821 Patrie Place
Raleigh, NC 27613
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
(919) 846-5020 * (919) 848-3576 (f)
[Note: Pages 2-385 missing in original document]
grant proposals and •- and funded some and did not fund others. They -- I know they published an annual digest of tobacco-
related research which would contain abstracts.
Q. And -- and you -- okay. And you've suggested in your report that CTR somehow didn't do its job. And you just mentioned
ago -- mentioned a moment ago that CTR funded some research and didn't fund other research. So I want to focus on the latter
part there.
Can you identify for me some proposed grant-proposing research that was submitted to CTR that was not funded and that you
think was -- was wrong not to fund?
A. Well, let's -- let's deal with the full elements of your question because the question started out with a proposition that CTR
didn't do their job. Let's see what they --
Q. Well, that was just part of my question.
A. Yeah.
Q. My question is: Can you identify a proposed piece of research that was submitted to the CTR for proposed funding that was
not funded by CTR, that you think it was wrong for them not to fund that research?
A. NO, I can't think of a specific example. I've not reviewed information that lists, you know, products -- proposals not funded.
Q. All right. Are you aware of the research that was funded by CTR?
A. Just in a general way. Again, I -- they would publish, you know, a digested form of -- of this work. I haven't delved too
deeply into those, though.
Q. Have you done any review of the quality of the scientists who were funded by CTR?
A. No. Again, I'm not speaking to the state of the art in this regard. Ho.
Q. Okay.
A. That's not part of my -- my area.
Q. In your -- in your paper you note that rarely was there a newspaper or magazine story where there wasn't some sort of a
response from somebody from the -- a tobacco company or the Tobacco institute or CTR, correct?
A. Yeah. What page are you on?
Q. I'm sorry. Page 8.
A. Yeah. Just so that we're on the same page.
Q. I'm going sort of page by page here.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
A. Okay. Oh, I see. Yeah, that's right. And I mention Timothy Hartnett and Clarence Cook Little, who in the 1950s, very
prominent in presenting the public -- public statements of the TIRC.
[Note: Pages 388-402 missing in original document]
materials the materials are, in fact, produced when they're requested?
A. Wall, I -- you -- what you're asking really is a question that -- that requires knowledge, detailed knowledge of -- of the --
the procedures of litigation, which probably, as I've illustrated, I'm -- I'm not particularly well-versed in that, not having legal
training. And even in my limited experience as an expert witness still don't really know fully the -- the various legal procedures.
Let me just say that this -- this section of the report is derived from a document that is basically-describing a policy, a company
policy, and that was my interest in it. It is -- it's -- it's -- it is putting forth a statement of what the policy should be. And indeed
I took it to mean what the policy was in terms of the -- the -- the treatment of --of documents, particularly research documents.
Q. But what you haven't investigated was whether, in fact, any such policy was, in fact, implemented. You don't know the
answer to that?
A. No, I don't know. X have not -- as I mentioned earlier, I have not- taken it to that step.
Q. All right. Now --
A. But I certainly had the policy and it was --
[Note: Pages 404-406 missing in original document]
incorrect.
Q. Even after what I have said Here today in my hypothetical about Book No. 2?
A. Yeah. No. As -- as I said earlier, what I haven't done is actually gone through and said, okay, well, which -- which -- this
might be possible, I'm not sure, with the available documentation -- which -- which documents were, in fact, culled, which
ones weren't.
Q. Okay.
A. I -- I have not done that.
Q. Okay.
A. And I've stated that. And what I'm presenting here is -- is -- is evidence that they had these policies.
Q. All right.
A. TO the extent that the policies were followed, that -- that -- I don't have evidence for that in this here, and I've not looked
at that evidence.
Q. Document 2. -- I mean, Document 2.3 --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
A. Yes.
Q. I mean paragraph 2.3 on page 19, here you refer to a memorandum dated January 17, 1985, which discusses “deadwood.”
It uses the word “deadwood.” Do
[Note: Pages 408-409 missing in original document]
should be a little bit embarrassed?
A. Sure. Well, I don't know if he was embarrassed. You know, we always are doing our best with the evidence that's available
to us and the process of inquiry is always ongoing. That's why one book isn't always the end of the story.
Q. Okay.
A. But, again, I -- I'm -- I list this in here as examples of -- of policy. And these -- these memos which are -- go into quite detail
at the date that they were written -- or what they're dated as in terms of their formal dates, 1985 or what have you, I think are
good examples of the policy at that time.
Now, that policy may have changed. And I have not done the kind of work to see if that policy was later adapted, implemented,
transformed. I offer one -- one piece of evidence to suggest that the policy had a -- a life beyond the date of the -- of the
memorandum, but that's all. So they're examples of -- of certainly their intentions.
MR. S??: Okay. Subject to maybe finding something I'm missing and asking one or two questions at the end, just to make --
make this transition quick, I think I'll conclude for now and pass the questions to Ms. Parker. I appreciate your
[Note: Pages 411-412 missing in original document]
A. Varmus, I'm familiar with that name, but --
Q. Who is he?
A. Re was involved in the National Institutes of Health for some years. I don't know a lot about him. I don't know his work.
Q. He's a respected scientist?
A. That's my sense of it. But, again, I'm not an expert in the scientific aspect of it, so --
Q. Who is Dr. Teague?
A. Teague is familiar to me, because he is someone who I've come across, if it's, I believe, Clarence Teague, an RJR --
Q. Who is he?
A. -- research scientist. He's active in the '50s into the '60s, and his name appears on -- he's the author of a number of -- of
internal reports.
Q. Do you believe he's a research scientist?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
A. I don't know if he's a research scientist. I know that he is the author of -- of internal reports --
Q. Do you know what he --
A. -- speaking to -- I'm sorry. If I could finish.
Q. Please.
A. -- speaking to scientific matters. I'm thinking of a -- of a 1953 memo I recall reading in which he deals with -- reports the
presence of certain carcinogens in the tobacco smoke.
Q. Do you know what Dr. Teague's position was at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?
A. Off the top of my head, I can't recall. But if I were to go back to the original documents, I'm sure I could easily ascertain that.
Q. Do you know who Dr. Teague reported to at Reynolds?
A. Right now, no, I don't know who his immediate superior was.
Q. All right. Do yon know a Dr. Rodgman?
A. Yes. That would be another person at that -- I believe also at Reynolds and who's also the author of a number of internal
memoranda on issues --
Q. What's his position?
A. -- relating to the science of -- if you'll let me finish -- relating to the science of --on these issues.
Again, I can't recall off the top of my head what his position is. But I know I'm thinking of some early 1960s memos where
it is -- it's clearly stated on the memo, and I would just have to refer back to those original memos to -- to find out exactly
what his position was.
[Note: Pages 415-425 missing in original document]
documents or documents that the company also collected, that the -- you know, that is my source of his role. This is common
in historical research. This is not a -- an unusual situation.
We try to, you know, when we're going through and there's -- trying to figure out how an organization operates, we look for
those who are, you know, authoring memoranda and circulating -- circulating them. It's -- there's nothing unusual about that.
So based on my reading in the --in the papers of the I company.
Q. Have you reviewed any contemporaneous documents from Reynolds from this time period in the early 1950s that would put
the document we marked as Exhibit 18 in context? Have you reviewed those documents?
A. No, I haven't --at this point, I haven't seen anything like that.
Q. Have you reviewed any contemporaneous public documents from this early 1950s time period that would put this Exhibit
18 in context?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
A. Public documents, no. I've seen no discussions of this particular memorandum in publicly-disseminated material.
Q. Now, have you done any investigation to
[Note: Pages 427-441 missing in original document]
A. Yes.
Q. And the American College of Chest Physicians also releases public statements to the general public, including to consumers,
correct?
A. Well, I -- I'm -- I'm just not familiar with them, so I couldn't say. They probably do, but I -- I -- I don't know just by -- by
lack of familiarity with that particular professional organization.
Q. Have you conducted any type of review or study of the general -- statements to the general public, for example, from the
American Cancer Society, the American Medical Association, the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society or
any -- I'm sorry -- the American College of Chest Physicians or any similar public health organizations, have you made that
review or study of any statements that they made to the general public in the 1950s?
A. I've read through the major public media outlets, magazines such as Life, Reader's Digest, much of Time Magazine, not all
of it. And in that regard, I've come across statements. But I haven't done it, in essence, what I think is the way you're describing
it, which is to go and trace every statement that the American Cancer Society may have made.
Q. Well --
[Note: Pages 443-461 missing in original document]
see that?
A. I see that.
Q. Okay. Dr. Rodgman also wrote, “...we initiated a lengthy research program to develop methods to lessen the amounts of
these potentially dangerous compounds in cigarette smoke.” Do you have any reason to dispute the correctness or the accuracy
of that statement?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Okay. Do you know how many experiments that Reynolds had done in this 1956 time period as part of this research?
A. Well, he goes on to list previous reports.
Q. I'm just asking you do you know.
A. Yeah. But, no, I don't know.
Q. And you're not an expert on cigarette design, correct?
A. No, I'm not.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2002 WL 34935827...
Q. You're not an expert on the pH of cigarette smoke, correct?
A. Ho, I'm don't know the science of it.
Q. You're not an expert on the chemistry of smoke?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Dr. Rodgman recommended that these
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7
