State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Original Image of 1998 WL 35271782 (PDF)
1998 WL 35271782 (Wash.Super.) (Expert Deposition)
Superior Court of Washington.
King County
State of Washington, Plaintiff,
v.
AMERICAN TOBACCO COMPANY, et al., Defendants.
No. 96-2-15056-8 SEA.
1998.
(Deposition of Dr. Kenneth Marc Ludmerer, M.D.)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: King County, Washington
Name of Expert: Kenneth Marc Ludmerer, M.D.
Area of Expertise: Health Care-Physicians & Health Professionals >> Internist
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances.
Appearing for the Plaintiff was Mr. Christopher A. O'Hara of Hagens, Berman, & Mitchell, 2425 East Camelback Road, Suite
620, Phoenix, Arizona 85016.
Appearing for the Defendant Philip Morris were Mr. James M. Rosenthal and Mr. Murray Garnick of Arnold & Porter, 555
Twelfth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20004-1206.
Appearing for the Defendant Philip Morris were Mr. Timothy P. O'Connor and Mr. B. Ballard Rogers of Winston & Strawn,
35 West Wacker Drive, Chicago, Illinois 60601-9703.
DEPOSITION OF KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., a witness, taken on behalf of the Plaintiff, pursuant to Notice, on the
3rd day of June, 1998, at the Holiday Inn. Hotel, 4504 Woodson Road, St. Louis, Missouri, before
ANGIE SHERWOOD, RPR, a Notary Public within the State of Missouri, of Hostetler & Associates, authorized by law to take
depositions anywhere in the State of Missouri.
INDEX
WITNESS:
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D.
Examination by Mr. O'Hara ... 4
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
TABLE
(Whereupon, the deposition commenced at 9:10 a.m.)
KENNETH M. LUDMERER, M.D., a witness, being first duly sworn, testified under oath as follows;
EXAMINATION
BY MR. O'HARA:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Ludmerer.
A. Good morning.
Q. We had a chance to meet very briefly before we got started this morning. As you know my name is Chris O'Hara and I am
one of the attorneys for the State of Washington in the litigation instigated by the Attorney General of State of Washington
against various members of the tobacco industry.
Let me start off by just asking I assume you've had your deposition taken before; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Just for the record because as you know Dr. Ludmerer has testified in the Cipollone and Mississippi cases,
the February 23rd order applies to him and that his deposition is limited to four hours. Based on our previous discussion I don't
think that would be a problem. I wanted to make you aware of that.
MR. O'HARA: I don't think we'll even go that long but I'll try to keep that in mind and move things along.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) So since you have been deposed before I assume that you are familiar with the ground rules of deposition
taking and whatnot, but I'll go over them again just so we are clear.
As you know, this is a formal question and answer session. If I ask you any questions that aren't clear or that you don't understand
please let me know and I'll do my best to rephrase the question and try to make some sense out of I'm getting at. I'll give you
my standard warning that if I do ask a question you don't understand it's probably my fault and not yours. If you need to take
a break at any time just let me know and we can stop at your convenience.
For the court reporter's benefit it's helpful if you keep your answers audible. For example, if I ask a question that calls for a
yes or no response it's helpful if you actually say yes or no as opposed to nodding or shaking your head. It's also helpful if
you can wait until I finish asking my questions before you begin answering and likewise I'll do my best to try not to interrupt
you with a further question if you are still answering so we are not talking over the top of each other which also makes the
court reporter's job more difficult.
Let me start out by asking when you first became involved in the State of Washington litigation to the best of your recollection?
A. To the best of my recollection that would have been sometime early 1998.
Q. Okay. And how was it that you became involved in the State of Washington litigation if you recall?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. I believe it was James Rosenthal who called me by telephone to ask if I would be willing to serve as an expert witness in
the State of Washington Attorney General case. I replied yes.
Q. Okay. Now, you have -- you've previously provided testimony in other tobacco-related cases; is that correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And which were those cases if you recall?
A. I have had three previous appearances. The first was a deposition for the retrial of the Cipollone case. The second was my
first and only court appearance. That was the Cutler case in Boston. My third appearance was I believe April 1st, April 2nd
1997, a deposition for the Mississippi Attorney General case.
Q. Do you recall whether you were designated as an expert witness in any of those three prior cases?
A. Well, by definition I was an expert witness in Cutler. I appeared in trial.
Q. Okay.
A. For Mississippi to the best of my recollection I already had been designated an expert witness. I do not know or remember
offhand my formal status with the Cipollone case retrial eight or nine, ten years ago.
Q. Do you recall the general areas upon which you provided testimony in the Cutler and Mississippi actions?
A. Yes.
Q. And what were those areas?
A. State of medical and scientific knowledge concerning the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer in
particular, concerning the health hazards of cigarette smoking more generally in the published medical and scientific literature
between 1930 and 1964.
Q. Okay. And was your testimony in Cipollone generally along on the same subjects?
A. The area that I was questioned on in Cipollone was on that same general area. I did not give testimony in Cipollone. I gave
a deposition and I was questioned about that area.
Q. Okay. And is it your understanding that you have been designated as an expert witness in the Washington State litigation?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And what is your area of expertise in the Washington State litigation? I assume it's probably the same.
A. Correct. It's the same as I described to you.
Q. Okay. And do I have a copy of your disclosure statement in the Washington State case that we'll go over which probably
outlines those areas and we'll discuss that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
So when would you -- to the best of your recollection when would you say that you first became involved in tobacco litigation
at all if you could give me a year?
A. August, 1988.
Q. Okay. Prior to August, 1988 had you previously ever done any work in any way, shape or forM any members of the tobacco
industry?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And on whose behalf will you be providing testimony in the Washington State case? Is it all of the defendants or
only some of the defendants?
A. I don't know.
Q. I believe you mentioned that it was early this year that you first received a call asking whether you would consider becoming
involved in the Washington State case; is that cornedt?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Can you -- do you have an idea of roughly the amount of time that you've spent focusing specifically on the State
of Washington litigation since that first phone call?
A. Through today 80 to 100 hours.
Q. Okay. Is there any way that you might be able to estimate for me the amount of time that you've spent on tobacco litigation
generally since you first became involved back in August of 1988? I know that's almost ten years.
A. It's hard because it's been very sporadic, intermittent.
Q. I understand.
A. Do you mind if I do a calculation?
Q. Not at all. Take your time. I'm not trying to test your memory on this. I'm just trying to get a general idea.
A. Well, most of my -- in fact, let me rephrase that if I may. My foundation came from an initial project that I did without
reference to a particular case. Testimony that I have given, depositions that I have been asked to participate in have all dealt
with that work and that was approximately 1,000 hours.
Q. Okay. And you mentioned originally a project that wasn't related to tobacco litigation. Did I understand you correctly?
A. To a particular case.
Q. Can you describe generally what that project was that you began working on.
A. That was a project that arose from my original contact with the tobacco defendants in August of 1988. Murray Garnick called
me, explained to me that he was a lawyer for the defense. He had represented the defense in the Cipollone case; that the defense
was interested in retaining as an expert consultant an individual with very high medical and historical credentials to review the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
state of the art as I previously defined it to you and to report to then on the findings. It was understood that depending on many
circumstances it could lead to a case, but the project was undertaken independently without reference to any particular case. I
agreed to do so based upon the mutual agreement that I could function completely independently, that I would approach this
with the same thoroughness, comprehensiveness and integrity and scholarly fashion that I do with all my historical work; that
I would report to them the findings. I wouldn't promise any findings in advance. With that, Murray readily agreed to that and
with that understanding I began the thousand-hour project that led to the opinions that I have for this case.
Q. Okay. Can you describe for me generally the process that you undertook in terms of looking into the state of history of the
medical knowledge regarding cigarettes and health.
A. Certainly. The project had several stages. The first stage involved a review of the secondary literature pertaining to smoking,
lung cancer, health, cigarettes, cancer in general. There were several dozen sources, both books and articles, that I read to do
what any conscientious historian would want to do to develop an understanding of the concept of events from what others have
said about it. That took maybe a month, six weeks. My memory is vague on a project ten years ago.
Q. Sure.
A. From there I systematically reviewed the primary literature from 1930 to 1964. I'm defining primary literature as published
literature that appeared in the world's published scientific and medical journals almost all of which were in English although
the medicus does cover international literature. Year by year I accumulated a bibliography of sources pertaining to lung cancer,
bronchogenic cancer. I state that specifically because at that time those were two separate entries in the index medicus. So to
make sure I had uncovered everything with lung cancer I had to look under both items. I looked under smoking and under
cigarettes. I would accumulate a list on a yellow, note pad of articles year by year that came from those four categories. I would
read the articles in the library, make notes on their main thrust and I did that systematically from 1930 to 1964.
Also as part of this project it became clear to me that the story of lung cancer and cigarette smoking was part of a much larger
story in the history of medicine and science. A scientific revolution occurred in terms of canons of evidence and canons of truth,
what type of evidence is accepted by the scientific community at large in terms of the causation of chronic disease. My view
of this was a revolution very much of the sort that Thomas Kuhn took up, “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.”
It was just not a question of accumulating evidence. It was a question of one mind set replacing another mind set; a true scientific
revolution.
So there was another month to two-month period of this project that I explored the issue of scientific revolution. I called it
paradigm, put together a paradigm of bibliography-related cigarette smoking to this larger and essential scientific context.
And the last major item that I did at that time -- I don't remember precisely when it was done in relation to these other steps. I
think it was not the first step. The first step I do remember was reviewing the secondary literature. Somewhere in there I was
asked to review and render an opinion of an expert's statement by Jeffrey Harris for the plaintiffs in the Cipollone case. He had
written an expert statement, had a bibliography of approximately 200 items and I reviewed that report and as part of that review
I read the 200 or so items in his bibliography to judge his comments about the literature from the actual sources themselves.
So these were the steps. I don't remember precisely the exact order but that was I think a fair and comprehensive summary of
the research I did at that time.
Q. Okay. Have you had an opportunity to review the expert statement of Jeffrey Harris in the State of Washington case?
Q. At what time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. At any time prior to today.
Q. I reviewed it very carefully at that time.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Are you asking about in the State of Washington case?
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) in the State of Washington case.
A. I'm sorry. I was thinking of his report for the Cipollone case.
Q. I'm just asking about the State of Washington.
A. I have not seen his report for the State of Washington and I don't know whether it's substantially different from the Cipollone
case or not.
Q. Did you have specific criticisms of Dr. Harris' expert statement in the Cipollone case that you recall?
A. Yes.
Q. Could you summarize those for me to the best of your recollection.
A. He was dishonest.
Q. And in what way?
A. He misrepresented the scientific literature.
Q. Can you think of any specific examples that you could point me to with regard to his misrepresentation of scientific literature?
A. I can give you examples of the types of things he did. Without the report in front of me I couldn't quote the specific paper.
Q. I understand.
A. There were a number of types of errors in that report that to a conscientious historian would be considered serious and
invalidating methodological deficiencies. Two of the most egregious had to do with inaccurate representation of materials that
by any scholarly standard he was obligated to represent fairly. For example, if you cite an article in a study, you are writing a
report and you cited the article, one is obliged to represent that article fairly, not to distort it or take it out of context. He did
that on a number of occasions. He would misrepresent an article or take it out of context.
For example, if I have an article by Dr. Smith, New England Journal of Medicine, 1946 and the article says it has been suggested
by some that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer but evidence to substantiate that claim does not exist at this time and the
overwhelming body of reputable authorities who reviewed that evidence have concluded that there is no reason at this time with
existing knowledge to be concerned about health risks from cigarette smoking, to take that statement, to take that article, and
say cigarette smoking causes lung cancer I would submit to you it takes that article out of context and misrepresents it. That is
a violation of scholarship or history. That would be an example of the type of thing that he would do.
Q. Is that a specific example that you are aware of? You mentioned an article by Dr. Smith.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. That is an example of the type of thing he did with a number of papers that were published prior to 1950. Without the report
in front of me I could not tell you which paper but I do remember I was quite impressed with the misrepresentation of the early
scientific literature by Dr. Harris in that document. That would be one example.
Q. Okay. Are there other -- any other broad areas of criticism that you have about Dr. Harris' expert statement in Cipollone
other than the general area of misrepresenting scientific literature that you can think of?
A. To a serious scholar that's a serious flaw.
Q. I understand.
A. He would also conveniently take articles out of context. If 500 articles from 1930 to 1950 appeared and there were one or
two articles that did suggest that smoking caused lung cancer he would selectively choose one or two articles and portray that
as representative of the lot.
Q. Okay.
A. Whereas, in fact, it's incorrect to do so particularly when there are other articles equally accessible to him that say yes, Dr.
Smith did suggest this but he had no evidence to support it and his views have not been accepted in the scientific community.
He would take Dr. Smith's article and to contrast to the earlier example where he would misrepresent an article but he would
inaccurately represent it as representative of the body of literature.
Q. Okay. Can you think of any other broad areas of criticism that you have?
A. I would have to see the report to be comprehensive in my answer. He showed little understanding of how science evolves,
how medicine evolves. He was quite presentist in this case, his outlook. That would be another methodological error to historians
of medicine and historians of science. That would be the third category.
Q. Have you had an opportunity to review any other expert statements concerning the history of, evolution of the medical
understanding of tobacco and health that you can think of?
A. I have seen a statement for another case by Dr. Elizabeth Whalen.
Q. Do you recall whether you had any criticisms of that report?
A. I have criticisms of that report similar to those of the Harris report. Similar in kind, not in degree. She was not as egregious
in her misrepresentation of some of the articles or some of the literature as Dr. Harris. I did think that occurred. I would say
that her tendency to pick and choose articles selectively and to view the past with use of the present rather than viewing it in
the context of the times was just as apparent as Dr. Harris.
Q. Okay. Any other expert reports that you can think of?
A. No.
Q. Okay.
A. Not as we speak. There could have been others but not as we speak.
Q. I don't mean to test your memory on that. I'm just trying to find out what comes to your mind.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Can you give me an estimate of the number of scientific articles that you've reviewed during the course of this roughly ten-
year study that you've undertaken in this area?
A. Somewhere between 1,300 and 1,500.
Q. Okay. Have you had an opportunity to review any documents, internal documents from tobacco companies in order to find
out what the tobacco companies knew about the potential health effect of their products?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection. That's compound.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Did you understand the question? I can try to rephrase it.
A. I don't understand the question or the objection or what I'm supposed to do. I am not a professional witness.
Q. I understand. Let me see if I can break that question up. Have you had an opportunity to review any documents from internal
-- excuse me -- any internal documents from tobacco companies at all?
A. What do you mean by review?
Q. To read.
A. Eight or nine years ago somewhere in relation to the Cipollone case I was shown selected internal company documents that
had previously been read, cited, discussed by Dr. Harris either in deposition or trial testimony. I was shown those documents.
We had one meeting in preparation for our deposition today. I was shown four or five samples of company documents at that
meeting last week. That is the extent of my involvement with internal company documents.
Q. Has your review of those internal company documents eight or nine years ago and then in reparation for today, has your
review of these documents given you any idea of what the tobacco industry knew about the health effects of its products at
any point in time?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Have you been asked to review any further internal documents?
A. No.
Q. Okay. You mentioned a meeting in preparation for today's deposition. Do you recall when that took place?
A. Thursday of last week.
Q. Okay. And who was present at that meeting?
A. Ballard, Murray Garnick and James.
Q. Okay. Other than the -- I think you said maybe four or five examples of internal company documents that you looked at in
that meeting. Did you look at any other documents at that meeting?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Do you recall what the general subject matter of the documents that you did review was?
A. Not very well. The documents were vague and reports of meetings, reports of visits. They were to my mind vague documents.
I had no context about how they came into being. My recollection is just not very good.
Q. Do you recall whether those documents in any way provided a glimpse of what the tobacco companies knew about the
potential health effects of their products?
A. My viewpoint is that they did not provide such a glimpse.
Q. Okay. Do you recall whether those documents provided a glimpse of the evolution of the historic debate about the question
of whether tobacco is injurious to health in any way?
A. My strong viewpoint is that they did not.
MR. O'HARA: Okay. Why don't we go ahead and mark your disclosure in the State of Washington case.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1224 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) If you could take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1224. Do you recognize this as
your disclosure statement in the State of Washington case? And take your time to review it.
A. Please ask the question again.
Q. Sure. Do you recognize this as your disclosure statement in the State of Washington case?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Did you prepare this statement yourself? Do you recall?
A. No.
Q. Do you know who did prepare it?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Did you have an opportunity or prior to today have you had an opportunity to review this statement?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And we'll go over some of the areas in greater detail, but in general does this accurately describe those areas in which
you will be providing testimony?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. May I amend that answer? it is an accurate representation of the area that I am confident to discuss as an expert witness.
Whether I will be asked to testify, specifically what I will be asked to testify about, I do not know at this time.
Q. That's a good point.
A. Okay. I appreciate that.
Q. Before we get to the specifics of the opinions I'd just like to spend a few minutes on your personal background if we could.
In looking at your C.V., which is attached to the disclosure statement, I see that you were an undergraduate student at Harvard
and received a degree in history and science in 1968; is that correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Okay. And subsequently it appears that you received a masters degree in history of medicine at Johns Hopkins University
in '71?
A. Yes.
Q. And then subsequent to that you received your M.D. from Johns Hopkins in '73; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And also looking at your C.V. it appears as though you are currently a professor of medicine at Washington University?
A. Yes. I'm also professor of history in the faculty of Arts and Sciences in Washington University. I have a joint appointment.
Q. Okay. So you are both a historian as well as a medical doctor; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you ever been in private practice in medicine?
A. No. I have not.
Q. Okay.
A. The C.V. will show that after the completion of my graduate medical education as we call it, internship, residency and I did
a fellowship, I was also a chief resident at Barnes Hospital. I immediately joined the full-time faculty of the medical school,
remain there today.
Q. So I assume as the chief resident at Barnes Hospital you did have an occasion to actually meet with and treat patients?
A. Oh, I see patients now. I am active clinically, but as a full-time faculty member of the medical school, part of the medical
school group practice, not a private practice in the community in a community setting. I do see patients as part of my full-time
academic work. In fact, I'm on the clinical service right now which I presume is why we are having the deposition in St. Louis
rather than somewhere else because this particular month of June it's not easy for me to travel.
Q. I understand and I appreciate your availability today.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. And I appreciate you coming to St. Louis.
Q. No problem. I'm happy to do it. Gets me out of the heat of Phoenix.
I could probably tell from your C.V. but you could probably help me out. When did you first become active clinically to the
best of your recollection?
A. As a medical student, I suppose third and fourth years.
Q. And have you consistently been active clinically since that time to the present?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
A. In different capacities. Obviously one's clinical involvement as a medical student is different from what it is as the house
officer, intern and resident. Now that I'm full-time faculty and an attending physician it's different from what it was then, but
there has been continuous clinical involvement of some type since my third year of medical school.
Q. Okay. And that would have been roughly mid '70s, early to mid '70s?
A. Early '70s.
Q. Okay. I also see by your C.V. that you have published quite extensively. And without going through each of your publications
in detail, can you tell me off the top of your head whether you recall whether you have ever published an article or any type of
scientific literature regarding the history of the evolution of scientific understanding of tobacco and health concerns?
A. I have not.
Q. Okay. Do you recall whether you have published any --
A. May I interject one item or two. Tobacco, no; health concerns, yes. I understood that you were relating the two. I have had
articles on health concerns that have not been pertaining to tobacco.
Q. Okay. But if I understand you correctly you have not --
A. I understood your question to be have I written on tobacco in any articles and the answer to that is no.
Q. Okay.
A. Your question as I heard it was tobacco and health concerns. Tobacco, no. I have written on other health issues.
Q. Okay. I understand, but you have not written specifically on tobacco?
A. That is correct.
Q. Have you taught any courses specifically on tobacco?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. Now, I asked you earlier if your disclosure statement accurately described those areas in which you will be providing
testimony in the State of Washington case. I understand you don't know what you will be asked so who knows.
A. If I'm asked at all.
Q. Can you tell me whether you are currently planning on providing any opinion testimony with regard to your own opinions
as to, for example, the potential causal link between smoking and lung cancer?
A. I am not.
Q. Okay. Do you have any personal opinions in that regard?
A. I have personal opinions. I'm not an expert on tobacco and its health consequences.
Q. What is your personal opinion as to whether smoking causes lung cancer?
A. My personal opinion, and it's been this way as long as I remember, is that I do accept the new paradigm that epidemiological
studies can yield information of causative significance in chronic diseases and I do accept the findings that cigarettes are a great
public health risk and a great public risk.
Q. And you mentioned that you felt that way for as long as you can remember. Can you try to quantify when you first felt that
way for me to the best of your recollection.
A. You are talking to an individual who never liked smoking. I remember when I was a kid asking in sharp language my father,
a physician, to stop smoking, Dad. So going back a long way. But if you are asking in terms of any type of general medical
sense, medical school, you know, like early '70s.
Q. Are you planning on providing any opinion testimony with regard to what the public may or may not have known about
potential health risks of cigarette smoking at any point in time?
A. No.
Q. Are you planning on providing any opinion testimony as to what the federal government knew or did not know about potential
health effects of cigarette smoking at any time?
A. I believe the correct answer to that would be no. I am aware that there were reports by the federal government. So from that
perspective it falls within the state of the published medical knowledge, but in essence the answer to your question would be
no, I'm not talking about government understanding and meetings and policy discussions and things of that sort. There were
some Surgeon General's reports and statements and so forth that I have seen but other than that, no.
Q. So would it be fair to assume that you are not planning on providing any opinion testimony with regard to the history of
regulation of tobacco?
A. Absolutely correct.
Q. And just so I can sort of try to get an understanding of exactly where your areas of expertise are, I understand those to be
history and medicine generally. Do you consider yourself to be an expert in economics?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. No.
Q. Do you consider yourself to be an expert in statistics?
A. No.
Q. You are not a statistician?
A. Correct.
Q. Are you an expert -- do you consider yourself to be an expert on the pharmacological effects of nicotine?
A. No.
Q. So I would assume you are not an expert on addiction?
A. Correct.
Q. Do you consider yourself to be an expert in consumer behavior?
A. No.
Q. Marketing?
A. No.
Q. Bioethics?
A. No.
Q. Corporate ethics?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Probably the most efficient way to get through some of your opinions is to track along with your disclosure statement
that we have marked as an exhibit. I'll go ahead and sort of read through the disclosure statement and then ask you some follow
ups.
The statement indicates that the defendants may call you to testify in the State of Washington case on the evolution of medical
knowledge of smoking and disease.
“Dr. Ludmerer is expected to explain the principles of historical analysis.” Why don't we start with that. Can you explain for
me what the principles of historical analysis are.
A. Many of those opinions have already been referred to in previous questions and answers to those questions that I have given
to you but to summarize I would like to indicate five principles.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
One, the importance of having a thorough understanding of the context of the specific events that you've studied. That is why
in my original -- the first step of my project ten years ago was to review the secondary literature, what had been written about
cancer and cigarettes and public health and those sorts of things. I thought it was my obligation as a historian to read the
secondary literature to get a sense of what others said about the same subject and get a sense of the intellectual, social, cultural
circumstances. That was the first step that I took.
Q. Could I interrupt you if I could. I meant to ask a related question to the secondary literature and then we'll get back to the
five principles of historical analysis, but what is your distinction with regard to the difference between primary and secondary
sources as you use those terms?
A. I'm defining primary sources as sources that appeared at the time. A primary source to me would be an article in 1930 or 1956
as opposed to a historical interpretation of those events published in 1993. Both would be published. The second article I would
define as a secondary source and one that I would want to see. The first to me would be a primary source. Primary sources as
I'm sure you know are quite broad. Published sources can be primary sources but not published sources. In the case of tobacco
you raise the question of company records, letters, diaries, whatever it may be. Primary sources need not be published. The
ones I looked at were published. But the essential part of the definition is that they come from the period that you are looking
at. They are not someone else's analysis or interpretation of those events at a later time.
Q. Okay. Okay. Getting back to the principles of historical analysis you mentioned that there were five and the first being --
A. The first being make sure you've read the secondary literature, you are familiar with that, you have a context of events.
Secondly, would be the importance of being comprehensive.
Q. I take it that means making sure that you've read as close as possible to everything?
A. Everything.
Q. Okay.
A. So that if you have a particular article, particular opinion that you can be confident that you understand it. Is this the dominant
view, is this the minority, is it some exception, did it make a difference, did it not make a difference. So you have to be
comprehensive. That can involve reading everything or reading a large amount of material in a systematic fashion if there is
such a voluminous volume of material that one cannot read everything.
Q. And would this issue that you've been studying for the past ten years, would that be one of those subjects where it would
be impossible to read everything?
A. No.
Q. Are you confident that you have read everything that there is to read?
A. I would not say that I'm confident I've read everything, but in terms of the primary literature I went to the index medicus,
generated a bibliography of everything that had been written about that subject. So I am confident that I approached it as
thoroughly and as comprehensively as one possibly could do. There could have been an article somewhere along the line that
for whatever reason I didn't see but I would say that I came as close to reading everything in the published literature from that
period of time as one could possibly do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. And I think I'm having your bibliography copied as we speak. Judging from the size of it I tend to believe you are probably
right. So the second principle is importance of being comprehensive?
A. Correct.
Q. And the third?
A. The third principle would be the importance of being -- I'm hesitating because I don't know quite what word would be best to
use. One could say balanced. One could say accurate. One could say honest but by that I mean reflecting fairly and accurately
the literature that you have read. Examples of that would be of the sort that I gave before. If you have an article in front of you
it is one's scholarly obligation in any forum including history, but not limited to history, to present that article accurately and
fairly and not distort it or take it out of context or one little phrase that may misrepresent the article. And then, similarly, even
if one represents an article accurately it has to be put into context with the body of literature. If you say that this represents
the dominant view you have to have good reason to believe it's the dominant view and not something you have selectively and
conveniently ignored the rest.
Q. Okay. And the fourth principle of historical analysis?
A. The fourth principle would be interpreting the past on its own terms, avoiding presentism, avoiding the understandable
human tendency to judge the past by what we do today, the thinking we do today. To put yourself in the minds of the people
of the time and see things from their own eyes.
Q. As a historian are there specific techniques or schools of thought with regard to how one can go about interpreting the past
in the eyes of the times?
A. It's part of the art of history that one learns. It's part of the methodology of doing history and history training programs,
but going to seminars and having classes in historical methods, by critically reviewing each other's articles and papers and
presentations, having your review subjected to the constructive criticism of peers and colleagues, other students. It's part of the
process of learning to do a field in much the same way that scientists in any field working on someone's laboratory pick up the
techniques of doing science. You learn by doing it and then if you are a chemist you have a laboratory conference each week
and presentations and meet with your adviser. It's this type of a process.
Q. Okay. And finally the fifth of the five principles of historical analysis.
A. This I would state specifically to history and medicine of science but I do think that it's important to have a correct and
accurate understanding of how scientific knowledge evolves. Recognizing that there are -- that incorrect ideas can be accepted,
that there can be resistance to good ideas or good in terms of what we today at the moment feel is correct. That the publication
of an article does not mean that people read it or believed it or even paid attention to that. For every step forward you have
steps laterally, you have steps backwards. The course of evolution is apparent only later on. Certainly it is not apparent at the
time. But it's crucial in my judgment for historians in medicine and science to have this sense of how scientific knowledge
and medical knowledge evolves.
Q. Is there anything that you would add to the principles of historical analysis? Obviously there is more to it than a five-minute
explanation.
A. As we speak now for this deposition those are the major principles that come to mind. Certainly there are more as you indicate,
more things to do in history and schools, historical interpretation and different approaches to different types of documents. The
question could generate a day-long, week-long discussion.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. I'm trying to avoid that.
A. I understand that. For purposes of my testimony I think that would be a fair first approximation.
Q. Those are the main areas?
A. To me at this time, right.
Q. Okay. The third paragraph of your expert statement reads “Dr. Ludmerer is also expected to testify about the state of medical
knowledge of smoking, cigarettes, disease and a possible relationship between cigarette smoking and disease in the United
States from the early 1900s to 1964.”
Let me, first of all, ask whether you have undertaken a review of scientific literature after 1964 in this area?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Is there any reason why you stopped at 1964?
A. Surgeon General's report.
Q. Okay. And what was the significance of the Surgeon General's report in terms of your describing that? Let me ask a different
question. Was it your decision to stop at 1964 or were you asked to stop at 1964?
A. I don't remember precisely how that came to be. Whose idea it was, if it was my idea and the attorneys at Arnold & Porter
agreed or conversely if they suggested the idea and I agreed but it made very good sense to me.
Q. And would it be fair to assume it made sense because of the Surgeon General's report that came out in 1964?
A. Yes.
Q. Are there other reasons?
A. No. The reason was the appearance of the Surgeon General's report. I am told, I'm not an expert in this, but I am told from the
legal standpoint that led to the preemption and duties to warn and things of that sort. I knew from my knowledge of secondary
sources that was a very, very important event; that it was a turning point in the study of tobacco so it made sense to me. I had
no problem with that. I also left open the possibility that through my research should I find any reason to question that date as
a stopping date that I wanted to feel free to bring that up; that I didn't feel bound to adhere to that date if circumstances should
change, but as I did my work, my initial sense of that, 1964 as a good stopping date was borne out.
Q. I'm sorry. If I understand correctly you still feel that 1964 is a good stopping point in terms of looking at the historical
question?
A. For my work.
Q. Okay.
A. I'm not an expert in the scientific debate after 1964. I do know that there were individuals in 1962 and '63 who maintained
that their canons of knowledge required experimental verification to determine. It wouldn't surprise me if they maintained after
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
1964 and wouldn't surprise me if they continued after 1964, but certainly that was a major event, major turning point, and I
thought it was very reasonable to do the study and stop at the time of the Surgeon General's report and that's what I did.
Q. In what ways did the Surgeon General's report represent a turning point?
A. I'm not sure I understand your question.
Q. Okay. You mentioned that -- I was asking what the significance of 1964 was and why that was chosen as a stopping point.
You mentioned the Surgeon General's report and you mentioned there was a turning point at this time in 1964 with regard to
the evolution of scientific knowledge regarding smoking and health.
A. Please understand that I am not an expert that I am not testifying post 1964 events.
Q. Right.
A. So my knowledge comes from secondary reading and the contextual reading I've done as part of this project, but I do
know that the Surgeon General's report led directly to the preemption requirements so that really brought to an end a 14-, 15-
year period of debate and I also know from my research that it was very important in terms of signifying the maturation of
epidemiology of chronic diseases as a discipline. So for both of those reasons at the time I viewed the Surgeon General's report
as extremely important and continue to do so.
MR. O'HARA: Before we go any further would you mind taking a short break.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Sure.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, before we continue on your disclosure statement, I just realized I had one follow up sort of
preliminary question. You mentioned that early on starting in around 1988 you undertook what you described as this thousand-
hour project reviewing secondary sources, primary sources, et cetera, looking at the historical perspective.
A. Correct.
Q. You also mentioned that from the beginning of this year you said you had spent roughly 80 to 100 hours on the Washington
case. Can you describe to me what you have done in that 80 to 100 hours in the Washington case to the best of your recollection.
A. Primarily I worked to get back to speed if you will on this material. I read some of the articles. I did not re-read all 1,200 to
1,400 articles but I looked at key articles. I read important secondary sources or reviewed more secondary sources I should say.
Looked at my affidavit, looked at articles that are pertinent to the affidavit. I re-read my testimony from the Cutler case, my
deposition from the Cipollone case, my deposition last year in the Mississippi case, things of that sort. There was one meeting
last week that I mentioned to you in Washington that was part of this. Those sorts of things to refresh myself and to get as up
to date as I could on the material that I originally worked on before.
Q. Essentially a review of your prior work in this area?
A. Correct.
Q. In this roughly 80 to 100 hours that you spent on the Washington State case do you recall whether you came across any
historical material that you not seen previous to your involvement in the State of Washington case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. No, not material.
Q. And I take it that your roughly 80 to 100 hours of work on the Washington State case did not involve anything post 1964;
is that correct?
A. Correct.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Do you mean primary sources or primary and secondary?
THE WITNESS: Mr. Rosenthal made an important clarification. Some of the materials that I have looked at were published
after 1964 but those would be secondary materials as I have defined them that pertained to the pre 1964 period.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Okay. But if I understand the distinction you haven't looked at any
A. Primary sources.
Q. -- scientific reports post 1964?
A. Right.
Q. I think I left off in the third paragraph of your disclosure statement which ends with the sentence “Specifically, he is expected
to testify that prior to the early 1950s there was no reliable scientific or medical evidence that cigarette smoking posed a serious
threat to the public health.”
First of all, let me ask you do you know whether there was any scientific or medical evidence that cigarette smoking posed a
serious threat to the public health prior to the early 1950s?
A. I would state for purposes of our discussion today I would make 1950 a turning point. Prior to 1950 there were a handful
of anecdotal case reports or people hypothesizing that cigarettes along with two or three dozen other items might be the cause.
That's really the extent of it. I might also indicate that there were two articles of better quality, not very good quality compared
with 1950 standards, good quality with regards to pre 1950 standards that were published in the German literature. One in
1939, one in 1943. They exist in the literature. I am unaware of any English speaking literature citing German medical studies
during World War II.
Q. Good point.
A. You can say it exists in the literature but there is no one I'm aware of that cited those studies at the time. The earliest citation
of those studies that I'm aware of in English speaking literature is in 1950.
Q. Okay.
A. But that's the extent of the art if you will in the published scientific literature prior to 1950.
Q. Okay. Just so I'm clear though you mentioned two German articles from '37 and '43?
A. 1939 and 1943 in the literature and are often cited today in this intellectual debate. Well, Mueller in 1939 and Schairer
Schoni??er in 1943 did this, but it did not have any effect in the English speaking scientific community at that time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. I see. Did the '39 and '43 articles suggest that smoking posed a serious threat to public health?
A. They suggested that there might be an association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. The evidence was not very
good. Even people who read those articles subsequently thought that they were not very good studies. I'm just saying that they
existed. They did not represent the high quality of evidence that was produced after 1950.
Q. What was it about any pre 1950 scientific articles regarding smoking and health which made them unreliable in general
terms? And I'm not asking you to focus on any specific article but just generally.
A. Well, in general terms I think your question has to be answered more broadly. Cancer was not understood in the 1930s and
'40s. It was considered a huge mystery. There was so little known about causes of cancers or mechanisms of cancer that a truism
in the scientific community at that time was if you want a career in science that will lead to a dead end go into cancer research.
This is before cell biology and molecular biology and all of the investigative, before clinical epidemiology, chronic diseases,
before the various investigative techniques that later became available.
There is a large volume of literature on lung cancer in the '30s and '40s. It's important to put this literature in context, to look
at it from the eyes of the time and not from today's eyes. Medical investigators like all investigators study questions that can
be answered. So the overwhelming thrust of the scientific work at that time on lung cancer was not on causation. It was on
the disease itself clinically. Is the disease increasing? Is this a perceived increase? Is this increase real or perceived? In fact,
one of the major investigative questions of the '30s and '40s, are we really seeing more lung cancer or do we just think we are
seeing it because of better diagnosis and things of that sort. People were trying to identify the natural history of cancer. That
is how it behaves, what part of the lung it begins in, various cell types, where it spreads, how it spreads, what are the clinical
symptoms, how do the clinical symptoms relate to where it is in the body, how does one diagn?? it. So lots of articles on x-rays,
on bronchoscopy and new technique. I don't remember precisely when bronchoscopy was introduced, sputum analysis and cell
type cytology. In the 1930s Dr. E.A. Graham did the first pneumonectomy for treatment of lung cancer. So there was a lot of
discussion about the best way and pneumonectomy, when you do surgery, when you do radiation, things of that sort. This is
the nature of the overwhelming body of medical and scientific literature on lung cancer prior to 1950.
It would be a mistake to take the handful of papers that I attempted to study and represent that as the dominant theme in cancer
research. It really wasn't because the issue of cause was such a difficult issue at that time in all cancer, not just lung cancer, and
similarly the comments that have been made about cause most of them did not come from papers on studies of cause of lung
cancer. Most of the comments that are made come from clinical descriptive studies. I have 100 patients with lung cancer and
this is their history and this is what they presented with and I did surgery and this is the result and there might be a sentence or
paragraph commenting on gee, cause is unknown. Or two dozen causes have been speculated and here they are but this was the
nature of the paper. It would be a mistake to give the impression that there was a large body of literature investigating cause of
lung cancer at that time. It really wasn't. Those are the exceptions because cancer itself is considered such a biological mystery.
Q. Okay. You mentioned that one of the questions that was being asked in the '30s and '40s was the question of whether there
actually was more lung cancer happening.
A. That's correct.
Q. Or whether it was just being diagnosed better or more frequently?
A. Right.
Q. Do you know whether there was ever scientific consensus that answered that question?
A. To the best of my knowledge a consensus did arise at or around 1954, '53, '54.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Can you describe for me what that consensus was.
A. The consensus was that the rise in lung cancer, are we seeing a real rise as opposed to an artifact of better diagnosis or
heightened awareness of the disease? That issue was put to rest, if you will, in the early '50s.
Q. Okay. Do you know whether there was medical consensus or scientific consensus as to what was causing that rise in lung
cancers?
A. I'm not certain I understand your question.
Q. If I understand your previous answer before, we talked about how one of the questions in being asked in the 1930s and '40s
concerned whether, in fact, there was more lung cancer that was happening as opposed to whether it was just more lung cancer
cases were being better diagnosed and better reported and you testified that there was a consensus in the early '50s that, in fact,
we were seeing more lung cancer cases. And now I'd like to know whether you know whether there was a consensus as to what
was causing that actual increase in the number of lung cancer cases that were actually happening at that time?
A. Well, this gets back to questions that you raised before about the Surgeon General's report stopping point with the report,
and I'd like to make certain that my understanding of the Surgeon General's report is clear.
My finding that I'm prepared to testify to is that there certainly was some controversy over this alleged relationship through
the 1964 Surgeon General's report. I have not studied systematically post 1964 though I have every reason to presume that
responsible minds were still open to the question. In fact, I know there were critical reviews by very reputable medical scientists
at the time the Surgeon General's report came out. I also know from the secondary literature, this is not my area of expertise,
that the Surgeon General's report was a turning point and that the heated public debate within the scientific community certainly
quieted down. One could call that a consensus, if you will, if you put in the qualification that does not necessarily mean that
every responsible scientist agreed. You'd have to look year by year to see what the evidence for and against was, what people
were saying, and I happen to know that not everyone was immediately persuaded by the Surgeon General's report and I also
would like to make certain that my comment about the Surgeon General's report state of knowledge wise is distinct from the
warning issue.
It occurred to me that I may have answered two things, two questions with one reply before. When you asked about the Surgeon
General's report, certainly I know from general reading and general information that it did lead to a failure to -- excuse me --
lead to a duty to warn and it was referring to debate ending it, was this a legal issue. The warning is there and people were
no longer to my knowledge as a nonexpert they weren't asking the question do we need to put labels on packages. I was not
referring to the scientific debate. Indeed I have read from my own investigation right around the time of the Surgeon General's
report there was skeptics. I don't know what happened after '64 but it would not surprise me if responsible people maintained
some of the same doubts after '64 that they had in December, 1963.
Q. Okay. If it makes you feel better I think that's how I took your earlier testimony.
A. Okay.
Q. I wasn't reading anything more into what you had to say about the Surgeon General's report ending the discussion about
warnings or federal preemption.
A. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Okay. I appreciate that explanation, but I'm not sure that I got an answer to the question as to whether you have an opinion
as to whether there was a consensus which formed as to the cause of the actual increase in lung cancer cases that were being
experienced in the '50s.
A. I thought I did answer it.
Q. I'm sorry. Perhaps you did.
A. No. I view the Surgeon General's report as a very important document because it reflected the maturation of the
epidemiology of chronic disease as a discipline. The debate was not just does cigarette smoking cause cancer. The debate was
is epidemiological evidence reliable. If you were not of the canon that viewed epidemiological evidence as reliable then you
weren't going to accept its finding on any issue, not just lung cancer in the Surgeon General's report. All scholars who have
studied the history of epidemiology as a turning point in terms of the maturation of the discipline and in terms of a predominance
of the scientific community being willing to accept epidemiological evidence as causation of chronic diseases in a way that
they weren't in the '50s or the early '60s. So you do have a change and visible overt protests quieted down. You don't have
the editorials.
So I read it from the secondary source. I'm not an expert post 1964 but secondary sources talk about the quieting down. That is
not to say that everyone agreed or that the case was wrapped shut, but there is a quieting down of the intensity of the debate.
Q. And did the 1964 Surgeon General's report list smoking as the cause for the actual rise in lung cancer that had been observed
over the '30s, '40s and '50s?
A. In 1964 the Surgeon General's report concluded that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer in men, not women, in men.
Q. And did the report conclude that cigarette smoking was a cause of the increase in actual lung cancer cases that were occurring
through the '30s, '40s and '50s?
A. Yes. It was the cause of lung cancer. Yes, it was relating the two.
Q. Okay.
A. But the language of the report did not focus on the question of is this real or perceived as I stated to you. Essentially what I
stated before that lung cancer was increasing. This increase had been noted for a while, but by the early 1950s the predominant
view was that this was a real increase. It makes that comment previously in this several hundred page report. It focused on
causation. So the language of the report states that cigarette smoking is a cause of cancer in men.
Q. Okay. The early 1950 reports to which you were referring with regard to the finding that this was an actual real increase in
lung cancer, did those reports list smoking as the cause of the actual increase?
A. To the best of my recollection that was separate literature.
Q. Okay. Do you know when that literature first began evolving?
A. Which literature?
Q. The literature which actually linked smoking to the actual increase in lung cancer cases being observed at the time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
A. I think we are saying the same thing. I would say that I would phrase it when did literature appear linking smoking with lung
cancer and that in my view 1950 was the major turning point with retrospective studies, several important retrospective studies.
Q. To the extent you can, picking the four or five most important studies that came out in the early '50s, if you could list those
for me. And I don't mean to limit you to four or five but those important ones that come to the top of your head.
A. Ultimately there were approximately 30, maybe even more. I don't remember precisely. But two or three studies that are
most frequently cited that were viewed at the time as seminal in terms of changing opinion were the Wynder and Graham study
in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1950. There was another paper in the same issue of the Journal of the
American Association by Dr. Levin. And then there was a very important study by Doll and Hill. There were others but those
are the three that are most frequently cited today and even more important that were at the time most commonly referred to.
Q. When did the Doll and Hill study come out?
A. They had a number of papers and studies, but the first study to my best recollection was also 1950. This is the reason that
I say that 1950 was a very important turning point, if you will, in the evolution of our understanding and if I were to make
any amendment at all to this statement I would say instead of prior to the 1950s I'd say prior to 1950. I would use that as the
turning point.
Q. Now, the fourth paragraph of the disclosure statement again refers to these early 1950 medical and scientific articles appearing
and the second sentence reads “He is further expected to testify that these articles primarily concerned statistical studies, which
were not considered sufficient under prevailing medical and scientific standards to prove that cigarette smoking caused lung
cancer or any other disease.” And I think we have spent a little bit of time talking about that, but I'd like to focus on what it
was about statistical studies, what made them be considered sufficient under prevailing medical and scientific standards at the
time? That was a very poorly worded question.
A. Well, I'm glad you asked that question because it illustrates that if someone is to be fair and if one is to be honest, you have
to immerse yourself in the context of the times. 1950s represent the combination of roughly 500 years, 500 years in which the
canons and medical research demonstrate causation requires some type of experimental verification. They were useful but there
were all sorts of witticisms about the fallacies of statistics, the biases of statistics. If you don't have good data to begin with
then statistical analysis will give you bad analysis. Statistical association not being the same thing as a causation or linking.
You have associations for all sorts of quirky reasons.
It was the canon, and I think that's the correct use of the term, the canon that to demonstrate causation of the disease requires
experimental evidence. Certainly the new studies were intriguing, got people thinking as well they should have even under the
standard of the time, but the time was being immersed in the five century tradition of requiring experimental evidence to be
able to draw conclusions.
Q. And what do you mean by experimental evidence? Is that like taking tar from cigarette smoke and painting it on the back
of mice, that type of thing?
A. Well, that would be an experiment although that would be an incorrect experiment because critics would say well, you have
shown tar produces something on the skin of mice. You haven't shown it produces lung cancer. It would mean that some type
of experimental observations on either animals or humans would be necessary to indicate that a certain agent was the cause of
the disease. If you want to show that diabetes arises from lack of insulin that's produced in hylic cells in the pancreas, well, you
could do experiments in animals, take out the hylas. Koch's Postulates for Infectious Disease were the most prominent examples
but one could go on and on. We often think of the experimental studies as requiring animals but that was not necessarily true.
Animal studies could produce information on causation but so could human studies. If you took human beings and deprived
them of vitamin C, citrus fruit, individuals would develop scurvy and then if you gave them citrus fruit they would get well.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
That would be experimental confirmation that there is something in citrus fruit which lack of causes scurvy and giving it will
cure scurvy even if you didn't know what that was.
So I think that the most important and frequently discussed standard was Koch's Postulates for Infectious Diseases that become
the gold standard. But throughout medical literature scientific medicine was experimental medicine as demonstrated by Claude
Barnard's classic book from the 19th century, “An Introduction to Scientific Medicine.” What comes true, what is scientific. It
is a five-century tradition of seeking verifiable, experimental evidence to be able to draw conclusions about causation. Other
types of observations are useful but they are not the gold standard if you will.
Q. Okay. Do you have an opinion as to when these types of statistical studies which first began appearing in the 1950s, when
that method of scientific research began to be more well accepted in the scientific and medical community?
A. I'm sorry. I didn't quite follow.
Q. I'd like to find out if you have an opinion as to if there came a time that these statistical type of studies that you earlier referred
to coming out in the early '50s, Wynder and Graham, Levin and Doll and Hill, whether that -- not the studies themselves but
that type of statistical analysis in looking at a medical problem if that became accepted?
A. I would call that the epidemiology of chronic diseases. That's what I was referring to before when I made comments about
paradigm and paradigm bibliography. One has a new scientific field created at this time that has to establish itself and mature
and demonstrate its power if you will. It didn't happen in one stroke. It evolved. One set of discoveries and techniques leads to
new questions and study techniques are developed. The field evolved from the early '50s through the mid '60s. I would say by
the middle '60s you have an acceptance among most people outside of that epidemiology that there is something to this new
discipline and that I would say that maturation culminates in the mid '60s. You didn't have textbooks of the clinical epidemiology
before then. You didn't have journals devoted to epidemiology of chronic disease before then. These things started appearing
in the mid '60s. You don't find the beginning of this field until 1950. You find the early maturation of it in the 1960s. As I
said before it doesn't necessarily mean that everyone who was told of experimental canons accepted it, but you find a turning
point in the attitude in the field establishing itself. The field of clinical epidemiology grew out of the smoking, lung cancer and
cigarette controversy. So the two go hand in hand with each other.
Q. Do you have an opinion as to when a majority of those involved in the medical and scientific community looked at the
question of smoking and when a majority of those people began to first accept statistical and epidemiological studies?
A. Well, you have to understand that this is an evolutionary process. This gets back to comments I made about methodology
and understanding how science works. It would be in error to say there is a paper and people read it right away and accept it.
When you have a new concept particularly something as large and as encompassing as a new canon of truth which is by
definition going to create controversy and debate that ultimately becomes accepted as the general body of epidemiology did.
You always have someone who takes the first step and then people in the middle and then toward the end. Reputable, honest,
nothing biased. Some people want more proof. Maybe they are more committed to the earlier explanation this is displacing. So
it's an evolutionary process. I would say that by the late 1950s you have had quite a number of important studies of different
types being done that have prospective as well as retrospective studies and you find people in the scientific community at large
taking not only the findings on lung cancer but the field of epidemiology itself very seriously as witnessed by the number of
statements that were taken by responsible scientific organizations, Public Health Service and American Cancer Society. It's the
late '50s you saw that statement. So clearly you have people who are not only accepting the evidence in particularly lung cancer
but they are accepting that epidemiological evidence volume. But there is an evolution year by year more information came.
There was studies done in the 1960s that were not available in 1959. More evidence comes in and you find people year by year
who are a little more accepting of the idea. Quite frankly putting this in the context of Thomas Kuhn's scientific revolutions.
It is less that people change their minds. It is more that individuals who have strict adherence of experimental methods and
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
experimental constancy either retired or died. This is a major point from the structure of scientific revolution. Historians of
science who have studied revolutions often we have one paradigm replacing the other. It is less that opponents were persuaded.
It's that despite that it went on 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 years and finally opposition died off and you have new people. And the same
kind of thing happened with clinical epidemiology.
Q. Understanding that the scientific revolution that you've been describing is and has been an evolution process, can you pick
a time during the course of that evolutionary process where the majority of scientists and medical experts began accepting the
statistical and epidemiological studies linking smoking to disease?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection. That's vague. What do you mean by began to accept?
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) When did they first accept it? When a majority of those people first accepted it.
A. From my perspective as a historian there are premises to your question that are not exactly correct.
Q. Okay.
A. But majorities are often wrong. I don't want to allow us to fall into the trap of hindsight because we accept clinical
epidemiology today that by definition anyone that accepted the view in the '50s was heroic and anyone who didn't was some
sort of retard.
Q. Right. I certainly don't mean to be implying any value judgments.
A. But I think for the record someone that's read it would like it to be stated that the majority is not correct. That ideas evolve.
That sometimes a consensus view is shown to be incorrect. All sorts of things can happen and that the prior existence of the
majority, minority view does not mean the consensus is there. If you have a 75-25 vote that does not mean a consensus, only
that scientists in that 25 percent and 75 percent are treating their arguments seriously. So these types of qualifications should
be brought before. But the question you are asking is part of my testimony, that the studies of the 1950s shocked people at the
time suggesting that this popular, seemingly innocuous, agent was harmful and people began to be worried and more evidence
is accumulated and more people year by year are switching on the view. It's very difficult to know precise numbers, but the
Surgeon General in the late 1950s at that time estimated, well, essentially described the debate in the scientific community. He
estimated that perhaps 75 percent accepted the hypothesis, 25 percent did not in the late '50s. That seems a reasonable estimate
from what I have seen. Surgeon General Bernie also emphasized the point that there is much we don't know about this. That
the hypothesis could be wrong and we need to know much more. That individuals who have not accepted this are among the
most eminent and responsible scientists in the nation so I would not call that a consensus. But by the late '50s you have more
who are saying, who are accepting the hypothesis than were rejecting but a controversy was going on.
Q. I understand. The hypothesis to which you are referring what hypothesis is that?
A. Cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
Q. Okay. If we remove -- and I know that the two are probably interlinked in a way that maybe makes it unfair to remove one
from the other, but if we remove the question of causal links of smoking to lung cancer and just the question of scientific, valid
statistical and epidemiological studies, do you have an opinion as to whether there may be a time when such studies, when
there was a consensus? Let me try it again.
Do you have an opinion as to whether there ever became evolved a consensus that these types of studies were scientifically
valid, epidemiological and statistical studies?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object. What do you mean by scientifically valid?
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Do you understand the question?
A. Perhaps it would be better to rephrase.
Q. Sure. I'm trying to find out whether there came a time not looking at the question of whether smoking cigarettes causes
lung cancer, but just looking at scientific evolution we have talked about this morning that you have explained prior to 1950
people needed the empirical, observable, experimental scientific data. Then we began to start seeing statistical epidemiological
studies which gained in acceptance. Did there come a time when a consensus was formed that these types of studies were
scientifically valid?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to the form. It's vague.
THE WITNESS: What does that mean? What am I supposed to do?
MR. ROSENTHAL: You can answer.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) To the extent you understand my question. If there is something I can do to try to rephrase I'll be happy to.
A. Recognizing that the consensus can be wrong and that responsible scientists may be in disagreement with the consensus
from secondary literature that I've read pertaining to the history of clinical epidemiology, the Surgeon General's report was
an important turning point by virtue of its clarification of the five criteria, consistency, temporal relation and so forth that one
needed if one was to use epidemiological evidence to draw conclusions about causality. That was an important turning point in
the maturation of the epidemiology of chronic diseases in terms of persuading investigators who are not epidemiologists that
there was something to this in the field and so forth. Now, as I said a tried and true ??oxicologist may not have accepted that
even if his colleagues at the medical school are starting to teach it to the students. But it was certainly an important turning
point in terms of bringing recognition to this new field. I don't think it's an accident that journals with the term epidemiology
in their name only began to appear after that report. That the first textbooks began to appear after that and so forth.
Q. So would it be fair then to say that at the time of the 1964 surgeon general's report there existed a consensus in the medical
and scientific community that epidemiology and statistical studies were scientifically valid methods of undergoing medical
research?
A. I would say it would be more accurate to say that in the aftermath of the report, not at the time. In the aftermath you have
to remember that the report made a contribution. People were confused at the time of the report. The reason that the Surgeon
General did a study was so there was no confusion and it was debated by people of good will, among responsible people. So I
think the comments you have made, the phraseology at the time or before I think definitely has to be moved afterwards. I think
that it's very important to recognize that the Surgeon General's report made a major contribution to the development of clinical
epidemiology as a field by putting together the five criteria which clearly evolved out of earlier work but to my knowledge have
now been stated precisely and until that point. And one finds a general acceptance of clinical epidemiology as a new discipline
that has validity following that including among investigators who themselves were not epidemiologists but who were willing
to say that its techniques were valid. As I've stated this does not mean that everyone would have agreed but there was editorials
both ways and the public debate certainly quieted down after that.
Please remember that my expertise is events through the Surgeon General's report so insofar as a number of the questions that
you have asked it really dealt with issues that dealt with the aftermath of the report. I really do not have the expertise to comment
on that as an expert and I'm not going to be testifying after 1964 to the best of my knowledge.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Okay. Now, the last sentence on the first page of your disclosure statement reads “He is also expected to express the opinion
that this bona fide controversy continued at least up to the publication of the report of the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee
in 1964.”
And keeping in mind your previous statement that '64 is your cut off --
A. Right.
Q. -- is it -- do you not have an opinion as to for how long that controversy continued after 1964?
A. I don't have an expert opinion on that. I have not reviewed it. I have not systematically gone through the literature. January
'64, March '64, 1965 and 1966 I have not followed forward.
Q. Okay. During the course of your work as a medical professor and a medical doctor not looking at what you've done in regards
to tobacco litigation, but just in the course of your work as a medical doctor and professor, have you come across any scientific
reports post 1964 which concern a causal link between smoking and disease?
A. I have not followed the literature closely.
Q. Have you seen any reports?
A. I have read newspaper accounts of something of discoveries of something a year or two ago about some chain link with lung
cancer but I'm not an expert. But actually through secondary literature I do know that evidence continued to come out which
illustrates how real the questions were in '64.
For example, Ronald Fisher was a strong advocate of the constitutional hypothesis of a genetic cause. He suggested certain
types of genetic studies be done that had not been done at the time of the Surgeon General's report but that was just another
reason that the question in the minds of some was unanswered. I read in papers that some of the studies that he suggested were
published in the 1980s and studies were done and published in the 1980s. Questions that he had in the '60s were answered in the
1980s but these are anecdotal. I have really not studied, you know, the literature post 1964. I have no expert testimony post 1964.
Q. Okay. Understanding that you don't have any expert testimony post 1964, do you have a personal opinion as to whether there
exists today controversy about whether smoking is injurious to public health?
A. I don't know whether I do. I'm not an expert in controversy and state of the art and who is accepting what view and who is
still demanding the experimental view. Certainly I do know it's the common teaching and epidemiological evidence is good.
As I stated since my medical school days I was taught that epidemiological methods are valid and I accepted that and I have a
personal view that evidence is good. But I am really not in a position to be able to comment on the controversy today and who
agrees and who doesn't and what grounds there are for agreeing with it and what grounds there are for disagreeing with it and
who disagrees and for what reasons. I do not have an expert opinion on that.
Q. Okay. And you don't have a personal opinion on that; is that correct?
A. None that I could say with the validity.
Q. Okay.
A. I'm here to speak as an expert over what I can talk about, not to render personal opinions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Continuing on the second page of your expert disclosure, first full paragraph reads “Dr. Ludmerer is also expected to testify
how this controversy was addressed by public health officials.”
Why don't we stop there and if you could summarize for me. And now we are talking pre 1964 how the controversy regarding
smoking and health was addressed by public health officials.
A. In essence we have discussed it already.
Q. Okay. I thought perhaps we had.
A. That some groups began to make statements about the public health risk of cigarette smoking in the late '50s. Surgeon
General Bernie had a mild statement in 1957, somewhat stronger statement in 1959 and, of course, Dr. Terry because of all the
confusion that was reigning ordered the advisory committee to be established and do its work and the 1964 Surgeon General's
report was published and concluded as mentioned that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and it had other conclusions, of
course, but that's the outline and essence of my testimony in that paragraph.
Q. The next sentence reads “Dr. Ludmerer is expected to describe the creation of the Surgeon General's advisory committee
and the publication of the first Surgeon General's report in 1964.”
First of all, let me ask you what were the circumstances surrounding the creation of the Surgeon General's advisory committee?
A. Well, to the best of my knowledge there was controversy on an issue of great importance to the public health with growing
concern that among responsible people there was substance to this group epidemiology and well done epidemiological studies
needed to be treated seriously but at the same time responsible eminent people who were deeply troubled by the hole in the
evidence, either the hole in the evidence such as the lack of experimental evidence or who were unwilling to accept that
epidemiological evidence was valid in the first place, who thought that it would be imprudent to act too quickly and risk being
wrong in something that is as important to the economy and culture as cigarette smoking. How do you make sense of this.
So he organized his ten-person committee, none of whom had taken public positions on the tobacco issues so, hence, were
not advocates or proponents of any particular view. They came from a variety of disciplines. It's my understanding that it was
a committee that was at least going into the study favorable to the tobacco industry in that they knew who was on that and
who was not. I do not know the details of that but it was not done to spite them. They participated and they did a thorough
conscientious review of the world literature perspectives, chemical studies, toxicological studies and so forth.
Included in their analysis which began sometime in 1962, and the report was published in January, 1964, included in this
analysis was a considerable amount of material that was new in the '60s that was not available to scientists or public health
groups in '57 or '59 or even in '62. And they published their report in January with the inclusions that we know.
Q. Based upon the historical review you've done in this case and other tobacco-related cases do you have a percentage of those
in the medical community who in 1964 accepted the statistical and epidemiological studies which were linking smoking to
lung cancer?
A. No.
Q. So we can't say it's 75 percent or 80 percent?
A. Not with accuracy. The only quantitative measurements that I'm aware of was the estimate of Surgeon General Bernie in the
late 1950s that it was 75-25 among scientific experts. There are also innumerable statements that the profession more broadly
was more skeptical; that 60 percent of physicians are still smoking. So much of this quantitative, the quantitative answer to the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
question that you are asking in part depends who are you talking about, the physician taking care of patients, the epidemiologist,
the scientific community? More broadly that includes it.
Q. I guess I would narrow my question to the scientific community.
A. If someone is looking at the scientific community the only quantitative estimate that I'm aware of as I said Surgeon General
Bernie in the late '50s maybe it was 75-25, putting aside the fact that you have to take into account who these people are. If you
have one Michael Jordan on your team that's equal to a lot of ordinary basketball players. So to equate it simply by the numbers
would be incorrect especially in view of the fact that the greatest scientific figures in this controversy were those that opposed
the cigarette hypothesis. It's a very important point. The greatest scientific figures, the most eminent scientists, were those who
did not accept the hypothesis which caused everyone a great deal of doubt.
Q. We are talking about the late '50s at this time?
A. Through the early '60s, through 1964.
Q. Again I don't mean to limit you to a few but if you could to the best of your recollection list off some names of those most
eminent scientists who disbelieved this epidemiological evidence that was coming out.
A. Well, there were a variety. There was Dr. Horsefall who in 1962 became director of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Scientific
Institute. According to Dr. Wynder, I believe it was Frank Horsefall at a cocktail party in 1962 and tells Dr. Wynder, and Dr.
Horsefall has a cigarette in his hand, that he believes that Dr. Wynder is being irresponsible. The epidemiological evidence
is not valid. That he would find his role at Sloan Kettering to be diminished. That would be one example in my judgment as
a historian of science. And by far the order of magnitude, Michael Jordan versus ordinary college players, by far the greatest
scientific figure was Ronald Fisher who was one of the eminent theoretical biologists of the 20th century who had training
in biology in a fashion similar to Einstein's training in physics who was a disbeliever of the smoking hypothesis, who had
suspicions of epidemiological evidence. There weren't as many Fishers as ordinary epidemiologists. Fisher was of such stature
that his concerns carried a great deal of weight and a great deal of controversy. For sake of time I would identify Fisher as being
by far the most significant figure in the controversy.
Q. Any other eminent scientists who at this time believed the smoking hypothesis who are worthy of mention?
A. Joseph Berkson was considered the most eminent statistician in the United States at that time. He was another who was
skeptical of the evidence so his suspicions, too, were very disturbing to medical scientists at the time. I do not consider
Berkson to be -- Berkson was an outstanding statistician. I don't consider him to have the stature that Fisher did. He was the
leading statistician in the country. The other experimentalists at the National Cancer Institute primarily because they were
experimentalists. This is how they were brought up professionally and scientifically and they just did not accept evidence of
causation that was not experimentally based. One can find individual scientists of different schools and different institutes. Just
to give an idea of the range, Dr. Hueper also at the National Cancer Institute, he's a significant person to mention because he
was an epidemiologist. It's not just experimentalists versus the epidemiologists but there was considerable controversy within
that community in this time, the '50s and early '60s. There was the concerns of the theoretical statisticians whose method was
the foundation of clinical epidemiology. Hueper was a good epidemiologist. He was concerned about smoking. It was his
view that the risks of smoking quantitatively were much less important as a cause than the risks of atmospheric pollution and
environmental exposures, particularly environmental occupational exposure from chemical industries and places like that. So
he focused his considerable energies on environmental and occupational factors as opposed to tobacco.
Q. Again not trying to limit you or test your memory of this, any other eminent scientists who disbelieved the hypothesis that
are worthy of mention or come to mind?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
MR. ROSENTHAL: Objection. It's compound.
THE WITNESS: There were others. An eminent statistician Yerushalmy. I don't know the spelling. Yerushalmy. I know a
number of the most eminent pathologists were skeptical of the relationship. So I would have to check my notes to give you
specific names. These weren't experimentalists. These weren't statisticians, these weren't epidemiologists, but it's another line
of medical inquiry. Many of the prominent pathologists were suspicious and many of the clinical investigators, the surgeons
and cancer experts doing clinical studies who were taking care of cancer patients in therapy practice and then studying the
patients were unpersuaded by the evidence simply because only a portion of smokers developed lung cancer and they had so
many smokers who never developed it. There is something wrong here despite the statistics.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) During the course of your historical analysis of all these medical articles and scientific articles coming out
at the time did you ever come across any information which informed you of who was funding the research that was going
on behind these articles?
A. Only insofar as courses of funding were commonly published in articles. It is common practice as I'm sure you know to have
a scientific article and funding. My information extended to whoever the funder is or several funders as it's often on the articles.
I did not systematically review who funded Dr. Wynder and who funded, you know, Dr. Green and so forth.
Q. Okay. So would you have an opinion one way or the other if you just looked at the body of scientists at this time period, late
'50s, early '60s who disbelieved the smoking hypothesis, would you have an opinion one way or another as to the percentage
of those scientists whose research was funded by the tobacco industry?
A. I have no knowledge as we speak of by which I can answer your question as stated. I could not tell you what percentage of
proponents were funded by tobacco, what percentage of opponents were funded by tobacco. I can tell you that, number one,
what counts in research is quality of idea, not who the funding agency is. Number two, I can tell you by having picked up
the papers and read them that quite a number of articles from different disciplines that were supportive of the hypothesis that
tobacco was dangerous were funded by the TARC. I can also tell you that many articles were funded not only by the TARC but
by the American Cancer Society, by the US Public Health Service, by other reputable agencies at the same time. So if you were
to take a given article as I saw just this week, for example, in my review that would be co-funded by the TARC and American
Cancer Society or co-funded by TARC and the US Public Health Service. If one were to be proving or disproving the TARC
would have to have the same comments about the American Cancer Society and US Public Health Service because many of
these were jointly funded. So whatever wisdom or lack of that the TARC demonstrated was not equaled by these other agencies.
Q. Do you have any opinion or have you drawn any conclusions regarding the extent to which tobacco industry funding of
scientific research contributed to the controversy about smoking and helped if it, in fact, contributed to it at all?
A. Not really because I have not systematically related a report to the funding agency. I do know that many of the most important
studies were funded wholly or in part by tobacco money. I do know that many of the studies that were used as evidence that
cigarettes are dangerous were funded by the tobacco industry but I can't give percentages. I have not really analyzed it. That's
a qualitative impression. It's not a quantitative impression. I have not systematically analyzed the data in that fashion.
Q. Okay.
A. But my overall qualitative impression of the 1950s and 1960s period I have examined is that funding that I am aware of that
was entered by the tobacco companies was done in a responsible fashion.
Q. Okay.
A. And I am not aware of any that was done irresponsibly.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
MR. O'HARA: Why don't we take a short break.
(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, I would just like to take a little bit of time and go through the documents that have been
produced in the State of Washington case in preparation for your deposition and it is not my intent to ask a lot of substantive
questions about these documents with perhaps one or two exceptions that we'll get to. I'd like to introduce them into the record
and have you identify them for me so we are clear on the record.
A. Certainly.
Q. I will represent to you this stack represents all the documents and now I have made a copy of the documents that were
forwarded to Hagens & Berman from Edell, White in Seattle which they identified as your reliance materials. First, your
bibliography. Why don't we go ahead and mark this.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1225 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) This is Exhibit 1225. Could you just describe to me what Exhibit 1225 is.
A. Yes. It represents the bibliography of sources that I consulted in the fall of 1988 when I was doing my review of the secondary
literature of materials relevant to the understanding of the history of lung cancer and used concerning its cause as well as the
history of our scientific understanding of the health effects of tobacco. This was the first stage of the research project as I
described it to you in my review of the secondary sources. This is a list of the sources that I consulted at that time.
Q. Okay. We'll keep it just that simple.
MR. O'HARA: If you could mark that as the next exhibit.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1226 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, if you could take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1226 and explain
to me what this quite lengthy document is.
A. This is my annotated bibliography of the world's primary literature from the period 1960 to January, 1964. My primary
literature. I mean primary scientific literature published at the time on the subjects that I mentioned to you earlier, lung cancer,
bronchogenic cancer, cigarettes, smoking. Would it be helpful if I were to elaborate?
Q. Sure, if you would just briefly.
A. Because I happen to have a yellow note pad with me.
Q. I think you described some of this earlier in today's testimony.
A. Everyone has their quirks and idiosyncracies. I do much of my work on these 5 by 8 yellow note pads, using green number
two leaded Washington University pencils. So I went to the library, the medical library, and picked up issues year by year of
index medicus which is the review to the medical literature. I looked up topics under the four categories that I named for you
on pads just like this. I wrote down the full citation to the article. There are usually two or three articles per page. Then after
generating the bibliography, and I believe I generated the entire bibliography first, then I would go through the stacks at the
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
library and track down the articles, read the articles. My comments about them are the assessment of the articles I had at the
time, what they did, what they were claiming, what they were all about. So it's an annotated bibliography. I did not make copies
of these articles in the great majority of instances but I made comments on them and this is my record.
Q. Okay. Now, is there any significance to the order of the bibliography? Is it chronological or the order in which you came
across the articles?
A. Largely chronological. It gets a little bit out of order because, for example, I would look at lung cancer and the articles would
be listed I believe alphabetically in lung cancer. That would be out of order a little bit. So there might be a January, 1960 and
a December, 1960 right after each other so they are out of order a little bit in terms of day by day, week by week, month by
month appearance. On the other hand, these are generally in order chronologically by year.
Q. Okay. And no other particular significance I take it to the order?
A. No, none at all.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1227 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) If you would take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1227 and describe for me what
this document is.
A. This document is the bibliography to the expert report prepared by Dr. Harris for the Cipollone case. As I mentioned
somewhere in that project more toward the first half than the second half I reviewed Dr. Harris' report and not only did I read
the report but I read the sources that he relied upon to see for myself how well his interpretations and conclusions were based
on the evidence that he cited and how accurately he cited them. And so I went through the articles and again have annotated
comments about the articles. The bibliography is that of Dr. Harris. The comments are mine.
Q. Right. I understand that. I might have been able to think of a clever question or two about your comments but largely I can't
read them so I won't ask you any questions.
A. If you wish to read them Mark Edell has my originals. He has never returned them.
Q. Okay. We might follow up on that.
MR. GARNICK: Let me clarify that if I may. The originals were given to Mr. Edell as part of the Cipollone or the Haynes case.
I can't remember which one. But I know that Mr. Motley had then became counsel of record in Haynes. Maybe he got access to
the materials and Cipollone. I don't know. Sharing between Cipollone and Haynes. They were given to plaintiff's counsel though
in the Cipollone or the Haynes case and for all I know, and I don't know one way or the other, Mr. Motley might have access
to them and I did write a letter to Mr. Edell some years ago asking for the return of the originals and they were not returned.
THE WITNESS: I am unable to provide you copies of better quality than you have because those are the copies that I am
now limited to.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) You never undertook to type up your comments?
A. No.
MR. GARNICK: I would ask that if you do get access to the originals, after you review them to whatever extent that you want
to if you would ultimately return them to Dr. Ludmerer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) I'd be happy to see if I can track the originals down and if we are successful in doing so we'll get them
back to you.
A. I appreciate that.
MR. O'HARA: Mark this as the next exhibit.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1228 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) If you could take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1228, sir, and explain for me
what this document is.
A. This document is analogous to document 1226. The distinction between the two is that this is an annotated bibliography of
articles in the published medical literature from 1930 to 1950 versus item 1226 which is 1960 to January, 1964. Same comments
apply, same methodology, same approach.
Q. So nothing significant about the ordering of the articles that you are listing?
A. Correct. You will find that once again roughly a year by year approach and there are items in here that are not year by year
and frankly I cannot explain at this time.
Q. Well, I won't ask you to.
A. Yes.
MR. O'HARA: This is the next.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1229 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, if you could take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1229 and explain
to me what this document is. I think from your explanation of the other ones I could probably guess.
A. Same comments for the period 1950 to 1959.
Q. That's what I thought. Again I take it no significance to the ordering of the documents?
A. Correct.
MR. O'HARA: This is the next.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1230 was marked by the reporter for identification.).
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) If you could take a look at what the court reporter has marked 1230 which is entitled supplemental
bibliography and explain what that document is.
A. At some point after completing my initial systematic study as I described to you I did a little bit of follow up, cleaning up
and found a few additional sources. This bibliography lists those additional sources that I found after going through a year
by year. Specifically after completing the 1960 to 1964 bibliography. There were different things from different times, both
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
primary sources and secondary sources that I encountered. It is possible that there is some duplication between this list and the
earlier bibliographies. I did not systematically examine new sources to see if I had seen them before and just forgotten or if I
actually was encountering them for the first time so it's a supplemental bibliography. As you can see from the titles there of
these 31 sources many of them are primary sources, British Journal of Cancer, 1952, for example. There are a few secondary
sources as well. Burnham, “American Physicians and Tobacco Use” from the Bulletin of the History of Medicine which was
published in 1989 which was after I began my work but I thought it was important and wanted to include it. Vandenbroucke,
“Those Who Were Wrong,” American Journal of Epidemiology was published as secondary source but came out either during
or whenever I completed my initial research and I added that to it. I see from the list that certain materials from depositions
and trials was sent to me. As I told you before I had access to those. I saw those. So they are included on this list. They were
put together primarily to assure that if I were to be a witness that the plaintiff would have a total and complete indication of
anything that I had looked at.
Q. Okay. I appreciate that. Just out of curiosity in number one, Vandenbroucke's “Those Who Were Wrong” --
A. Yes.
Q. -- do you recall that article?
A. Yes.
Q. Who was wrong?
A. The point of that article is to indicate how important it is to -- for those who would use history properly and to do history
properly to put yourself into the context of the time and not judge the past by present standards. The central message of that
paper is that those who were wrong, the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer by current understanding, the
Fishers, the Berksons, people of that sort, at the time had extraordinary powerful arguments pointing out weaknesses in the
hypothesis and if we hadn't known the quote, unquote outcome we would look at those as exemplars of how literature should
be analyzed religiously, critically, constructively.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1231 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Sir, if you would take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1231 and explain what this
document is.
A. This document is my paradigm bibliography, an item that I had referred to earlier this morning. As I mentioned in the process
of doing my study it became clear to me that the controversy was less does cigarette smoking cause lung cancer; it was much
more what canons of proof will we accept and do we demand to draw conclusions about chronic diseases. And this paradigm
shift as I've called from experimental data to the epidemiology of chronic disease and to help understand that term better I put
together this paradigm. It includes sources that -- secondary sources that study the evolution of epidemiology as signs pointing
out the maturation in the mid '60s, not before. Also I put it in the context of scientific revolutions in my judgment. This was
a major scientific revolution. I would draw your attention to item 31 Thomas Kuhn, “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions”
which I mentioned also this morning but this was the bibliography that I read and consulted at the time I developed that aspect
of my understanding of the issues.
Q. Now, just looking at the dates of some of these documents is it fair to assume that some of these are primary sources, others
are secondary?
A. Which document are you referring to?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. This one.
A. The paradigm?
Q. Yes, the paradigm.
A. These are primary, secondary sources.
Q. Okay.
A. There a few primary sources but most of them are secondary. Scanning it very quickly I do see a reference or two or three
that I would consider primary but the majority of them I would define as secondary. They all are published.
Q. Okay.
A. For example, number 30, Robert Keogh, “New Criteria for Causality” which is precisely the point I have been making all
morning long. I would consider that a primary source. It was a well articulated statement from people at the time recognizing
that a major shift in viewpoint had occurred. Something like Thomas Kuhn's “Structure of Scientific Revolution” would clearly
be a secondary source. So they are both primary and secondary sources in here.
Q. Now, here is an example of where I'm probably not understanding your testimony and asking a dumb question, but if I
understand you correctly you had not reviewed any primary sources after 1964; is that correct?
A. Correct.
Q. But --
A. For the most part but a lot of the secondary sources obviously were written back to back, after or before. Secondary sources
can be from before 1964 and may have read a history of cancer causation or history of scientific attitudes or cancer causation
that may have been published earlier. Secondary sources can range over the dates.
Q. And a lot of secondary sources are after 1964?
A. Many are after, correct, and some secondary sources are before 1964. For example, Thomas Kuhn's classic book on the
“Structure of Scientific Revolutions” was published in 1962. I would define it as a secondary source.
Q. Okay.
A. Most of them, in fact, looking at this quickly all of the sources after 1964 are secondary sources. Lilienfeld involving the
case control study that was a historical study. Anthony Atkinson and Stephen Fienberg, editors, “A Celebration of Statistics,”
ISI Centenary Volume, 1985, that was clearly a secondary source. Without taking the time to look at these carefully every post
1964 date that I see is a secondary source.
Q. Okay. Could you explain to me -- I think what I'm having a hard time struggling with can you explain to me what it is about
secondary sources, which as I understand it prevent you from providing opinion testimony, as to what consensus may or may
not have existed after 1964?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object. What do you mean by consensus?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) I'm referring to consensus in the medical community or scientific community regarding a link between
smoking and lung cancer and disease.
A. Expertise, authority and honesty in history as in any other field require doing it yourself. Certainly the secondary sources
are important. They are important in proportion to the quality of the author as well as the quality of the study. As I've been
mentioning through the morning I learned a considerable amount from secondary sources. I usually precede any of my own
archival work or searching primary sources until I became familiar with, if not all, of the pertinent secondary literature so I
treat the secondary literature very importantly, but everyone is writing about the issue from their own perspective with different
questions. If I am to draw my own conclusion about the debates and knowledge in 1979 or '89 or 1998 in the same fashion
that I did from the earlier period I would need to review primary evidence in the same fashion that I did for the period I'm
testifying on. To my knowledge none of the sources that I read did that. They may have opinions about the post 1964 period.
They may have had a few selected items but as I indicated before if one is to comment on the state of the art when they should
be comprehensive and thorough, read either all of the literature or read it in a systematic fashion. None of these authors had
done that as you are describing for state of the art. They might have opinions based on a handful of things from someone else.
They hadn't nailed it down. Had they nailed it down I could have relied on it. None of them nailed it down in the fashion that
I had earlier. It was not my area to do it myself.
Q. Okay. Do you plan on conducting a review of primary sources post 1964 any time from now until the time of the trial in
the State of Washington case?
A. As far as I'm aware, no.
Q. Would it be possible to conduct such a review?
A. When is Washington scheduled for trial?
Q. September.
A. It would be very difficult.
Q. If you put your life on hold, right?
A. Right.
Q. Do you have any kind of estimate on the number of hours you would expect it to take you to conduct a review of the primary
sources from 1964 to the present based upon what you've
A. Many thousands.
Q. Many thousands of hours?
A. I'm basing that knowing that it took me roughly a thousand hours in a two-year period 1998 and 1989 to conduct my study
for pre 1964 and knowing that the volume of articles has increased. There are many more articles in more recent years and
decades than there were at the time. I suppose one could do it in fewer hours if you were to systematically do it and say I'll just
read every fifth article or every tenth article. That may or may not be acceptable. I don't know.
Q. Okay.
A. But it would be a more daunting task to do it for more recent years simply because of the number of articles.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
MR. O'HARA: Could you mark this as the next exhibit.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1232 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, if you could lake a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1232 which is
entitled additional bibliography. If you can describe this document for me.
A. This is a document with additional significance to document 1230 entitled supplemental bibliography. The difference
between the two is when these bibliographies were put together. From my personal involvement as an expert witness and
consultant it's been personally important to me since I stand behind my work as a consultant and as an expert in my historical
reputation is it's part of this -- it's important to me that anyone looking at my work have access to the totality of sources that
I've examined and I know that's also been important to the attorneys that I've had discussions with representing the defense.
So after I had done my original work, and I'm referring now to supplemental bibliography 1230, somewhere I came across bits
and pieces here or there after doing my first survey from that supplemental bibliography and that was done somewhere during
my preparation to give a deposition in the retrial of the Cipollone case so we are talking '89, '90, somewhere in that ballpark,
whenever that was. Then as you know for many years I had no involvement with tobacco and litigation and so forth. Then
last year I became involved and gave a deposition for the Mississippi case, reviewed what I had done but you come across a
few new things. Those few new things were put together in this additional bibliography. For the most part these items were
1997 but we put a couple of more things on that I found in preparation for this deposition so it was redone and a new date was
put in and that's '98. So you can understand that to be the new items both of primary and secondary nature that I happened to
stumble on in preparation for this deposition.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1233 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Dr. Ludmerer, if you would take a look at what the court reporter has marked as Exhibit 1233 and I'll
represent to you that this is one of two articles that we got forwarded to our Seattle office just this past Monday and I'm assuming
that this was either left out of an earlier bibliography or is something that you recently --
A. Yes. These were afterthoughts that I had. To give you the background sometime early in the month Mr. Rosenthal asked
me if I would put together any new sources that I had encountered that would be pertinent to this deposition for the State
of Washington case. That's item 1232, additional bibliography, that we have already introduced and after giving him a list it
occurred to me that there were two other articles that would be appropriate to include. This had already been typed up and sent
to you, submitted in evidence, whatever the term is. So he sent you the articles.
Q. Okay. Can you tell -- and this document is an article by Sir Richard Doll entitled “Uncovering the Effects of Smoking:
Historical Perspective”?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell just by looking at this, and I could probably figure it out if I looked at it, when this document was published?
A. I don't know that it's been published.
Q. Okay. Do you know when it was written?
A. My recollection is that it was written sometime in early 1997. I'm not certain but that's my understanding.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. And if I understand the distinction correctly, this is what you would describe as a secondary source?
A. Correct.
Q. In fact, Sir Richard Doll in this article undertakes perhaps not as quantitatively complete as your own but a similar type of
historical analysis, does he not, of the controversy about smoking and health?
A. Similarly. He did not review the literature in a systematic detailed fashion like I did but it covers the area and gives his
recollections of what had happened. He cites articles and events that to him were pertinent. It's also far more ranging than
my testimony. This is not Sir Richard Doll state of the art 1930 to 1964, but this is his overview of a lifetime in the field
of investigating effects of smoking. So a large part of the article, perhaps more than half, deals with post 1964 issues and
secondhand smoke and a variety of issues that I have not been involved in as a consultant.
Q. Okay. This is one of the areas where I did have a specific question that I wanted to ask you. If you could turn to page 18 of
Exhibit 1233. At the top of the page Sir Richard Doll writes “Despite their provenance these reports had little lasting impact on
the general public and the situation did not change materially until after reports by the Royal College of Physicians of London
in 1962 and the Advisory Committee to the US Surgeon General in 1964.”
Then going down to the next paragraph it refers to a variety of different articles that came out in the '50s and early '60s and
then he summarizes on the top of page 19 saying “Following these reports, the idea that smoking was a major cause of lung
cancer ceased to be seriously challenged except by the tobacco industry outside the UK (where it had been quietly accepted)
and a few eccentric individuals such as Burch.”
Do you know which reports he is referring to when he says “following these reports”?
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object. Calls for speculation.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) is it your understanding he is referring to the 1962 report of the Royal College of Physicians of London
and the 1964 Surgeon General's report?
A. Yes.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: That is how I read it.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) Do you agree with his statement that follows those two reports that the idea that smoking was a major cause
of lung cancer ceased to be seriously challenged except by the tobacco industry?
A. I'm unable to answer the question as you've phrased it because he is referring to events post 1964 and I don't know. I agree
with this article insofar as he points out the controversy continued through the Surgeon General's report among many respected
and eminent scientific authorities from different disciplines. That part of the testimony I agree with. I am unable to comment on
reaction after 1964 and not having reviewed it systematically. I do know that many respectable scientists did not change their
mind because they were awfully good experimentalists and they were confident of their own analytical and reasoning powers
and if they hadn't been persuaded that the epidemiological evidence was valid or if they considered that the whole experimental
evidence was too large, if they felt that in 1963 they weren't swayed by another opinion. I do know there was responsible
disagreement immediately after the time and I don't know what happened going forward.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
I would say with all due respect for Dr. Doll, and I have nothing but the highest regard and respect for him; I consider him
to be a great person as well as a great investigator, but I do think that to the historian this sentence flashes warning signs like
doctors not trying and are ill prepared to comment on the historical record. If one reviewed the evidence from the primary
source systematically year by year in the '60s and found that the only ones opposing the hypothesis were from the tobacco
industry then that would allow this conclusion to be drawn. It's very suspicious that most people accepted it by and anyone who
didn't was a dummy, that type of thing and presentism does not allow for legitimate disagreement among historical scientists.
My suspicion is knowing that there was legitimate disagreement in 1964 is that some people probably continued to disagree at
least immediately thereafter. How long that lasted, what the grounds were, how reasonable were the grounds, how unreasonable
were they, I really don't know. I have not investigated that at all.
Q. So just to summarize you have no way of knowing whether he was right or not when he says that following the Surgeon
General's report, paraphrasing, the hypothesis was not seriously challenged except by eccentric individuals?
A. I have no way of knowing.
Q. Okay.
A. I would ask to see evidence as opposed to one's opinion on it or stating opinions that today are politically correct and just
assuming that everyone after the Surgeon General's report felt the same way. Now I would insist on seeing the evidence but
I have not seen it and am not able to comment.
(Whereupon, Ludmerer Deposition Exhibit 1234 was marked by the reporter for identification.)
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) I don't have any substantive questions about this document. This was the document that the court reporter
has marked as Exhibit 1234. It was the second of the two articles that were recently forwarded to me and this appears to be
from the British Journal of Addiction entitled “Conversation with Sir Richard Doll.”
Without taking the time to review this document in any great detail, is there anything significant or that jumps to mind in terms
of the opinion testimony that you'll be providing in this case?
A. Nothing that qualitatively changes anything that we've already discussed. It came to my attention or I remembered it. I had
read it before. I remembered after I had talked with Mr. Rosenthal about supplemental, about the additional bibliography and
I asked, I inquired if there would be a possibility of including this published interview as well as an unpublished manuscript
as part of the supplemental bibliography.
Q. Okay.
A. And as I mentioned the only reason they are not part of that is that I remembered them late. If I may say one thing about
methodology that I think has been a theme this morning but perhaps might be worth stating explicitly for the record. My
perspective on this issue is as a historian of medicine and as historian I'm independent. I don't know what the answers are to
the questions I may ask. I don't even care. I do want evidence. I insist on evidence. That is my obligation. That is my moral and
ethical obligation as a historian or as a scholar in general that the evidence be examined and that it be examined necessarily
and fairly and not misrepresented. So I think that's the point I've been trying to make throughout the discussion this morning
on the different topics that apply to the different questions you raised. I don't know the answer to it. Maybe his phraseology
and his unpublished manuscript is. But we need the evidence. I have frequently found statements in the secondary literature
are not correct if you go back and seek primary evidence on any issue, not just on tobacco. So the intellectual rigor of history
like any issue is getting primary evidence and evaluating it fairly.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
Q. Okay. I appreciate that. I think I'm real close to being done. I just have a follow-up question, sort of background question
or two that I think I missed.
In looking at your medical background as opposed to your history background, are there any specific areas of expertise in the
broad field of medicine in which you focus on?
A. I would be considered a general internist.
Q. And what does a general internist do?
A. General internist is a specialist within the medical field dealing with medical conditions of adults including heart function
and kidneys. I have not sub specialized with internal medicine and by that I mean doing two or three years in cardiology or
hematology or any of the sub specialties. I've had a specialty residency as well as fellowship, residency and internship and chief
resident. I have not done a sub specialty fellowship.
Q. Do you consider yourself to be an expert on causation of chronic disease?
A. The answer to that would be yes and no.
Q. Okay. If you would just elaborate for me.
A. It would be unrealistic of me as we sit here today speaking to say that as an internist and a professor of health and an educator
and one that teaches students, residents on these issues I've talked about that's the yes part. On the other hand, at the level of
expertise that is required for the issues you are dealing with, the complex litigation that you are dealing with, is so essential to
the national health and national policy, I am not your expert on causation. I'm not going to talk about that. People who have
devoted their lives to causation of cancer on any one of the specific issues you are dealing with and many issues in the same
way that I have focused on the historical issues and I am not prepared to talk about it. I am not an expert on causation or cancer
or scientific state of the art 1998. So that's the no part.
Q. Okay. I think I understand the difference there. And, finally, I assume that you are being compensated for your time?
A. Correct.
Q. Could I ask what your hourly rate is?
A. $300 per hour.
Q. And does that apply to general research as well as testimony?
A. It applies to anything.
Q. Okay.
A. To everything I should say.
Q. Okay. Has that rate stayed the same since you first began to get involved in tobacco litigation in 1988?
A. In my first phase which was 1988 through 1991 my rate was $200 per hour and the current phase of my involvement which
was 1996 through the present it's been $300 and it has not changed.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39State of Washington, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN TOBACCO..., 1998 WL 35271782...
MR. ROSENTHAL: I think I'm probably done. If I could have a minute to look at my notes and make sure I'm not forgetting
anything.
MR. ROSENTHAL: Sure.
Q. (By Mr. O'Hara) I think my only other follow-up question would be we talked a little bit about the notes that you had made
on the Jeffrey Harris bibliography and discussed the fact that we are not sure where those originals are. Do you know whether
you have originals of your other handwritten notes that we've introduced as exhibits today?
A. They were all given to Mark Edell.
Q. So the answer would be the same as far as that material. We'll see if we can't track down the originals. It's difficult to read
a lot of the stuff that has been produced.
A. It's difficult for me to read when I review my own material.
MR. O'HARA: So with that I have no further questions.
MR. ROSENTHAL: I have no questions.
(Whereupon, the deposition adjourned at 12:30 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40
