VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Original Image of 2012 WL 4062242 (PDF)
2012 WL 4062242 (M.D.Fla.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
United States District Court, M.D. Florida,
Jacksonville Division.
VANBLARCOM,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al.
No. 3:09CV10556.
August 8, 2012.
(Partial Testimony of Dr. Jim Martin)
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Warranty/Breach of Warranty
Jurisdiction: M.D.Fla.
Name of Expert: James Kirby Martin, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Note: This document was obtained from the above titled case. (PDF information below.)
Court: United States District Court, M.D. Florida.
Title: IN RE: ENGLE PROGENY CASES.
Docket Number: No. 3:09-cv-10000-TJC-JBT.
Date: August 8, 2012.
ORAL DEPOSITION OF DR. JIM MARTIN, produced as a witness at the instance of PLAINTIFFS, and duly sworn, was
taken in the above-styled and numbered cause on Wednesday, AUGUST 8, 2012, from 8:59 a.m. to 2:07 p.m., before Kathleen
Rossi Tyler, CSR in and for the State of Texas, recorded by machine shorthand, at the offices of JONES DAY, 717 Texas,
Suite 3300, Houston, Texas, pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the provisions stated on the record or attached
hereto; that the deposition shall be read and signed before any notary public.
JOB NO. 1-130799
[Note: Pages 2-27 missing in original document]
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Q. Okay. Yeah. Well -- and I take it that the material in both of these reports, especially the background material and stuff on
your reliance list, that wasn't gathered for this case, right?
A. Well, some of it was, and some of it is part of a larger background. I've been doing research for years and years and years.
Q. Uh-huh. Okay. And, in fact, you were first retained by the defendants, the tobacco companies, in 1994; is that correct?
MR. COTTON: Objection; form.
A. That is correct.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. In fact, you were first approached by them in the 1980s, right?
A. Well, I should qualify that and say I met with some lawyers, and I believe it was about 1986.
Q. Uh-huh. Okay. So 1986 lawyers from the defendants first come to you and talk to you about being an expert. And they
actually retain you then in 1994; is that correct?
MR. COTTON: Objection; form.
A. Lawyers for the tobacco companies approached me in 1980 -- approximately 1986. They asked me whether I'd be interested
in studying some questions. And because I had so many other projects going on, I declined to do so.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) They reapproached you or you agreed to work with them in 1994, right?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. Yes. The attorneys approached me, asked me in 1994 whether I would be interested in studying these questions. And because
I was finishing up two or three projects and had an opening in my schedule, I said, “Well, I'd be glad to look into questions.”
Q. Okay. I've tallied up the bills that you brought for these two matters, and -- and I came up with $56,341.41 for just you.
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, mischaracterizes the evidence.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) So do you want to -- does that sound about right, what you've been paid?
A. For these --
Q. For these two cases?
A. For these two cases?
Q. Yes.
A. I didn't tally them up, so -- but if you did --
MS. McFADDEN: Dr. Martin, I'd ask you to take a look and make sure that it is as he has characterized it, that it is just for
these two cases.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
THE WITNESS: Well, that would -- that ??
[Note: Pages 30-32 missing in original document]
Q. Okay. So and -- and how many -- how many past cases were you retained on that you did work on? I don't want to know the
names, but that you actually were given a case and didn't actually -- weren't actually deposed?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection.
A. There -- it's really hard for me to say, but I -- I -- I would give you a number in the area of 30.
Q. Okay. So there have been another 30 cases where you were retained or did some work but you didn't actually get to the
point of deposition or testimony at trial?
A. A case may have gone away for any number of reasons.
Q. Okay. Now, can you give me your best current estimate of the amount that you've been paid since you started working for
the tobacco companies?
MR. COTTON: Objection; form.
A. Well --
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) You keep a running estimate because I've seen it in your prior what your current running estimate --
A. Well, my current running estimate as of last week in a deposition was over the last seven years approximately $800,000.
Q. 800,000 over the last seven years?
A. Seven years.
Q. Okay. And what's your -- since the beginning what's your current running estimate?
A. I really don't know.
Q. Well, seven years takes us back to 2005.
A. Approximately.
Q. So for the ten -- for the 11 years before that, 1994 to 2005, how much were you paid?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, form.
A. Well, I can't give you an exact number.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. Well, I want an estimate.
A. Estimate, I would say probably 4-, 5-, 600,000. I don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Q. 400, 500 or 600,000?
A. With the --
Q. And that would be from --
A. -- “I don't know” added.
Q. Okay. But the --
A. 1994 to 2005 approximately.
Q. Yeah. Okay. But the -- the estimate you gave a couple weeks ago, $800,000 over seven years, that doesn't include this current
work you've done today?
A. Yes, it does.
[Note: Pages 35-41 missing in original document]
?? nature of tobacco; is that correct?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, mischaracterizes the testimony.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) I'm going to rephrase the question, so that it's clear so we have a clean record.
A. Okay.
Q. Doctor, when the lawyers from Jones Day here came to you in 1994 and you agreed to work with them after they approached
you the year before and you'd said no -- I mean, eight years before and you'd said no, as of 1994 you had not published anything
in the area of public awareness regarding the risks of smoking or regarding the addictive nature of cigarettes or nicotine; is
that correct?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, compound question.
A. Well, I'd have to give it a no. A no and a no, since there are two questions there.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) And -- and on neither of those subjects had you done any research targeted at those questions; is that
correct?
A. At those questions specifically, not targeted specifically. That's -- I've already made that point.
Q. Okay. Now, in the 17 years since you were approached by lawyers from Jones Day, how many papers have you published
in peer review journals on the subject of public understanding regarding the risks of smoking?
A. None.
Q. Okay. How many papers have you presented at conferences, Doctor, on your work?
A. None.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Q. And -- and how many conferences have you spoken at on your work regarding public attitudes toward smoking and
understanding of the issue of the addictiveness of nicotine?
A. None.
Q. None. So -- and how many of your colleagues have you consulted with on your work who are not otherwise employed by
the tobacco companies have you consulted with and run your theories and approaches by?
A. The kind of -- the kind of statistical information I do. Is that what you're referring to?
Q. No. I'm saying you've generated a series of conclusions that you've testified to now --
A. Right. Uh-huh.
Q. -- in 11 depositions and trials?
A. Right.
Q. You've written several reports?
A. Right.
[Note: Pages 44-46 missing in original document]
?? was interested in finding people who had expertise in the area of public understandings regarding the risks of smoking and/
or addiction and had done work in that area, would they find that whole area that you've spent 17 years working on -- would
they find any reference to that work any place in this resume?
A. Not in this particular one apparently, but I -- sorry. I thought it was there.
Q. Well, if you've done something for 17 years as a professional historian, why wouldn't you want other historians to -- to know
that you've done it so they could include you in the academic discussions on these subjects?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. I don't know how to answer that question. But I can tell you that if you go on the Internet there is a copy of an earlier form
of my vitae that has this information on it. That's what I can tell you. I don't know why it is not here.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. Is there a reason why you haven't subjected your opinions to peer review?
A. Is there a reason why I haven't subjected, yes, because I work on many different projects at many different times; and I have
not chosen to subject those opinions, as you put it, to peer review.
[Note: Pages 48-49 missing in original document]
?? expect you to be continuously productive from a research and writing point of view.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Q. Yeah. Yeah. And -- and -- and you have written extensively, as we can see looking at your publication list. And -- and given
the importance of the publication -- well, let me back up. Scratch that.
Is the reason why scholars are judged on their publications is that the purpose of academic scholarship is to share it with other
academics to further broaden the information that's available and the knowledge base that's available?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection.
A. Well, that certainly is one objective.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) And is another objective of the whole process of publication to subject opinions to peer review so that
we can obtain truth through having multiple people look at a question rather than information being isolated?
A. I don't think that's necessarily one of the criteria that's -- that's used, no.
Q. Well, why do we peer-review things, sir?
A. Well, if you publish something it would presumably be peer-reviewed.
Q. But why do we have a peer-review process?
A. So -- so that the purpose of peer review is to see whether the conclusions basically follow from the presentation of evidence.
That's what the purpose of peer review would be all about. There are other things that we've taken into consideration in peer
review, such as is the writing clear, those kinds of things would also play a -- play a part.
Q. Okay. And -- and when we do peer review to see if the conclusions follow from the evidence, the peer review is done by
fellow professional historians, correct?
A. Well, yes. That's right. That's one way you can get a peer review.
Q. Well, in the history field if you submit a paper, for instance, on Benedict Arnold -- I know you've written on him. If you
submitted a paper on Benedict Arnold, that paper isn't reviewed by, you know, economists or political scientists, right?
A. Not -- not necessarily.
Q. It's reviewed by historians, right?
A. Presumably.
Q. Okay. And the reason why is because there's a historical method, and -- and -- and historical approach. And part of the process
of peer review is to see that, in fact, the person who's drawing conclusions and written them up has followed the appropriate
historical methodology, correct?
A. Well, I explained that at the beginning of my report, and, yes, I do follow -- I both teach and I follow the appropriate historical
methodology in all the work I do.
Q. I'm not asking whether you think so. The purpose of peer review is to ensure that the work of historians that is put out to the
public and published has, in fact, followed the appropriate historical methodology, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. Well, I'll go back over that and repeat what I said to you in maybe a slightly different form so you can understand. I both
teach and follow historical methodology in all the research I do, and I certainly have done the same thing in this work that I
have done in this particular case.
Whether it has been peer-reviewed or not is not an issue that has anything to do with whether I have followed accurate, specific
historical methodology on the thousands of documents that I have researched and reviewed in this case.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. We'll get to your methodology. I'm not talking about your methodology. We'll talk about
that in a bit, Doctor. My question is: One of the things that peer review is for is to ensure that before articles are published,
before information is put out to the public and to other scholars on a particular historical subject, that the appropriate historical
methodology has been followed, correct?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. Well, that is one purpose of peer review. I'm not sure that's the only purpose of peer review.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) I'm not saying it's the only purpose. That's one of the purposes. And another purpose of peer review
in the historical area, Doctor, is to see that the author of the paper hasn't missed particular issues or hasn't missed particular
sources of information that should have been considered, right?
A. That would be another purpose, yes.
Q. Okay. It's to check to see if the -- the sources that were consulted were broad enough or there were some sources that should
have been consulted, right, Doctor?
A. That can certainly be one of the considerations, yes.
Q. Okay. And -- and another consideration, Doctor, of peer review is to see that the paper correctly addresses and correctly
discloses contrary evidence for the thesis or the conclusions that are being drawn by the paper; is that correct?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. That can certainly be another factor taken into consideration.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. It's to see that papers that are published are not slanted, right, Doctor?
A. Well, you're asking me whether -- virtually all papers are slanted, I suppose you can say, that have gone through peer review.
Q. Okay. And it's also to see that the authors haven't missed something or haven't misstated something, right?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. Well, if there's a factual error, certainly.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. And -- and -- and when one does a -- when one does a peer-review process, one gets back
comments from the peer reviewers which suggest information that should be looked at, things that should be considered,
alternative explanations which should be explored, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
A. Well, you just introduced alternative explanations that should have been explored. That certainly can be a factor, yes.
Q. Yeah. Absolutely. If you write a paper on Benedict Arnold and you have a particular theory about Benedict Arnold and there
is a line of scholarship which is to the contrary or has an alternative explanation, the authors might suggest that you need to
review that and address that alternative line. That would be the kind of comment you would get in peer review, right, Doctor?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, compound.
A. Well, in the compound it would be yes, yes, and yes.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. Peer review is basically out there to see that people are not putting out misleading or incomplete
information to the historical community and the public at large, right?
A. That's one of the purposes of peer review. I think we've been through this now several times.
Q. Yeah. Now -- and, Doctor, when we do peer review, peer reviewers are selected for a particular paper because they have
some experience or knowledge in the particular subject area of the paper generally, correct?
A. While we go through this I would like to point out that there's a lot of scholarship out there that does not go through peer
review, does not go into publication. So you're only talking about one little ??
[Note: Pages 56-121 missing in original document]
?? And about the issue of the difficulties in quitting, whether that be addiction or habituation, whatever you want to call it.
That's what I'm doing. So, of course, I wouldn't go to an episode to go back to what we talked about before about UFOs since
I wasn't asked to do a study of UFOs. I would go to something, whether it was publicly available to Mr. Hoppes. And that's
exactly what I did.
Q. Sir, how many television shows were there in the 1960s, '70s, and '80s that -- that actually had an episode in which smoking
was discussed as a cause of lung cancer?
A. I don't know. I can't give you a specific number.
Q. What you can give me is what you've cherry-picked, right, sir?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection.
A. No. I've tried to -- I've tried to come up with every episode that there is. So if you want to call that cherry-picking, you can.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay.
A. But what I can tell you is that is not what I'm doing. The point is the deposition said he loved this program. All I said -- and
I never claimed anything beyond that -- was that this program covered issues ??
[Note: Pages 123-125 missing in original document]
?? taken -- in TV programs, you took from him. And you in turn gave him public service announcements, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, mischaracterizes testimony.
A. I can tell you, again -- and I'll say this again -- the issue -- this particular program -- this particular program dealt with the
health risks of smoking. That issue was publicly -- I'm sorry -- that episode was publicly available to Mr. Hoppes and actually
everyone else in the United States who watched the program.
I never said he could watch the program. I said it was all part of the body, a corpus of information that was out there to the
effect that smoking is not good for your health. That's all I claim.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) I want to know where -- so you have one episode of All in the Family where smoking is portrayed
the way you would say it, negatively; is that correct?
A. Yeah. Where they say it's not good for your health. That's not --
Q. Not good for your health. Okay.
A. That's not exactly a positive portrayal.
Q. Yeah. So -- so -- so you have hundreds of episodes of All in the Family, in which Archie Bunker smokes away on cigars
all the time and other people smoke cigarettes, and in all those hundreds of episodes of people smoking, there's one episode
where it said smoking isn't good for your health, right?
A. I think we've gone over this ten times now, but the answer to that question is yes.
Q. Yes. So if Mr. Hoppes, who liked Archie Bunker -- he might have missed this episode, one of hundreds?
A. He might have seen it too.
Q. Okay. But I just want you to know if he had missed this episode, every other episode of Archie Bunker he sees on TV,
CBS -- mama CBS, he would see Archie Bunker smoking cigars and other people smoking cigarettes and nothing bad said
about it, right, sir?
MR. COTTON: Objection, form, lack of foundation.
A. Well -- go over this again. There's one small piece of a large body of information. So if he missed this particular episode
or saw Archie Bunker smoking, there was information all over the place wherever he lived to the effect that smoking was bad
for your health.
It wasn't just this one program. So what we're doing is we are taking this one program, and we ??
[Note: Page 128 missing in original document]
?? information that I was interested in, and we exchanged information. That's exactly what happened.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) So it would be fair to say that you certainly made no effort to do a survey of television programs to
determine how often smoking was portrayed negatively versus positively; is that correct?
A. I have not tried that kind of a survey.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9VANBLARCOM, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO. et al., 2012 WL 4062242 (2012)
Q. And you've done no kind of analysis other than just simply having examples that you were given by another expert hired
by the tobacco companies?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection.
MR. COTTON: Objection, form, lack of foundation.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Is that correct?
A. I don't think that's correct, no. I just explained to you we exchanged information. I was aware of television programs that
portrayed smoking in a negative light. He happened to have these clips. I'm not very good at that. I'm not a skilled technician
when it comes to doing this thing, and so we exchanged information. That's all we did.
Q. Let me give you another one. Mama CBS, in addition to All in the Family which was a top-ten show, they had another top-
ten show called M*A*S*H, right?
[Note: Pages 130-244 missing in original document]
?? was already out of junior high school, right?
A. Wait a minute. He was born in, what, '22. No. He would have been -- '33, he would have been 11.
Q. Okay.
A. That means he would be in the -- be the fifth or the sixth grade.
Q. Okay. You're right. Do you have any -- can you say to a degree of reasonable professional probability that that book, Health
and Good Citizenship, by Andrews would have been one that would have been available in Mr. Kauffman's school?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, form.
A. It certainly is a book that is out there and available and was being used in public schools in Ohio, so that's what I do know.
But I can't say it was the Pettisville school specifically.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) On Page 16 you comment on Mr. Kauffman's daughter [sic], Sharon, Linda or Sandra. Did any of them
testify that they were taught about the risks of smoking or addictive nature of nicotine when they were deposed?
A. Well, two of the daughters are deceased. I may mix them up. One is Sandra, and one is Sharon. As I recall, Sharon is the
one who lost the automobile. Is that what we're referring to in here?
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10
