In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Original Image of 2009 WL 5061522 (PDF)
2009 WL 5061522 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
Seventeenth Judicial Circuit.
Broward County
In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION.
Pertains to: Leon Barbanell.
Nos. 08-80000 (19), 07-36737(19).
March 31, 2009.
Videotaped Deposition of Joan Hoff, Ph.D. (via video Teleconferencing)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Broward County, Florida
Name of Expert: Joan Hoff, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances.
Attorney Appearing (via video Teleconference) on Behalf of the Plaintiff, Leon Barbanell: Mr. Jonathan R. Gdanski
Schlesinger Law Offices
1212 Southeast Third Avenue
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33316
(954) 320-9507.
Attorneys Appearing (Telephonically) on Behalf of the Defendant, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company: Mr. Neil Kodsi
(morning)
Ms. Anna Craig (afternoon)
Sedgwick, Detert, Moran & Arnold, LLP
2400 East Commercial Blvd., Suite 1110
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33308
(954) 958-2513.
Attorney on Behalf of Defendant Philip Morris USA, Inc.: Mr. Timothy E. Congrove
Shook, Hardy & Bacon, LLP
Miami Center, Suite 2400
201 South Biscayne Blvd.
Miami, FL 33131
(305) 358-7470.
BE IT REMEMBERED, that the videotaped deposition upon oral examination of JOAN HOFF, Ph.D., appearing at the instance
of Plaintiff, was taken at Montana State University, 128 EPS Building, Bozeman, Montana on Tuesday, March 31, 2009,
beginning at 9:00 a.m. (MST). Pursuant to the Montana Rules of Civil Procedure, before Laurine Brinkman, a Registered
Professional Reporter (RPR) and Notary Public for the State of Montana. Mr. Steve Flagg, videographer.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
INDEX
... Page/Line
Direct Examination by Mr. Gdanski ... 6,5
VIDEOTAPES
... Page/Line
Tape NO. 1 ... 5,5
Tape No. 2 ... 61,10
Tape NO. 3 ... 112,14
Tape NO. 4 ... 198,4
Tape NO. 5 ... 269,17
EXHIBITS
... Page/Line
No. 1: Defendant Philip Morris USA Inc's Expert witness Disclosure. ... 25, 24
No. 2: Plaintiff's Notice of Taking video Deposition Duces Tecum (via VTC). ... 112, 24
No. 3: Plaintiff's Notice of Taking video Deposition Duces Tecum (via VTC). ... 115,16
No. 4: Resume of Joan Hoff December 2008. ... 160, 3
No. 5: Deponent's Invoice dated 3/11/09. ... 161, 9
No. 6: E-mail correspondence. ... 169, 21
No. 7: E-mail correspondence. ... 169, 21
No. 8: Deponent's notes dated Feb. 27. ... 204, 2
No. 9: Deponent's notes dated Feb. 27. ... 204, 2
No. 10: Newspaper Article from Fort Lauderdale Daily News dated 6/4/55. ... 216,5
No. 11: Advertisement “More Doctors Smoke Camels Than Any Other Cigarette!” ... 216, 5
No. 12: Article from Encore: 1939. ... 240, 12
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
No. 13: Article from Good Housekeeping April 1926. ... 242, 22
No. 14: Chapter 4 Trends in Public Beliefs Attitudes, and opinions About Smoking. ... 254, 3
No. 15: Deponent's Reliance List. ... 256, 13
No. 16: Deponent's Reliance List Revised. ... 256, 13
No. 17: Advertisement “why did you change to Camels, Dick Haymes?” ... 271, 6
No. 18: Three (3) DVDS “Dr. Joan Hoff, Barbanell Reliance materials March 18, 2009. ... 279, 11
WHEREUPON, the following proceedings were had and testimony taken to wit:
THE REPORTER: This is the videotape deposition of DR. JOAN HOFF taken by Plaintiffs in the matter of In Re: Engle
Progeny Cases, Tobacco Litigation, Pertains to: Leon Barbanell, 07-036737 (19), Cause No. 08-80000 (19) in the Circuit Court
of the Seventeenth Judicial Circuit in and for Broward County, Florida.
This deposition is taken on Tuesday, March 31st, 2009, and held at the Burns Technology Center, 128 Engineering and Physical
Science Building, Montana State university, Bozeman, Montana.
The videographer is Mr. Steve Flagg. The court reporter is Laurine Brinkman.
The time is 9:09 a.m. Counsel will now, please, introduce themselves for the record.
MR. GDANSKI: Jonathan Gdanski for the Plaintiffs from the Schlesinger Law Firm.
MR. CONGROVE: Tim Congrove from shook, Hardy & Bacon for Defendant Philip Morris USA.
MR. KODSKI: This is Neil Kodsi on the phone with Carlton-Fields for R.J. Reynolds Company.
DR. JOAN HOFF called as a witness herein, having been duly sworn was examined and testified as follows:
DIRECT EXAMINATION
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Good morning, Dr. Hoff.
How are you?
A. I'm pretty good. How are you?
Q. I'm doing good. I introduced myself to you before we started this deposition. My name is Jonathan Gdanski and I represent
the Plaintiff in this case, Leon Barbanell, who is pursuing this lawsuit against the cigarette companies for the death of his wife,
Shirley Barbanell.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
I understand you've had your deposition taken before, so I assume you are familiar with the basic ground rules of deposition
questions and answering; is that correct?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. Okay. Have you ever had your deposition taken through video teleconference?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. So then there are a few sort of sub rules that go into a video teleconference deposition that are important to keep in
mind. Of course, it's even more important now that you wait for me to finish my question and I wait for you to finish your answer
because sometimes there's a few-second lag or a delay in the connection and what will happen is occasionally, inadvertently,
we will speak over each other. So I'll do my best to wait for you to finish your answers and if you can do your best to wait for
me to finish my questions, I would very much appreciate that and it would make it much easier on the court reporter, okay?
A. I understand, yes.
Q. All right. And as in depositions, if you respond to a question, I'm going to assume that you understood the question and that
you're responding to it, and if you don't understand the question, of course, let me know and I'll try my best to rephrase or break
it up and make it a little bit easier to understand. All right?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, very good.
MR. GDANSKI: Just one quick sort of side point. Tim, I know that in past depositions that we've had an agreement sort of that
one objection is an objection for all and we don't have to, you know, keep objecting from defense counsel.
Is that all right?
MR. CONGROVE: That is fine by me.
(To Mr. Kodsi) Neil, is that okay with you?
MR. KODSI: Absolutely fine by me.
MR. GDANSKI: It just makes it easier on the teleconference system.
MR. KODSI: I agree 100 percent, that's fine by me.
MR. GDANSKI: All right, thank you.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, please state your full name for the record.
A. It's Joan Hoff, H-O-F-F.
Q. All right. Did you ever go by any other name?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. At one point when I was married, I went by Joan Hoff Wilson.
Q. All right. Are you currently married?
A. No.
Q. Okay. what is your home address, Dr. Hoff?
A. [ DELETED ] [ DELETED ]
Q. And do you have a business address?
A. The physical address is [ DELETED ]. There is no road address at [ DELETED ].
Q. Okay. why is that? Just out of curiosity.
A. It's because it's a rural community where there aren't that many named roads.
Q. Okay. Do you have access to the Internet?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Do you have a business address?
A. The business address would be the P.O. box in the the Skycrest Condo.
Q. Are you currently employed?
A. I teach part-time at the university here in Bozeman, Montana State university.
Q. Okay. And what classes do you teach?
A. I only teach one class, it's an upper division class this semester on the modern presidency. Sometimes it's on foreign policy,
sometimes it's on women's history. It depends on the semester I teach it.
Q. Do any of the classes you teach now at Montana State have anything to do with tobacco or the history of the tobacco
companies?
A. No.
Q. Have you ever taught a class that dealt with that subject?
A. The only time I've touched upon the tobacco industry as a subject matter would have been when I taught survey courses
at Indiana university in the Colonial period when it's impossible not to mention the tobacco trade when you're dealing with
the Colonial period.
Q. Okay. But you never taught a class dealing with the awareness or risk of health effects of smoking or any of the issues we're
here to talk about today; have you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I have not.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Have you ever given a seminar on any of the issues we're here to talk about today?
A. No.
Q. Okay. written any published papers?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you ever written any unpublished papers?
A. No.
Q. Okay, all right. How long have you been a part-time professor at Montana State university?
A. Since 2001.
Q. And since that time you've been employed in a part-time position teaching one class a semester; is that right?
A. Just one class a year.
Q. One class a year.
A. Yes, I teach spring semester. I teach the semester. I ski at Big sky.
Q. Okay. So you ski in the fall and teach in the spring?
A. No, I ski in the spring and teach in the spring. That's the --
Q. what did you do -- go ahead, I'm sorry.
A. No, so then I'm here spring semester.
Q. Okay. And what do you do during the fall?
A. I tend to travel or do independent writing and research. I have an apartment in New York so I live part-time there.
Q. Okay. where is your apartment in New York?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. In Midtown.
Q. Oh, yeah? what's the address?
A. [ DELETED ] [ DELETED ]
Q. [ DELETED ]?
A. [ DELETED]
Q. Oh, I knew I missed a digit.
What are the cross streets?
A. It's between [ DELETED ], just around the corner, actually, from the UN.
Q. Yep, I know, I lived there for a little bit before my wife shipped me down here.
Okay. So for the past, I think you said four or five years, you've been spending the fall in New York and the spring teaching
in Montana?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And you mentioned that you've done a little bit of writing over the past four or five years during the fall and
summertime.
what have you been writing about in that period of time?
A. well, I've just recently published a book as of last year on U.S. foreign policy from -- really, going from Woodrow Wilson
through the last Bush presidency, that came out at the end of last year.
Q. All right. when did you buy the apartment in New York?
A. I didn't buy it, it came with a job I had in New York back in 1995 and I'm renting it.
Q. Okay. Do you rent it for the entire year or only for certain months of the year?
A. I rent it for the entire year.
Q. Okay. And remind me again when it was, I'm sorry, I didn't make a note of that. You began teaching part-time at Montana
State, I think you said four or five -- I don't recall.
A. 2001.
Q. 2001, okay. So much longer than four or five years ago, 2001.
Prior to 2001, where were you employed?
A. I came to Montana from the College of William and Mary. I had a fellowship there for the year 2000/2001.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. All right. And what was your fellowship in? Can you tell me a little bit about that.
A. It was simply a fellowship they offered to senior scholars every year to teach one graduate seminar and to give three public
lectures.
Q. Okay. what did you teach that year, what seminar?
A. That year I taught a course that involved basically the subject matter of the book I just published so it would be an analysis
of u.S. foreign policy from the administration of Woodrow Wilson through -- at that time it would have been through the
administration of Clinton.
Q. Okay. Now you understand that you're here today to give expert opinion testimony in this case, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And do you know the name of this case?
A. This case is the Barbanell case.
Q. Okay. I understand you've acted as an expert and provided opinion testimony in the past, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. All right. So can you tell me what you believe your duties and responsibilities are as an expert witness who going to provide
opinion testimony to a jury?
A. well, I'm here for several reasons today and would be if the case goes to trial. First, using what is known as social and culture
history methodology, I'm going to testify to the general awareness --
Q. I'm sorry, I don't mean to -- I don't want to get into your opinions yet.
A. Okay.
Q. I think you're going to express your opinions now; is that right?
A. Yes, I was going to.
Q. we'll spend some time on your opinions, I'm sure.
But my question is, generally as an expert witness who is going to provide an opinion, what do you believe your duties and
responsibilities are by way of coming to those opinions?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: what I do in terms of social and cultural history is to try to determine what information was available to the
average person on a variety of different subjects. And so, consequently, using that methodology, I am here basically to indicate
what common knowledge or general awareness was on a particular topic.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Do you believe it's your responsibility to be unbiased?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: we teach our graduate students and as professional historians, we always attempt to be as unbiased as possible.
It's one of the things that is part of any kind of basic historical methodology.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. But not in terms of being a graduate student. I'm talking now specifically with regard to providing an opinion in a
lawsuit.
Do you believe that it's important to be unbiased?
A. Yes, and I believe it's important to be unbiased in my capacity as a professional historian.
Q. Sure. Do you also believe that it's important to be thorough in your research?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And do you believe that it's your responsibility as an expert to look at all of the information that's out there regarding
the subject matter?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: TO look at all of the information within reason. At a certain point on any topic the information can become
repetitive or redundant, but, in general, you look at all that's reasonably responsible to look at.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. So is it your testimony that your reliance materials are not repetitive and redundant?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The reliance materials are selected for general awareness purposes but also selected specifically for this case.
So in that sense they are not redundant to any -- in fact, they're just simply not redundant, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Are they not repetitive?
A. They're neither.
Q. So each one stands for its own proposition and its own specific purpose for which you relied upon.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: Yes, except for the general references to certain publications where there would be a coverage of a number
of years.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Did you attach the “Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers” to your reliance list?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Only as it would appear in some of the newspapers which I read. As far as I recall, it's not listed separately.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. why not?
A. Simply because it would be covered in the newspaper accountings.
Q. well, yes, it would be covered as a reference in the newspaper accounts, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. But it wouldn't be actually there in its entire form; would it?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The entire document?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yes, Doctor.
A. No.
Q. Okay. Do you know how many newspapers the “Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers” was published in?
A. Yes.
Q. How many?
A. 448.
Q. And what's the estimated readership of the 448 newspapers it was published in?
A. I have no idea.
Q. Okay. would you agree that -- well, I'll strike that, we'll get to that.
Can you define “public knowledge,” please?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes. Public knowledge or general awareness is the most widely shared common information that a society conveys to its
citizens on a variety of topics in any time period. It's really the kind of lowest common denominator of information that cultures
exhibit or display for their citizens, and it's a type of information that comes to us very early on in our childhood and which is
then either reinforced by educational institutions or religious institutions or other institutions of the society.
And it's a type of information that we hold in our heads and sometimes wonder where it really has come from. It seems to be
almost ingrained in our genes or in our psyche because we begin to learn about common knowledge topics at a very early age,
usually getting that information from our parents, and as I said, going on then to have some of that information reinforced by
the institutions of society.
Q. All right. And that was common knowledge.
Is that any different than public knowledge?
A. I think the terms are currently being used somewhat interchangeably. I tend to prefer the term “common knowledge” to
“public knowledge,” but I do often use the term “public awareness.”
Q. Okay. And are common knowledge, public knowledge, and public awareness synonymous for the purposes that we're talking
about today? Is there any reason I should be aware of a distinction that you make?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Oh, it's important --
A. AS I said --
Q. No, go ahead, I'm sorry.
A. -- I would prefer the term either “common knowledge” or “public awareness,” but we can use them interchangeably.
Q. Okay. And you agree that when engaging in historical research and teaching an opinion and conclusion, it's important to
define your terms and concepts, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Now, would you agree that for knowledge to be common and therefore for it to be common knowledge, it must be
known and understood as true by all the individuals who you are opining that it's common to?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. No. Tell me why not.
A. Because given the way the common knowledge or a public awareness originates, it very often is based on folklore or
conventional wisdom, and in some instances, the type of common knowledge on a given subject simply is incorrect, it simply
comes down to us through our parents or our relatives and doesn't necessarily mean that it's true.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
For example, for a long time it was believed that, what, flies caused polio. So it has nothing to do with truth, it simply has to
do with information that's in your mind about a given topic at a particular time. Sometimes it turns out to be true; sometimes
it turns out not to be true.
Q. Okay. well, going through that kind of analysis then, would you agree that there are stages and levels of common knowledge
and it's not just one particular period of time when it became common knowledge?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I quite understand the question. would you say it again?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure. I mean, I can turn it into more of a conversational question so it's not as, you know, hard to understand.
But my understanding of what you just said is that your understanding of common knowledge is that at certain points in time it
would be part of folklore, perhaps, people say, Oh, this may cause this or this may do this -- and as time progresses, that belief
may become more fully developed and ultimately accepted to be true, or perhaps it may become a simple piece of historical
folklore, which is thrown by the wayside and people remember it as such.
So is it your testimony and your understanding of common knowledge that at certain points in time the common knowledge
will change?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form, and it seems to mischaracterize her prior testimony.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. If it mischaracterizes, let me know. I'm trying to understand your testimony.
A. well, in any given topic, the common knowledge is cumulative over time, and to that degree, there's not so much perhaps a
change of the information as simply the information being reinforced by the institutions of society.
Q. So you would disagree with what I said earlier, and your understanding is that it's not that the common knowledge is changed
but that in this situation, at least, that it's been reinforced; is that correct?
A. Yes.
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So, okay. Can you define the term “health risks”?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: Not in any scientific way because I'm not an excerpt on either risk-taking behavior nor a physician with respect
to the definition of what health is in any given period.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And can you define the term “addiction”?
A. NO, because it has a scientific definition, I understand, but, again, it's beyond my expertise in this case.
Q. Okay. what's the scientific definition you understand it to be?
A. I don't know the scientific definition. I just understand there is one.
Q. Okay. when the health risks of smoking cigarettes became common knowledge, what were those health risks?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: Are you asking for a specific time period or just very generally?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. My understanding is that you don't have a time period. You're saying that it developed, at one point it became common, and
I haven't asked you at what point that is but I imagine there is a point in time and then from that point forward, it was reinforced.
So I'd like to know at that point in time, whenever it was that it became common knowledge, what the health risks were that
people had common knowledge of.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I still need to know a time frame. If you're going back as I did when I originally did research on this topic to
the 15th or 16th centuries, you have indications there of health problems with respect to smoking -- or with respect to tobacco, I
should say, use of tobacco. And then continuing forward you can see a history of a negative reputation associated with tobacco.
That, I've done previously for this kind of testimony and these kinds of cases. But if you're asking specifically about a time
period, a more contemporary time period, I'd just like to know what time period you're referring to.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And it pretty well relates to the time period as they relate to the smoker, in this case, Shirley Barbanell.
But then is it your testimony and your opinion that the perceived risks and the public awareness regarding health effects of
smoking changed over time?
A. The specifics of the perceived risks developed over time from very general warnings about health problems associated with
tobacco use to increasingly specific ones.
Q. Okay. You also mentioned earlier that these occasional folklores are reinforced by our religious institutions.
Do you know what religion Shirley Barbanell was?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. From the depositions, it was clear that she was Jewish.
Q. Okay. Are you aware of any piece of Jewish literature or Jewish religious writing that deals with the subject of the health
risks of smoking?
A. No.
Q. Did you look for anything like that?
A. I didn't.
Q. Okay. Do you know if her family was a particularly religious family?
A. From the depositions, it appeared that they were not.
Q. Okay. Let's go ahead and take a look at the disclosure in this case, the expert witness disclosure.
Before I ask that, Dr. Hoff, what is your understanding -- strike that.
For whom are you offering testimony today?
A. I'm offering testimony on behalf of Shook, Hardy & Bacon, representing Philip Morris.
Q. Okay.
MR. CONGROVE: (To Mr. Kodsi) And just for the record to be clear, Neil, you've adopted Dr. Hoff as your witness as well
on behalf of Reynolds, correct?
MR. KODSI: That's correct.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah. Dr. Hoff, that's true, and that was my next question. I want to make you aware of the fact that while you may have
been retained by Shook, Hardy & Bacon, the other defendants in this case, including R.J. Reynolds, and in this particular case,
Liggett and vector are the remaining defendants. But they've adopted you as their witness as well.
Were you aware of that?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, you are.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I'm not quite sure that Liggett has adopted Dr. Hoff, but the record will reflect that. I'm just not
sure on that.
MR. GDANSKI: In all honesty, I assume that they did, but I'm not sure either.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay, thank you.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. GDANSKI: YOU may be right.
All right, let's go ahead and have the court reporter mark the expert witness disclosure as the first exhibit, if we could, if we
have a clean copy.
(Exhibit No. 1 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And there's a couple of quick questions I want to go back over so we don't have to deal with them much later.
Doctor, where were you born?
A. I was born here in Montana, in Butte, Montana.
Q. Okay. And I'm going to try not to go through a whole bunch of things that you've covered in prior depositions, but I assume
your past and your educational background is the same as it was in prior depositions.
That's, of course, correct, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And what year were you born in?
A. 1939.
Q. Have you ever been a smoker, Dr. Hoff?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you ever smoked any cigarettes?
A. what do you mean by “any cigarettes”?
Q. well --
A. I mean, I obviously tried a cigarette, but I have never smoked cigarettes.
Q. So you've tried it but you don't consider trying, having smoked cigarettes. In other words, you don't consider yourself to
have ever become a regular smoker.
A. No.
Q. was your husband a smoker?
A. Yes, he was.
Q. Is your husband still alive?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes, he is.
Q. All right. Is he currently a smoker?
A. No.
Q. All right. when did he begin smoking?
A. I don't really -- I think he probably began in high school. By the time I met him at Berkeley when we were going to school
there, he smoked, and then while we were continuing our education at Berkeley, he stopped smoking.
Q. Okay. what year did you start at Berkeley?
A. I started there in the early '60 -- well, early '60s, 1961, basically.
Q. what year did you finish up at Berkeley?
A. In 1966.
Q. So would it be fair to say that was a -- well, a relatively radical time period at Berkeley?
A. Yes.
Q. A little bit before it peaked?
A. Not really before it peaked. YOU would have the free-speech movement on campus beginning really -- and some of the civil
rights and anti-war activity beginning by 1964. So it peaks, really, or ends really around 1967 on the Berkeley campus. So I
was there during the beginnings of it and sort of the middle period.
Q. Okay. were you a part of any of the movements that were developing at Berkeley in that time period?
A. Yes.
Q. without having me to ask a question, just tell me a little bit about it, if you can.
A. well, I participated in some of the civil rights demonstrations and the anti-war demonstrations which took place. I also
participated in the revision of the curriculum which the students were asking for at that time period.
Q. why were they asking for a revision of the curriculum?
A. well, if you look back to that decade, it was one in which different types of reforms were being advocated, and one of the
things on the Berkeley campus that was strongly stressed was the rigidity of the course offerings, the lack of diversity in the
course offerings so that the curriculum did not really address the diverse needs of the ethnic and racial makeup of the student
body.
So it was somewhat logical in a time of general reform for students to consider revising the curriculum to better represent the
diversity of the student body through a diverse curriculum.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. And after you finished at Berkeley in '66, did you have an opportunity to go back there to study at any point in time
or to teach?
A. No. I went on to teach from -- after I received my Ph.D., I taught for a brief period at San Mateo Junior College, and then
went to Sacramento State.
Q. Let's take a look at the disclosure.
Do you have a copy in front of you, Dr. Hoff?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. All right. And just so I'm clear, because I see the document you're looking at and it looks a little bit different than the
document I'm looking at.
So, how many pages is your document?
A. Mine appears to be three.
Q. Okay. And what's the front page?
A. The front page, just the heading is “Defendant Philip Morris Expert witness Disclosure.”
Q. All right. On the bottom of that page, is there a page number?
A. There is not.
Q. Okay. In the bottom left-hand corner of that page is there a six-digit number with a letter and then another number?
A. There is a number here. Does it begin “595”?
Q. Yeah. Can you go ahead and read me what number you have on yours?
A. “595773v2.”
Q. Okay. And then the next page in your set of documents is what?
A. The number?
Q. No. Is there a page number on the next page?
A. There is a number at the very bottom but it's a No. 7. Do you see that?
Q. Okay. And then the last -- yeah, the last page is No. 8; is that correct?
A. Last page is No. 8, yes.
Q. Okay. I just want to make sure we're looking at the same thing.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes.
Q. obviously there were Pages 2 through 6 dealing with other experts. Okay, we have the correct document in front of us.
Are you still a distinguished research professor of history at Montana State university?
A. Yes. That's how I was hired in 2001.
Q. Okay. And what does that mean, to be a distinguished research professor?
A. It means basically I'm an emerita professor there.
Q. Okay.
A. It's a title they give to people who have basically retired and are in some kind of retired status.
Q. Okay. Do you consider yourself retired?
A. From full-time teaching, I certainly do, but as a researcher and writer, I am not.
Q. Okay. Has any of your research, other than what you've done for the tobacco companies, dealt with the issue of public
awareness on any issue?
A. Yes.
Q. what would that be?
A. I've done extensive research on women, primarily in the Colonial period, and then later on in the 1920s and actually in the
1960s where I had to use this cultural and social history methodology to try to determine the atmosphere and milieu, really, of
those decades or those periods in which women existed and in which they then had certain experiences.
I've also done the same kind of awareness research on a topic involving an Irish peasant family. I actually published a book
on this topic because the family in the late 19th century experienced a member of the family who they perceived to have been
taken over by the fairies and, consequently, I had to do research to see what the common knowledge or awareness was in that
community of fairy folklore.
And I did that, in part, by reading depositions which came out of the trial involving this peasant family because they ended up
killing the family member because they thought she was possessed by the fairies.
Q. I'm not sure where to start with that.
A. It's a very interesting topic. In fact, I enjoyed that research more than anything else because I literally saw everything that
existed in connection with the family, with the community, and with the case, the legal trial itself.
Q. And you believe it's important to see everything that existed with respect to a historical issue you're researching, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: No, I don't really believe that because I do a lot of contemporary research and you simply can't see everything,
but you try to see a representative amount of material. It depends on the time period. with the Irish case, I literally saw everything
that existed. when I worked on the Nixon presidency, obviously I didn't see everything that was out there about Nixon, but I
saw enough to write a fairly unbiased interpretation of him. So, it depends on the subject matter.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Your research of Nixon had nothing to do with awareness issues or public perception issues; did it?
A. NO, it did not, except to the degree that one had to deal with his negative public perception.
Q. Right. But you weren't doing an analysis of that issue.
A. No, I was not.
Q. Okay. Let's start with the women in the Colonial period.
Is that a separate research subject than the women in the '60s issue or were those together and combined?
A. They were separate topics.
Q. Okay, so it was women in the Colonial period.
What was the specific topic you were researching?
A. I was asked back in 1974, in anticipation of the bicentennial of the American Revolution, to write a paper on the impact that
the American Revolution had had on American colonial women, and I eagerly accepted this topic because I had just come out
of Berkeley and I was of the opinion that there had to be very radical women participating in the American Revolution, it just
happened to be an idea in my mind coming from my experience at Berkeley.
So I started to look at the material available on women for that time period, either diaries of women or books they may have read
or preachings from the churches they had gone to. I had to look into their birth records from church records, and from all of this,
much to my surprise and, to a certain degree, dismay, I found that there weren't radical American women during the American
Revolution, and that, if anything, the American Revolution set women back in terms of their educational opportunities, their
work opportunities, and a number of other opportunities that had been more open to them in the Colonial period before the
revolution.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I really apologize for interrupting but the videographer just told me that we're getting some
feedback from somewhere, we think over the VTC. Sounds like --
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: voices.
MR. CONGROVE: we're getting some voices and some tapping. I don't know if that's coming from your room or if it's over --
MR. GDANSKI: Not my room, but I thought you were going to say something else like maybe my computer was making noise
because it's close to the mike so I'm going to move it, but I don't know anything about the voices.
MR. KODSI: This is Neil, I've got my phone on mute, so I don't think it's me.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: So it's not Neil, okay. I'm not sure where it's coming from.
(There was a brief delay in the proceedings.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 10:05 a.m., we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I think we left off talking about the conclusions you reached in your research into women in the Colonial period,
correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. My understanding was that there were sort of two conclusions, two opinions, you reached. One was that women
were not -- and you can correct me if I'm misstating it, were not actively involved or were not an integral part of the Colonial
revolutionary process, and the second opinion was that the revolution and the Colonial period actually set women back.
Is that a fair restatement?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Okay. why did it set women back?
A. well, after every revolution, if you think about it, and I probably should have thought about it before I got into the research,
every revolution wants to institutionalize itself, and in the case of the American Revolution or any revolution you look at, the
French Revolution, Russian Revolution, the process of institutionalizing the revolution, that is undertaken usually by men and
very often, unless women have had a prominent role in the fomenting of the revolution and carrying it out, their needs are
very often neglected.
For example, voting rights for women coming out of the American Revolution were simply completely ignored, but, more
specifically, some of the economic activities that women had engaged in, particularly married women in the Colonial period,
were denied them as rules and regulations were put into place following the America Revolution. So the running of taverns and
acting on behalf of their husbands when their husbands were absent, was all made more difficult after the revolution.
And if you look at what was happening to women's education, they were not offered the kinds of institutions or schooling that
the men were. So, in a variety of ways -- and I looked at half a dozen different areas in which women operated before the
revolution and afterward, and found that their positions hadn't really been enhanced, and, consequently, their positions in the
new society were worse off than they had been prior to the revolution.
The end result of all of this was I wrote a very controversial article which turned out to be, much to my surprise, seminal
because it denied the original assumptions of a lot of Colonial historians, and I really wasn't a Colonial historian by training and,
consequently, the article caused controversy. But, in the long run, it became the accepted view of the impact of the American
Revolution on women.
Q. Okay. And would it be fair to say as a result of the revolution, women's rights were suppressed by the people instituting
and making rights?
A. Or ignored, not always active suppression; ignored, largely.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. And did you have to go and research the documentation recognizing the suppression of the rights or the actual literature
where the men perhaps would talk about denying rights to women or ignoring them?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes, I did. It would depend on the particular right. For example, women had in the Colonial period what was
known as “dower rights,” which, in essence, were a type of marriage insurance.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Marriage, sure, I know what the dowries are.
A. No, not dowries, dower rights, which meant that they technically received a third of their husband's property when the
marriage ended, either through divorce, which was very uncommon, or through death. It was a dower right that they had. And as
the country started to develop after the revolution, these dower rights became encumbrances on economic development because
these widows were entitled to a third of the husband's property and that didn't allow for efficient economic development as the
country was beginning to go into commercial agriculture and some minor manufacturing.
So dower rights were simply eliminated from the purview of widows. Incrementally, by 1920 or by 1820, 1830, most of these
dower rights no longer existed in the newly established states.
Q. Okay.
A. That's just one example, but you have to go back to find out what those rights had been, how they had been exercised
previously, and then how they had been slowly, but surely, eliminated.
Q. Okay. And that's an example of when you're researching a subject to look at the entirety of the literature, as opposed to just
simply reaching a conclusion that the rights have been eliminated, but it's important to look into the background to see exactly
how they were eliminated and how they were suppressed, right?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Say the first part of the question again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure.
A. I think I agree with it, but I'm not sure of one of the words you used at the very beginning.
Q. I'm not either. Can you have the court reporter read it back? Because if you are focusing on one word, I don't want to say
it again without the word.
(The pending question was read back.)
THE WITNESS: It was the “entirety of the literature” phrase that I had --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. I thought it was.
A. Yes. In the case of these dower rights, I was able to locate but not read every -- about 5,000 dower rights, and I was at the
Newberry Institute in Chicago at the time studying how to -- computerize research material, and that's where I'm getting back to
this entirety of the literature. I knew there were 5,000 cases out there. I was not about to try to read all of these dower rights cases
for the article because I never would have finished the article in time. And I learned a methodology at the Newberry Institute
whereby I could take a sampling of those dower rights, subject them to computer analysis, and come up with a representation
of the loss of what the dower rights were to begin with and the loss of dower rights in the course of the period following the
American Revolution.
So, in essence, I had a body of literature that was quite large which I reduced to a representative sample, and that's why I had
some question about your use of the term “entirety” because it doesn't quite indicate what I did in this particular case.
Q. Okay, I think I understand.
Did you include the 1994 surgeon general's report on cigarette smoking in your reliance list?
A. I think it is.
MR. CONGROVE: which year did you say, Jonathan?
MR. GDANSKI: '94, maybe it's 2004. I may be off on that.
THE WITNESS: Did you say '94 or '64?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I think I mean 2004, I'm sorry.
A. (witness reviewing document.)
Q. I don't think you did.
A. No, it doesn't appear to be.
Q. I'm looking at the revised one.
Is it accurate that the only two surgeon general's reports you included are the 1964 and the 1989 reports?
A. Yes.
Q. Any reason you left off the other reports?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: All of the other reports?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. well, any reason you chose those two specifically and left off, you know, the other surgeon general's reports?
A. well, the '64 one is of crucial importance because of the publicity it received, so it stands out as the most publicized of the
surgeon general reports up to that time.
Q. okay.
A. And then the '89 report is the one in which the surgeon general is indicating the addictive nature and qualities of cigarette
smoking.
Q. Okay. And when the surgeon general concluded that cigarettes are addictive, did the tobacco companies agree with the
surgeon general?
A. In what sense are you asking that they agreed?
MR. CONGROVE: object to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Did they admit that cigarettes are addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: There's no way I can specifically answer that, except to look at the newspaper or magazine coverage of that
particular report to see if in some of those newspaper accounts there would be responses from the tobacco companies.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And were there?
A. I'm not recalling right now, though I could easily probably check on it, what the exact responses were, but all of these reports
were responded to by the tobacco industry. I'm not right now recalling the exact wording of any of these responses in '89, but
they are in the stories for that time period.
Q. All right. Do you know when the tobacco companies first admitted, probably, that cigarettes are addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So it may have been 1990 right after the surgeon general's report, right?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Since -- I don't really know.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. Do you know when they first admitted that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you had an opportunity to review the congressional testimony where the tobacco companies deny that cigarettes are
addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
Do you have a date in mind, Jonathan?
MR. GDANSKI: I forget the testimony. I think it was the Waxman hearings, but I'm not sure of the date.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. DO you know what I'm referring to?
A. I know the Waxman hearings took place in 1994.
Q. Okay. And what were those hearings about?
A. They were, as you've stated, they had testimony from tobacco executives.
Q. DO you know what they testified to?
A. No more than I would recall simply from my own reading of the newspapers, but I don't specifically have any information
right now in my mind about the wording of what they said.
Q. And you don't recall, and I'm asking you as an individual, not as an expert, but you don't recall as an individual in society
when that congressional testimony was taken and when the tobacco executives gave testimony to Congress?
A. I recall that it took place in '94. I read about it as an individual, yes.
Q. And you don't recall what transpired or what they said; do you?
A. Not specifically. I recall in general there was publicity about the fact that their testimony seemed to contradict the general
awareness or common knowledge about cigarette smoking and the health hazards associated with cigarette smoking.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Excuse me just a moment, I need to replace the mike.
(There was a brief delay in the proceedings.)
MR. GDANSKI: Are we okay to go?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: Yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Did you include transcripts of the Waxman hearings or videos of the Waxman hearings on your reliance list?
A. No.
Q. why not?
A. For a couple of reasons. one, they occurred beyond the time period for which I've testified in other cases or even in this
case. And that type of public hearing simply doesn't lend itself to the kind of historical research I do, I have done in terms of
determining public awareness about cigarettes up until that point. In other words, if I were going to continue to do research from
'94 to the present time, perhaps there would be a reason to include it, but there wasn't for any of the previous cases I've dealt with.
Q. what is the cutoff date for your research then?
A. Normally in the cases where I've either done research or testified --
Q. In this case.
A. In this case it would be the early '90s, mid '90s at the very latest.
Q. But certainly not in a period of time including the Waxman hearings, right?
A. well, the Waxman hearings would have occurred before Shirley Barbanell died in '96, but in terms of showing the atmosphere
and awareness levels of the communities in which she lived or her education in New York City, the Waxman hearings would
be irrelevant.
Q. DO you know if Shirley Barbanell saw the Waxman hearings on TV?
A. No, I do not.
Q. what depositions have you read in this case?
A. I've read the family depositions of her husband, of her daughter, of -- I think it's a sister-in-law, Fay Barbanell, and of Fay
Barbanell's sons, Hugh and Joseph.
Q. Okay.
A. And I mentioned the daughter, yes, Karen Barbanell.
Q. Have you read the depositions of any of the experts who have been deposed in this case?
A. No.
Q. All right. Are you familiar with an individual by the name of -- I'm drawing a blank -- Shelley Gerking?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. How about Kent Tedin, that's T-E-D-I-N, do you know who that is?
A. No, I do not.
Q. Okay. He knew who you are, but -- for what that's worth.
I'm just going back to your disclosure now. It says that you're the president and CEO of the Center for the Study of the Presidency.
A. I was.
Q. Are you still?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. what is that organization?
A. well, it is the reason I moved to New York in 1995, to take up the position at that organization. It was established in the 1960s
to encourage students -- it was established, actually, by a fairly conservative individual who taught on Long Island at C.w. Post,
and he was disturbed by the student demonstrations of that time period. It's kind of ironic in a way, I ended up heading an
institution that came out of individuals' opposition to the demonstrations I was in as a student.
But he established this center so that there would be another outlet, positive outlet, he thought, for student activity and,
consequently, he established a journal of presidential studies and then he would hold conferences for students to participate in
biannually so that they could express their opinions and interests and perhaps dissatisfactions with what was going on. And he
also established an internship for white House interns in Washington o.C. And so by 1995, this had been going on since the
mid 1960s, and I came to head that organization.
Q. Okay. For what period of time did you head it?
A. Just for a couple of years, from '95 to '97, and then I went on to another administrative job.
Q. Okay, all right. I'm going to ask you some general questions about the disclosure.
Do you know who wrote this disclosure?
A. This disclosure, the statement you have in front of you?
Q. Yes, Doctor.
A. Yes. I reviewed this with the attorneys who actually wrote it because they condensed my earlier or other prior expert reports.
Q. And you don't have an expert report in this case; do you?
A. No, I do not.
Q. Okay. But in prior cases you've supplied the parties and the Court with an expert report, correct?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Is there any reason you authored expert reports in some cases and not others?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I was surprised that one wasn't required in this case, and I asked about it and was told that the State of Florida
didn't require expert reports at the state level.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. They do not.
Who did you ask about that?
A. The attorneys at Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. Anyone in particular?
A. I assume it was David Boman.
Q. David Boman.
Is that the attorney you primarily deal with at Shook, Hardy & Bacon, David Boman?
A. Yes -- well, yes, on this case, yes.
Q. Right. we'll get into some of the Shook-Hardy people in a little bit.
Dr. Hoff, did you have anything to do with the lawsuit brought by the Department of Justice against the cigarette manufacturers?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. No, you weren't retained as an expert in that case?
A. No.
Q. Are you familiar with the lawsuit at all?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Not really.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. when did Shook-Hardy first ask your permission to provide expert testimony in the case, or if I misstated the
relationship, you can clarify. But when did you first become involved with the Barbanell lawsuit?
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
MR. KODSI: Sorry about that.
MR. CONGROVE: No, I'm sorry, that's me, that's my conference dial-in number. we're good to go. Sorry, Jonathan.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And my question is, when did Shook-Hardy first ask you to be an expert witness in the Barbanell lawsuit?
A. It was back in December of last year.
Q. December of '08?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And tell me a little bit about that interaction in December '08, when they came to you with this case.
A. well, it was simply the name of the case and whether I would agree to act as an expert witness in it, but at that time I knew
really nothing else about the case except that we were to prepare a reliance list in advance of any further activity on my part
in the case.
Q. Do you know how many cases you've been listed in as an expert pending in Florida?
A. Right now?
Q. Yeah, pending in Florida.
A. I really don't know the exact number.
Q. Is it more than ten?
A. No, as far as I know.
Q. More than five?
A. It could be around five. I don't know the exact number.
Q. DO they have to ask you and notify you before they list you as an expert?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And in each of these cases that you're referring to, are those what we could agree to call the “Engle Progeny” cases?
A. I didn't hear the first part of it, I just missed the word --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. sure. In the five or so cases you are saying you may have been listed, can we agree that those are the “Engle Progeny” cases?
A. I think so, yes.
Q. And you're familiar with the term “Engle Progeny Case,” correct?
A. Yes.
Q. what do you understand that term to mean?
A. I understand it was simply a case in which a large class action suit was thrown out by the State of Florida.
Q. Okay. And that's the extent of your understanding of that case.
A. Yes.
Q. Did you ever Google “Engle class action” to see what it was about?
A. No -- no.
Q. No? YOU know, there was a lot of newspaper articles written about the Engle class action.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. How do you know that?
A. I, probably in just reading the newspapers that I read, would have seen it. I'm not so sure I remember the name precisely but
I do remember that a class action suit in Florida had been thrown out.
Q. Okay. Did you ever ask the attorneys for Shook-Hardy if there's anything more to a case being termed an “Engle Progeny
case”?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: No, given the way you've asked the question, the answer is no.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, I mean -- okay, I'll ask you.
Did you ever ask the attorneys of Shook-Hardy anything about the Engle class action?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Not really. I was informed by them that a number, numerous individual cases, had resulted from that decision,
but I don't remember that I asked them about that. I think I was simply informed that this case was one of these numerous
individual cases.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. what newspapers do you subscribe to?
A. well, you remember I'm living primarily in Big Sky, Montana, so the only paper I can subscribe to is the Bozeman chronicle.
There's just no delivery up there of major national papers. So I have to rely on Internet access while I'm there, and I regularly
read, obviously, the newspaper, New York Times, and some national, other national publications, but I don't subscribe to any
at Big sky, except the Chronicle.
Q. How about when you live in New York?
A. In New York, because I'm only there, again, four months at a time, I regularly pick up the New York Times and the
Washington Post.
Q. HOW about the wall Street Journal?
A. NO, I don't read that regularly. occasionally I'll look for something on-line that I'm interested in, but I don't read the wall
Street Journal.
Q. Okay. Do you subscribe to any news alerts on the Internet? And if you don't know what that means, I'll try my best to explain it.
A. why don't you explain it, though I think I know what you mean.
Q. Okay. I'm familiar with Google news alerts but most websites or news agencies have it where you can set up a system
that if you enter a few words, any time an article or a website, or anything, really, is created or comes out that has those key
words, they will e-mail you to let you know that this article has been written or posted or whatever it may be, depending on
that website or that company.
A. NO, I don't subscribe to that.
Q. Okay, gotcha.
All right, now in December of '08 when David Roman contacted you regarding this lawsuit, did you immediately agree to work
on it or did you need some time to think about it?
A. well, I agreed to work on it, but at that time I was actually working on another case so that the only question in my mind
was, would this case conflict with the research I was doing for another case.
Q. uh-huh. why would the research conflict?
A. In the sense that there might be a conflict.
Q. Okay. And the other case was also an Engle Progeny case?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know the name of that case?
A. It was Gelep.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. And did you testify in Gelep?
A. No.
Q. Did you provide a deposition?
A. No.
Q. Any reason why not?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I can answer that. I started to do preliminary research and then was not -- I wasn't requested to
either give an expert report or to testify.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. when did they let you know in Gelep that -- well, that you would not be testifying?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure, sometime at the beginning of this year, I think.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. DO you know if that case has been tried?
A. I really don't know.
Q. Okay. when you say you really don't know, I'm trying to understand --
A. It's something that I wouldn't follow up on if I'm not in --
Q. Okay, gotcha.
And so going back to my original question, in December of '08, then, when you were initially contacted, did you take some
time to see if it conflicted with the Gelep case or did you say “yes”?
A. I said “yes” at that time.
Q. Okay. And then at that time they asked you to prepare a list of reliance materials; is that right?
A. Yes, a preliminary list of reliance materials.
Q. Okay. And did you do all of that on your own?
A. No, I did not.
Q. who assisted you with that project?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. The attorneys at Shook, Hardy & Bacon, based on my previous reliance list.
Q. I mean, when you say “previous reliance list,” you're referring to a reliance list that you supplied in prior tobacco cases,
correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. what additions did you make to the reliance list, as opposed to the additions the attorneys for Shook, Hardy & Bacon
made?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I can answer that. What we initially did because there were some time constraints, is to come up
with a very generic reliance list that was not specific to the Barbanell case. So what we did then was to look at my previous
reliance list and simply put in generic material that would apply for my testimony as an expert witness on public awareness.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So is this identical to some of the prior reliance lists you've utilized?
A. I can't say that the first one you received was identical, but it was very close to previous lists with, again, possibly some
exceptions, but very close to the list, previous list.
Q. Okay, all right. And you can't point to anything specific which was added to the first reliance list; can you?
A. No, I can't.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you, how did you go about and research this Florida Fort Lauderdale newspaper? And it's called “Fort
Lauderdale News from 1953 to 1988.” How did you do that?
A. well, once I realized the specifics of this particular case, it was obvious that since the Barbanells had lived in Florida two
different time periods, that it would be necessary for me to look at southern Florida papers. And so I requested information on
those papers, that is listings of references to tobacco and smoking from those papers, from Shook, Hardy & Bacon. And so it
turned out that that Fort Lauderdale paper then, which became the sun sentinel paper, was one that I looked at.
Q. okay. So you asked them for those, you asked Shook-Hardy for those materials, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Did you compile any of these materials on your own?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: what materials are you referring to?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. On your reliance list. I mean, there's a lot of them, so it's hard to refer to one.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. well, if you look at the first page, for example, most of those early citations I did for the very first case I was involved in
back in 1994, and I compiled all of those.
Q. And what case was that?
A. I think the first one was the Rogers case in Indiana, it went to trial in '96.
Q. Did you testify at trial?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. AS a historian?
A. Yes, as an expert witness, as I would be here.
Q. Sure. My question, though, was not when you first compiled them, but who found them, who researched and located these
documents.
Was it you?
A. As I just said, yes, because these early documents all came from research that I did when I was at Indiana university, with
the help of my graduate students.
Q. And how about the selections of the Miami Harold from 1927 to 1990, did you go ahead and gather those on your own?
A. what are the dates again that you're giving?
Q. Miami Harold, 1927 to 1990.
A. No, those came from Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. At your request?
A. Yes.
Q. HOW long after you requested it did they supply you with a list of newspaper articles going back to 1927?
A. I don't know exactly, maybe, at the most, a couple of weeks.
Q. couple of weeks?
A. Yeah, I really don't know.
Q. Okay. And would the same thing be true -- and when I say “the same thing,” I'm referring to the fact that Shook-Hardy
gathered and supplied these materials -- gathered these materials and supplied them to you, would that be true for the New York
Daily News, the New York Harold Tribute, the New York Post, the New York Times, St. Petersburg Times, Tampa Tribune --
MR. CONGROVE: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. -- with those newspapers?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form, and I've got to tell you, Jonathan, we are coming up on a video break.
MR. GDANSKI: A dreaded video break. Okay, well, let's go through that question.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. is that true for those?
A. Not for all of them, no. It's definitely true for the Florida papers. It is not true for the New York Times, and it is not completely
true for the New York Post, but it is true for the Daily News and the Harold Tribune.
Q. So, and, of course, it's still true for the Miami Harold, the Fort Lauderdale News, the Fort Lauderdale Sun Sentinel, St.
Petersburg Times, and Tampa Tribune, correct?
A. I said for all of the Florida papers, yes.
Q. Okay, gotcha.
So you haven't actually done any research or investigation into what was contained in the Florida newspapers; have you?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: State the question again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure. You haven't done any of your own research or investigation as to what was contained in the Florida newspapers;
have you?
A. when you say my own research, what do you mean by that?
Q. I mean, you don't know if there's things that they did not include in the articles that were supplied to you or --
MR. Objection: Objection.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. You just don't know. You haven't done any of your own research to locate the articles.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form and, Jonathan, we really are out of time.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Can you answer that question and we'll take a break?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I think it would take too long to answer it.
Q. Then we'll ask it again after the break.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 10:44 a.m. This is the end of Tape 1 and we are off the record.
(There was a short break taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 10:51 a.m. This is the beginning of Tape 2, we're on the record.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. I think we left off on a question, so can we have the court reporter read back the last question, please?
(The pending question was read back.)
MR. CONGROVE: And just to be clear, objection to form, if that wasn't already on there.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And just to put the question in context, do you understand the question, because that was a bit out of context because it
really was to some prior questions.
A. Yes, why don't you give the question to me again and maybe both parts of it separately, there were two parts, it seemed like.
Q. well, my understanding is that you haven't done any of your own independent research into the Florida newspapers and what
was contained in those papers; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form, and I believe that misstates prior testimony.
THE WITNESS: I think I can't answer that the way it's been asked. I didn't gather the individual articles but I did independently
research the articles.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. But you didn't research the newspapers.
A. when you say “research,” if you mean gather the individual articles, I did not do that.
Q. Okay. Do you know who did?
A. Personally? I mean, an individual?
Q. well, what office?
MR. CONGROVE: objection.
THE WITNESS: The disks came to me from Shook, Hardy & Bacon. I don't know what office would have actually, physically
done the gathering.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. GDANSKI: okay. whatever's doing the crumpling sound, I don't know, I don't know what it is, but is that you?
MR. CONGROVE: That was me, sorry.
MR. GDANSKI: No worries, it just was coming over on the speaker.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And you haven't gone to the newspaper archives to look through them to see what is contained in the archives, have
you, for these Florida papers?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The use of the term “archives” is somewhat misleading in this context. Most major newspapers can be accessed
either on microfilm or, in these days, sometimes on the Internet. So one doesn't physically have to go to any particular archive
of any newspaper, any major newspaper, at least, in the country.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Did you try and access the Miami Harold through microfilm or microfiche?
A. The only thing I did with the Miami Harold and, again, this would be what I do with any major newspaper, is to look at the
indices that the individual paper provides for researchers so that you can do a spot check of a topic or a spot check of a time
period to see if what I have received on the disk is reflected in the newspaper's indices which are independently accessible.
Q. I'm not sure, what do you mean by the “newspaper indices”?
A. New York Times, for example, and L.A. Times, Miami Harold, before the computer age, did provide microfilm indices of
their articles by topic, for the most part, and by time period, and so those microfilm indices have, in most instances, been now
transferred to make them digitally accessible.
Q. And you researched the Miami Harold indices for purposes of this case, correct?
A. Yes, and because it was the one newspaper I knew would have one of these indices.
Q. Okay. HOW much time did you spend on researching the indices of the Miami Harold?
A. I can't say exactly. I was simply trying to make sure that some of the major news stories that I had researched and used
previously in my -- in coming to my general awareness conclusions, were not only on the disk, but I checked to see if, perhaps,
there were other stories about these events that were showing up in the indices. And in the case of the Miami Harold, everything
in the indices or the index, in this case, showed up on the disk I had.
Q. Okay. And you did the same thing for the Fort Lauderdale Sun Sentinel, which was formerly known as the Fort Lauderdale
News?
A. NO, I did not. It didn't have a readily accessible index to its archive material.
Q. So how do you know if there is not additional articles which may be relevant or if things have been excluded? How do
you know that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't know it definitely, but given the research I've done in other newspapers where indexes were available,
it's usually -- it's turned out to be the case that the material covered the topics of smoking and tobacco and even tobacco ads
accurately.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. DO you know if Shirley Barbanell ever subscribed to the Miami Harold?
A. NO, as far as I know, she did not.
Q. DO you know if she ever subscribed to the Sun Sentinel?
A. AS far as I know from the deposition, she did.
Q. Okay. Did she subscribe to the St. Petersburg Times?
A. No. And that would have, I think, been out of her geographical area.
Q. Yeah, I think so, too.
HoW about the Tampa Tribune?
A. Same would apply there, it's not in south Florida.
Q. All right. And so why are those included on your reliance list?
A. Because they gave me general information about coverage in Florida in the entire state on the topics of tobacco and health
hazards and the habit-forming nature to cigarette smoking, so it gave me a more comprehensive picture of the entire state, rather
than simply limiting my research to the area in which she lived. It's conceivable that the Sun Sentinel might have stood out
as an oddity or be abnormal with respect to the coverage that would have occurred in the St. Petersburg paper or the Tampa
Tribune. So that's why I looked at those papers as well.
Q. Okay. who selected the St. Petersburg Times and the Tampa Tribune as papers to look at?
A. Those two papers I selected earlier because of the research I was doing on the Gelep case.
Q. Okay. So you didn't select them in this case because you wanted to see what the universal knowledge was in Florida, you
already had those, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. So why didn't you select additional newspapers in Florida, maybe a paper in Jacksonville or a paper in west Palm Beach,
perhaps?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: well, I think there's a point of diminishing and returns, you would have selected numerous other papers, but I
was trying, first of all, to use the Miami Harold as the paper of record for the state because it is in the largest city and the largest
paper. Then I looked specifically at the St. Petersburg and Tampa Tribune papers because of the other case in which I was
involved, and then it was logical to go to the Fort Lauderdale newspapers or the Sun Sentinel because of where the Barbanells
lived. There's no point doing scatter-gun research if you can locate a locale where the individual had resided.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. DO you know if Barbanells, and specifically Shirley, ever read or subscribed to Better Homes and Gardens?
A. No.
Q. Do you know if she ever read or subscribed to Consumer Reports?
A. No.
Q. And do you know if she ever read or subscribed to Florida Health Notes?
A. No.
Q. Same question with regard to Good Health.
A. Same answer, no.
Q. Okay. How about Good Housekeeping?
A. No.
Q. And how about Ladies Home Journal?
A. No, though there's some indication from the daughter's deposition that she might have read women's journals, but I don't
know which ones.
Q. Right. And certainly you don't know if it was Ladies Home Journal or some other journal.
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. How about Life Magazine?
A. I don't know if she read it.
Q. So what are these doing on your reliance list?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: well, as we started out talking about the earlier items on the list, they represent research that I've done
previously to obtain a national view of what kinds of popular magazines and newspapers are available to the average person
that contained information about smoking and about cigarette health hazards in general. In other words, the type of research I
do is comprehensive to the degree that it tries to convey a picture of what the national viewpoint of, in a very general sense,
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
of smoking and health hazards of smoking as were available to the average reader. And those newspapers and magazines were
available, readily available, to the average reader.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And would you agree that throughout all these newspapers and magazines and publications, the average American reader was
receiving mixed messages regarding the health risks of smoking? some said it was bad for you, some said it was undetermined,
and some said it was flat out not bad for you.
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: It depends on what you mean exactly by “mixed messages.”
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, that the message wasn't, you know, uniform and it was not definitive.
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: It would depend to a certain degree on the particular publication. For example, something like Reader's Digest
was uniformly publishing articles urging people not to smoke and pointing out the health hazards of smoking.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But, like you said, we can't just look to one publication, we have to look at the universal documents.
So, by analyzing the universal documents, would you agree that over the '30s, '40s, '50s, '60s the message in the literature
was mixed in that some said it was bad for you and some said it was not as bad for you? Some newspapers had quotes from
individuals who concluded that research was ongoing and it was undetermined at this point what exactly caused cancer, et
cetera. would you agree with that?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't. Your question is too general. YOU would have to look again at the individual publication. Senior
Scholastic, for example, didn't give out a mixed message to high school seniors about smoking. It was very direct and very
negative about smoking, as I've said, so was Reader's Digest. So the women's journals, again, tended to pick up on articles
about the harmful nature of smoking, for example, pregnant women. So I can't answer your very general question with a “yes”
because it simply isn't true.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, you can't answer my question because it's too general or because you disagree with it? I mean, I have to -- you've
provided an exhaustive list of reliance materials and you have not limited yourself to one publication; have you?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Yeah. So it's hard for me now to ask you questions about one publication because you're making the assertion that the public
globally relies upon all of the literature that's published and all the newspapers that are out there.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
So I'm asking you a question, after analyzing all of the literature that's out there, all of the publications, all of the newspapers,
and all of the magazines and journals, is it accurate to say that the message coming out from all of these publications was mixed
insofar as it was -- some would say cigarette smoking was very bad for you, some would say it was undetermined, some would
say we need ongoing research, some would say it's not bad for you? Is that a fair assessment?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't answer it because it varies.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. From time to time or journal to journal?
A. It varies from journal to journal, as I've been trying to point out, and so one can't say, for example, that Good Housekeeping
had all of those variable opinions or messages that you've just listed.
Q. Okay. Let's stick to the Fort Lauderdale Sun Sentinel or Daily News, then.
Would it be fair to say, looking at that publication all by itself, the message coming out of that publication, was mixed --
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. -- with regard to the health effects of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you're asking about a newspaper that I personally and very carefully looked at, and what's interesting
about the Sun Sentinel is that for the years that the Barbanells lived in Florida and subscribed to this newspaper, its editorial
position was very much in line with the surgeon general's reports, and it ended up carrying an unusual column beginning in
about 1986 called “News Bank,” and this column was one of the most comprehensive and extensive studies of the health
hazards of smoking, particularly for women, and the newspaper, in general, was concerned about women's smoking habits,
that I haven't seen in the other Florida papers. And, in fact, I haven't seen this News Bank column in any of the papers I've
researched before this time.
So, the Sun Sentinel took a position on smoking that was very strongly, both from an editorial point of view and the materials
of its columns and articles, very strongly in favor of these surgeon general's or other reports. For example, it made a great deal
out of the “No Smoking Day” that occurred in November of every year. It encouraged movie stars and athletes to come and
adopt individual people in communities to participate in a “Smoke-Out Day.” And then it would --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. wouldn't it -- I'm sorry -- I'm sorry, I thought you were done.
A. NO. From the time that these “Smoke Outs” began, the Sentinel was very much on top of that story. Articles days before,
articles days after, saying how successful it had been. They even engaged the sheriff in, where was it, in south Beach, to give
up smoking for a day, and publicized it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
The paper was unusually anti-smoking in terms of its editorials and in terms of its choice of the articles that it had published. It
obviously, at times, would publish information from the tobacco companies as well, but the overwhelming number of articles
having to do with cigarette smoking or tobacco were not favorable to the tobacco companies.
Q. And what year did you say they began to carry that column?
A. They started it in 1986 and --
Q. Okay. And in 1986, was there anybody who maintained that cigarettes were not addictive or that cigarettes -- it was
determined or not conclusively proven that cigarettes caused lung cancer and other diseases? was there any groups of individuals
that still held that position?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, when you say “groups or individuals,” in an organized sense are you talking about or just --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. In either.
Was there anybody who at that point in time, 1986, still maintained that cigarettes were not addictive and that cigarettes were
unproven or it was not yet proven that cigarettes were the cause of lung cancer and other illnesses?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not so sure that I could say with the -- agree to the exact wording, but, obviously, in some of these
newspaper stories, there would be statements by representatives of the tobacco companies, not necessarily agreeing with the
surgeon general reports or other issues that came up. But, keep in mind, in the '80s, particularly, there was agitation on behalf
of not smoking in public places, and no smoking on airplanes, and these kinds of issues. very seldom did you have indication
of what you could call pro-smoking groups or individuals cited or quoted. Depends, again, on the topic.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. DO you know when Shirley Barbanell started smoking?
A. According to the deposition, she started smoking, I think it was in 1939, when she was 16.
Q. I think so, too.
And do you know when she first moved to Florida?
A. she was married in Florida and lived there, if I remember correctly, from 1960 to 1964.
Q. uh-huh. And from 1960 to '64, would it be fair to say that the Fort Lauderdale News carried articles which contained both
messages that spoke to the dangers of smoking cigarettes and to the unproven nature of those dangers of smoking cigarettes?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: Again, you'd have to look or I could only answer the question by talking specifically about the issues for those
four years. Keep in mind what was happening in that time period, you had had a number of scientific reports come out. I mean,
you have to be very specific about this. The Fort Lauderdale paper covered the publicity being given those scientific studies
and in '64, obviously, covered the surgeon general's report.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure, I understand that they covered the scientific studies, and I'm asking if when they covered those scientific studies in
their articles, did they say, These are the studies that presented this position and there is, you know, another position that is
not conclusively proven?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Not in that didactic way, no. They would carry the stories on these scientific studies, and then, as I've indicated
earlier, would perhaps toward the end of that story or at someplace in the story, indicate the position of the Tobacco Institute
on the issue.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And what is the Tobacco Institute?
A. It was an organization that was established, oh, let's see, in 1958 to -- it really is kind of a public relations firm to present press
releases and, in general, to publicize the position of the tobacco industry on the issues which were arising from the scientific
studies.
Q. And what was the position of the tobacco industry that the Tobacco Institute promulgated?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: well, again, you're asking a very general question but I think --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm really not.
A. -- from a commonsense point of view, it would be one that did not completely agree, obviously, with the scientific studies
which were getting this heavy publicity at the time.
Q. And the Tobacco Institute did a lot of their own counter public relations; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: From what I read in the newspapers and magazines when they were quoted, they certainly attempted to get
out their point of view, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. So there were multiple points of views coming out then, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
MR. GDANSKI: I can't ask it any more -- I mean, I've asked it broadly and I've asked it exclusively and both times she tells
me my questions were inappropriate.
THE WITNESS: well, again, you're talking about multiple in a very general or generic sense. If you focus on a particular time
period as we started out, I think, with this round of questioning, on the period '60 to '64, there you have events occurring which
probably are going to amount to more articles and more information being presented to the average reader about the health
hazards and problems with cigarette smoking than you are going to find exclusively focusing on information from the Tobacco
Institute for that particular time period.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. That, I mean, that wasn't my question, and my question you answered at the end, was whether or not the Tobacco
Institute was putting out a message of the tobacco companies.
I think the answer is “yes,” right?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: AS long as that's not considered to be “multiple.” I'm a little bothered by the term “multiple.”
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm not sure what you mean by “multiple.” I'm not saying that was the only message that was out there in the public, I'm
simply asking whether or not you would agree that the Tobacco Institute was putting out the message of the tobacco companies,
which was, that cigarettes are not proven to be harmful to your health.
A. Yes.
Q. Yes, okay. And they were doing that in various newspapers across the country, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, let me back up just a moment then.
When we're talking about tobacco industry or tobacco companies, I'm just using that term pretty broadly, and if you need me
to clarify it, I will. But I'm using it to include, you know, R.J. Reynolds and predecessor companies, and Brown & Williams,
the American Tobacco Company. I'm using it to include Philip Morris. I'm using it include 1Liggett and Meyers, Lorillard.
You understand that, correct?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Okay. If at any point in time I'm asking you too broadly and my question, in theory, will encompass a company that you
don't believe is part of that question-and-answer series, let me know, okay?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. Tell me, you're familiar with the Tobacco Institute Research Committee, correct?
A. I'm familiar with it to the degree I know when it was established.
Q. Okay. Do you know any other name that it goes by?
A. Yes, the Council for Tobacco Research.
Q. Okay. what do you know about it? Tell me.
A. I know that it was established in '54, again, in response to some very specific scientific studies that the industry was interested
in, as it said, in conducting further research about. And so it then continued to do this kind of research until '64 when it changed
to the Council on Tobacco Research, changed its name, but its function, I think, remained the same.
Q. And what studies specifically were the impetus for the creation of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee?
A. TO the degree that the information was available publically, it appeared to be the -- this, again, is in 1954, it came on the
heels of the prominently publicized mice study that was done at the end of 1953.
Q. Can you define “prominently publicized”?
A. well, I think I can. It received, if you consider some of the individual newspapers and magazines I looked at, because it was the
study of mice, of animals, there were pictures of the mice which had been painted with tar, cigarette tar, and developed cancerous
skin lesions, and these pictures appeared in Life Magazine and captured the public's attention and the pictures appeared in Time,
pictures appeared in some of the newspapers. But it was the Life Magazine coverage that kind of made it a national issue.
Q. was the Frank Statement nationally publicized? If that was the term that you used.
A. TO the degree that we talked earlier that it had been published in some newspapers in the country, yes.
Q. In some, what was the number again?
A. 448.
Q. 448. Do you know of any other piece of literature that was published across the country in 448 major newspapers?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: NO.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. No? I mean, for example, the American Cancer Society reports, are those published as full-page ads in newspapers across
the country?
A. At times -- you mean, the report itself or simply statements by --
Q. The report itself.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. well, you would never publish a report of multiple pages in a single newspaper or newspapers across the country. The Frank
Statement was simply a single-page statement.
Q. Sure, I understand, and we'll get back to it. But you spoke a little about the TIRC and CTR.
Is that your complete understanding of those agencies?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I think to the degree that I -- my understanding is that they were formed to conduct research funded by the
tobacco companies.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. SO, correct me if I'm wrong.
Your understanding is that TIRC was formed to conduct research and TI was basically formed as the public relations department
of the tobacco company; is that accurate?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it's accurate, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. okay. was there an actual public relations firm that the tobacco companies used before the founding of TI?
A. Yes.
Q. And what was the name of that?
A. It was Hill & Knowlton.
Q. Yeah. And for how many years did Hill & Knowlton work for the tobacco companies?
A. I know that the relationship ended in '63. I'm not quite sure when it began. I think it was may be early '50s. I'm not sure on that.
Q. Did they have a hand in the Frank Statement and publicizing that document -- publishing that document?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know specifically.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you ever done any research into Hill & Knowlton?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. No? Their names came up a lot in the literature that you reviewed though, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Primarily it actually came up in the secondary literature on the subject that I read. Any history -- in any history
of tobacco or cigarette smoking that individual authors have written books about will usually mention Hill & Knowlton, if they
deal with that time period when Hill & Knowlton was representing the tobacco industry.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. would you agree with me that the tobacco companies and the industry groups conspired and concealed or omitted
information from the public regarding the health effects of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form; calls for a legal conclusion.
THE WITNESS: It does. My expertise doesn't extend to that kind of research or conclusion.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Did you run across any evidence in your research that the tobacco companies withheld information from the public regarding
the addictive nature of cigarettes and the health effects of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, primarily in secondary accounts that I would have read about the tobacco industry in general or about
cigarettes, that is in these monographs and books.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So you're saying you didn't find anything related to that in newspaper articles.
A. Not --
THE WITNESS: (TO MR. CONGROVE) Go ahead, sorry.
Not until you -- depending on, again, the time frame here. Not until, for example, the publications or the publicity given in
the Waxman hearings, then the newspaper articles would reflect the responses of Waxman himself and the response of other
members of Congress to the testimony of the tobacco executives.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I'm not sure I understand that answer, but let's go ahead.
Are you an expert in chemistry?
A. No.
Q. And you will not offer any opinions in this case with regards to chemistry or the substances contained in a cigarette, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. How about in biology, are you an expert in biology?
A. No.
Q. All right. And you will not offer any opinions regarding biology in this case; will you?
A. No, that's correct.
Q. All right. How about pharmacology, are you an expert in that area?
A. No.
Q. All right. And you will not offer opinions in that area; will you?
A. No.
Q. HOW about cigarette design, are you an expert in that area?
A. No.
Q. Okay. I imagine you will not offer opinions then --
A. Correct.
Q. -- in that area, okay.
Psychology, are you an expert in psychology?
A. No.
Q. Okay. will you offer opinions in psychology?
A. No.
Q. Do you have any training in social psychology?
A. No.
Q. You are not going to offer any opinions in the areas of social psychology?
A. No.
Q. Risk perception, are you an expert in risk perception?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. Okay. Do you believe there's such a thing as an expertise in risk perception?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I guess there could be. There could be expertise in a lot of things.
Q. well, you can say you are an expert, whether or not -- whether you feel that opens itself up to expertise, I suppose, is a
different question.
Are you an expert in statistics?
A. NO.
Q. Okay. YOU will not offer any opinions relating to statistics or statistical analysis in this case; will you?
A. No, I will not.
Q. Okay. How about polling, are you a polling expert?
A. No, I'm not.
Q. All right. will you offer any opinions on analyzing the results of polls or how polls were done, whether they were accurate
or not? will you offer any opinions as to polls?
A. No, I will not.
Q. Okay. Are you an expert in advertising and marketing, the effects that advertising and marketing has on the public?
A. NO.
Q. Okay. So you will not offer any opinions regarding the effects of advertising and marketing, will you?
A. I will not.
Q. Okay. I imagine you're not an expert in epidemiology.
A. I am not.
Q. Okay. And I imagine you're not an expert in addiction; are you?
A. No, I am not.
Q. Okay. So you will not offer expert opinion testimony in the field of epidemiology or addiction, will you?
A. I will not, yes.
Q. Okay. DO you know whether or not Shirley Barbanell was addicted to smoking?
A. I only know from the depositions that she, I think at least toward the end of her life, according to her daughter, thought or
said that she was addicted. And prior to that time, she simply said that she had a bad habit.
Q. Okay. Do you know when the -- well, we'll talk -- strike that last comment then.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
So is it your position that you're only qualified in this case and you will only be testifying as a historian, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you've never been qualified to testify in any other field, other than as an historian, have you?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. Have you ever been challenged as an expert? If you don't know what that means, I can explain it to you.
A. I guess you'll have to. Ever been challenged as a historian?
Q. Yeah. In lawsuits, under certain circumstances, the parties have the opportunity to challenge the testimony and the
admissibility of the testimony of the other side's expert. So in federal court that's known as a Daubert, D-A-U-B-E-R-T; state
court sometimes it's known as the Frye challenge.
But has anyone ever challenged your methodologies at testing or your methodologies at research?
A. I don't think so, given what you just said.
Q. Okay, all right. Let me look at one thing quickly here. I'm going to try my best throughout the deposition to be thorough from
my end so I don't miss any opportunity because I'm sure you know this is, well, potentially, my only opportunity to question
you before a trial in this case. So forgive me if I sometimes jump back and forth and fix certain questions that I may have
missed beforehand.
I'd like to go back to your disclosure, please.
A. okay.
(witness complies.)
Yes.
Q. In the second paragraph, let's read through that together. It states that: “or. Hoff is expected to testify about the long-standing
public awareness of the health risks of smoking cigarettes.”
So, I think, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, we've defined or we've tried to define “public awareness,” correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And have we defined “long-standing”?
A. It would simply mean over time.
Q. Over what period of time?
A. well, in my case, I've studied the accumulation of this public awareness since Columbus.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. You do certainly agree that the public awareness regarding the health effects of smoking cigarettes has changed
dramatically since Columbus, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: well, for one thing, there weren't cigarettes then. It was simply a question of tobacco use.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, it says here: “Long-standing public awareness of the health risks of smoking cigarettes.” So, I mean, you told me --
I don't know what's going on over there -- can you hear me?
A. Yes, we can hear.
Q. Okay. You told me that when you say “long-standing” in this context, you're talking about going back to Columbus. And
now you're telling me that that doesn't actually go back that far with regard to the health risks of smoking cigarettes.
So, my question then to you is, how far back are you going? Define “long-standing” in terms of this sentence.
A. In terms of this sentence, all right, I will.
Q. well, this is the sentence -- just so I'm clear, this is not my sentence, this is the sentence I'm operating under because it's
in your disclosure.
A. No, I have no trouble with your question, Counselor. The long-standing then would have to do with, obviously, the appearance
of cigarettes, beginning of mass production of cigarettes in the 1880s. Though they actually occurred, some usage of them,
occurred during the Civil war.
Q. Okay. So then why do we have on your disclosure the 1493 Christopher Columbus; plus 1604 James I, that from 1604; 1726,
Cotton Mather; and 1787, Benjamin Rush; another Benjamin Rush from 1806; Johnson Quincy Adams, 1845.
Do those have anything to do with this case or can we just put them by the wayside?
A. If you would look at the statement that we've been reading from, this disclosure statement, you'll see that I'm also expected
to testify about historical public attitudes and information about tobacco use, health risks of tobacco use. And, consequently,
those documents you mentioned there are part of my early research into the subject of tobacco use and they indicate, again, the
problems that people perceived with using tobacco, going back, as I said to begin with, to Columbus.
So that's part of the reason that they're there. The other part is to show the comprehensiveness of the public awareness or the
negative information available about tobacco use over time.
Q. Okay. So for purposes of health risks of cigarettes -- smoking cigarettes, we're going back to the early 1900s for purposes
of general tobacco use, we're going back significantly earlier; is that right?
A. Yes, well, for cigarette use, we're going back to the late 1900s. I guess that's what you said.
Q. NO, I said early 1900s --
A. Early -- no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. You're saying --
A. I'm saying late 19th century, is what we're going back to.
Q. Right, late 1800s.
A. Yes, late 1800s.
Q. Okay, sure. Can you define the term “risk”?
A. I guess kind of a generic definition would simply be something that -- a risk is something that might cause a problem, you
can take a risk.
Q. Okay, that's fine.
A. we could Google it here.
Q. No, it's okay. I'm not sure Google is an authority on definitions.
A. Okay.
Q. And just the last part of that sentence reads: “The risk of contracting lung cancer from smoking cigarettes.”
Now, I'd like to be clear, you're talking about the risk of contracting lung cancer, you have no opinions on the historical awareness
of diseases, other than lung cancer?
A. Associated with cigarette smoking?
Q. Yeah.
A. There were other diseases which appear in the literature about diseases related to smoking.
Q. But in this case, you're just going to talk about the long-standing public awareness of the health risk of smoking cigarettes.
You know, what health risk, is really my question. Are we talking just about lung cancer or a very broad range of health risks?
A. very broad range of health risks, as I've studied the subject over time.
Q. So why do you have here “including the risk of contracting lung cancer.”
A. Because that becomes a point of contention in the case.
Q. why do you think that?
A. well, because from the depositions it appeared to me that her family members thought that she died of lung cancer.
Q. okay. Next sentence says that you're expected to testify about the long-standing -- again, I imagine that long-standing has
the same definition in this sentence as it did in the prior sentence, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Let's go ahead and define long-standing in this sentence for purposes of what it's seeking to prove -- let me strike that.
This sentence you're talking about the long-standing public awareness of the habit-forming or addictive properties of cigarettes.
And for purposes of the public awareness of the habit-forming or addictive properties of cigarettes, can you define “long-
standing”?
A. I thought we just did with respect to --
Q. well, we did. I'd like you to define “long-standing” in two different -- for purposes of the question of the health effects of
smoking cigarettes, and then we also defined long-standing differently for purposes of public attitudes regarding tobacco use.
One has a much earlier date on the long-standing question.
So I'm asking for purposes of the addictive nature of cigarettes, can you define “long-standing”?
A. Yes. That would go back then to tobacco use and be a much broader historical period.
Q. Okay, that's -- okay. So that would be the same definition you're utilizing for the latter part of this paragraph where it talks
about the health risks of tobacco use generally.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. what are the addictive properties of cigarettes?
A. They are, again, you see the term “habit-forming” or “addictive properties.” what it refers to is the fact that many people
who smoke simply start to smoke more and more and find it very difficult to stop smoking, and in common parlance, that's
been referred to either as “habit-forming” or “habituation” or in this case, the idea that it's addictive.
Q. Okay. Do you know if the cigarette companies agree with you that cigarettes are addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't know. I can't answer, that's such a general question.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'll represent to you that in this case it's conclusively determined that cigarettes are addictive.
Were you aware of that?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Conclusively -- say the statement again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah. I'll represent to you that in this case it is not an issue that cigarettes are addictive.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Were you aware of that?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And I'll also represent to you that being an Engle Progeny case doesn't just mean that it came from this large class
action, it actually means substantially more, and I'll tell you a little bit about what it means. It means that there were certain
findings that were made by a jury, and one of the findings -- and you can tell me if you're aware of this, was that the tobacco
companies conspired together and concealed the health -- concealed information from the public regarding the health effects
of smoking.
Were you aware that that's not an issue in this case?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: That it is not an issue?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah. That that's conclusively determined, we need not prove that they did those things.
A. No, I'm not aware of any of that.
Q. Okay. Did you ever -- it's okay, I'll ask it later.
The next sentence states that you will address the historical method.
Can you define “historical method” for purposes of this sentence?
A. Yes, I can. That refers to the historical method that I use and other historians use in what's now called the field of cultural and
social history. I also do research in political history and economic history, foreign policy history, and the methodologies slightly
change there or is slightly different, but for this case and for the social and cultural history, there's a specific methodology that's
adhered to. Do you want me to go into it in detail?
Q. Yeah, I'd like you to, please. Not too long, though.
A. okay. well, all right, and some of this applies generally to historical research but the social --
Q. If something applies specifically to the research done in this case, then maybe you can reference that.
A. Okay. In this case what, and in the other cases I've prepared for, is we're trying to show what was generally available to
the average individual on the subject either of tobacco or of cigarette smoking and the difficulty of quitting. And this comes
under the heading of “cultural and social research” because you can't use traditional historical sources for finding this out. You
have to look to what we call nontraditional sources, mainly being the newspapers; the magazines; the popular songs of the day;
movies, if we're in a time period where there are movies; television can inform us. You look to see what popular songs were,
you look, obviously to see if there were any diary entries by average people, if they happened to be literate.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
So the social and cultural research attempts to show the average life of people in any given time period and what we do is call
it history from the bottom up, rather than history from the top down, which most historians traditionally practice. we usually
focus on prominent individuals and major events, and that's history from the top down.
Social and cultural history tries to show the opposite, history of the average person in the time frame in which that person might
happen to live, and so we use what are called “nontraditional sources.”
Q. Okay. what would be the traditional historical sources in this type of analysis?
A. For this -- for --
Q. For a tobacco case.
A. well, there are some traditional sources that you could go back to, but basically to show, what I'm trying to show is in terms
of common knowledge or public awareness is you're going to use the nontraditional sources. But, for example, if you go back
to the reliance list, you'll see that the writings of Columbus would be a traditional source. The statements by the Kings of
England would be a traditional source, James the First, for example, or Cotton Mather would be a nontraditional source, in that
I'm looking at a particular speech that he gave from the pulpit. Benjamin Rush would be a nontraditional source because he's
commenting specifically on his observations of the harmful use of alcohol and tobacco.
So, it varies, but some of those early sources on the reliance list are both traditional and nontraditional.
Q. well, I'm just curious, why is Christopher Columbus a tradition source, whereas, Benjamin Rush is a nontraditional source?
A. Because Christopher Columbus wrote an official memoir which is used by historians in other contexts and he's a prominent
figure.
Maybe this would explain it better. Traditional history is written about, as I said, prominent people and prominent events. So
you're looking at those individuals who are well known in history to see if they wrote memoirs or maybe wrote a book. You're
looking at exchanges between heads of state, you're looking at government documents to show how countries are dealing with
one another. Those are traditional sources used by mainstream historians to write about political, economic, and foreign policy
history.
So, in this case, Columbus is a traditional source because it's Columbus, but when you're looking at Benjamin Rush, you're
looking at a source that -- in which he's writing specifically about the subject matter of this case.
Q. Okay.
A. And you wouldn't use Benjamin Rush in a normal political study that you would be writing about the 18th Century.
Q. And going back to your disclosure, the next sentence says that you're expected to testify that both types of awareness have
long been reflected and reinforced in virtually every aspect of American society.
When it says “both types of awareness,” what multiple awarenesses are you referring to?
A. well, that would be the health risks and then the habit-forming properties.
Q. Gotcha, okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. uh-huh.
Q. And the next sentence, you're expected to testify about historical public attitudes and information about tobacco use and
the health risks of tobacco.
How are you able to talk about the public attitude?
A. Towards tobacco?
Q. Yeah. I mean, I understand you can talk about what's in the literature and what you believe to be in the newspapers and in
the articles, but how are you able to then draw a conclusion on the public's attitude?
A. Again, using this social and cultural history methodology, what you tend to end up with is a body of information that is
very general but which reflects the culture, really, of the -- the cultural attitudes of a society. And in this case, and this is true
generally of public awareness, if we didn't have this kind of common knowledge on certain topics, whether it be cigarettes,
tobacco, or something else, we wouldn't be able to laugh at jokes, we wouldn't be able to understand humor, we wouldn't be able
to understand cartoons, or comic strips, or even references in movies to, in this case, the subject matter of cigarettes and tobacco.
So, public attitudes are reflected in the popular, either literature of the period, whether it be comic strips or cartoons, and in the
fact that we can laugh at, in this case, when a cartoon depicts the health hazards of smoking cigarettes. If we didn't have that
kind of cultural glue which common knowledge represents, we'd have no way to express humor in society, or satire. And so
that if you -- every cartoon is an expression of public attitude.
Q. So are you aware of any cartoons that were -- strike that.
Are you aware of any cartoons where characters were seen to be smoking cigarettes and there was nothing discussed with regard
to the health effects of smoking or, perhaps even the opposite, they seem to be enjoying smoking the cigarette?
A. I'd say “no” to that, and my only qualification would be that in a satirical sense, there are, on occasion, cartoons or comic strips
where, in this case, what sometimes is referred to as the tobacco “fiend,” seems to be enjoying smoking. But, again, because
of the general public awareness about the health hazards of smoking, we can laugh at that or see it as a satirical presentation
of a smoking habit.
Q. Okay. Do you know if the tobacco companies utilized cartoons to advertise their product?
A. I don't, because if they did -- I don't.
Q. Okay. One second, let me just read through this.
Do you have an opinion one way or another whether or not Shirley Barbanell, prior to 1970, as a random date, prior to 1970,
was aware of the health risks of smoking?
A. Prior to 1970, I think --
Q. Yes.
A. -- from the deposition of her daughter, we do.
Q. Okay. HOW about based on reading the literature and the publications that are out there?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. That she was aware of the literature and publications out there? Is that the question?
Q. Yes -- yes.
A. TO the degree that she lived in several locations and was educated in a school system that provided such information, the
chances are, she was.
Q. But you have no way of knowing one way or another whether or not that's, in fact, true, you're just making an assumption,
correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I'm saying that she lived in two particular geographical areas. She was educated in a particular school
system that conveyed to her the kind of information about public awareness that we've been discussing.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. what textbook did they utilize in Shirley Barbanell's 2nd grade class for purposes of health education?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know specifically, but I certainly am aware of the lesson plans and the curriculum and the mandated
textbooks which were suggested by the state of New York, really from the turn of the last century forward, and which were
very clear and very concise and very precise for the 1920s and '30s when she would have been in school.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But you don't know which ones she used in her school, do you?
A. No. Again, mandated textbooks are mandated textbooks, and schools can choose and pick, but as I looked at those textbooks
for the 1930s, there was a consistent component in all of them about what they were calling then physiology and hygiene and
which later became health education.
Q. DO any of those textbooks talk about the fact that it's not conclusively determined what exactly the health effects of smoking
are and that it's an issue that's open for debate?
A. No, none of them did.
Q. Okay. DO you know where she went to elementary school, Shirley Barbanell?
A. I don't know that. It was in one of the boroughs, it wasn't in Manhattan, but I think it was probably in Brooklyn.
Q. Do you know where she went to high school?
A. I had -- I've forgotten the name, but the high school was specifically named.
Q. And do you know what textbooks they used in that high school?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. No. I only know, again, the guidelines and mandated textbooks and curriculum suggestions that the State was putting out.
Q. Okay. Now let's just look at the next paragraph in your disclosure, that you'll opine about the nature, sources and extent of
the awareness of the risks of smoking.
Is that any different? I mean, is there an additional opinion or is there an additional conclusion you're going to reach based on
that sentence, as opposed to those which preceded it?
A. I don't think so. All that paragraph is designed to do is to indicate that if you take the first two generalizations of the second
paragraph, I am going to try to apply them then to the decedent here, Shirley Barbanell, Barbanell, excuse me, the states in
which she lived, and in the educational system which she experienced. So, it's a repetition.
Q. Okay, I understand.
A. Yeah.
Q. I understand that. And moving to the next page, it says that you may offer opinions of testimony in response to issues raised
by Plaintiffs and Plaintiff's experts.
Have you ever been asked to do that or are you aware of the Plaintiff's experts, read any of the depositions?
A. No, I'm not at this time.
Q. Okay.
MR. CONGROVE: Hey, Jonathan, just a point of clarification. You have, really, kind of two questions in there, which is, is
she aware of who the Plaintiff's experts are, and has she been asked to -- I just want to be clear. YOU asked two questions here.
Maybe if you could go back and break them up, I think you might get a different answer, and I want you to know that so that,
you know, this is your opportunity today to ask her about that.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Are you aware of the Plaintiff's experts in this case?
A. No.
Q. Okay.
MR. CONGROVE: I thought you asked whether or not she was -- had been asked if she was to give opinions or to comment
upon and review the Plaintiff's experts in the case, have we asked her to do that.
MR. GDANSKI: I guess --
MR. CONGROVE: I thought that was the first question. I thought that was your first question. And then I thought you said, DO
you know who the Plaintiff's expert is in this case and have you -- there was a third question, have you reviewed their deposition?
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, so let's break it up then, thank you.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you ever been asked to review issues raised by Plaintiff's experts and comment upon the testimony provided by
Plaintiff's experts?
A. Yes, when those are available.
Q. Okay. And do you know who the Plaintiff's experts will or -- will be in this case?
A. NO, not specifically.
Q. And what areas of testimony from the Plaintiff's experts would you feel most comfortable responding to? I mean, you're not
going to respond to our addiction expert, are you?
A. NO.
Q. Okay. So, which experts would you respond to?
A. I have no list of the experts.
Q. Okay -- well, okay, then there's not much I can do.
Which field of expertise though, is my question?
A. I'm trying to think of -- I don't know if I've actually had to respond in previous cases to any other expert's report specifically.
Q. Yeah, I'm not talking so much as a formal response and I don't think the disclosure is either. You know, I'm not saying that
you will come back and say, I specifically disagree with so-and-so's assertion of “x.” I'm saying generally he has his opinion
on the matter and I have my opinion on the matter and we disagree.
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So if you anticipate doing that for any of the Plaintiff's experts in this case, I'd like to know that.
A. I anticipate it, but I don't think I've experienced it in past cases.
Q. Okay, there you go, that's fine. And we'll get into the next paragraph and your disclosure as we go through some of the
things that you rely upon.
But I would just ask you this question at the outset, are there any documents that you did not include in your reliance list which
you think should be included?
A. No.
Q. And when I refer to “documents,” I'm also referring to the songs or the videos you have on there.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
So is there anything at all on your reliance list which you think -- I'm sorry, is there anything at all not on the reliance list that
you think should be there?
A. I don't think so. I mean, there are other items that could have been added, but I think this is fairly representative of the
basis for my opinion.
Q. Okay. And are there any items that are not on the reliance list which you think would be evidence of a contrary opinion
that you've left off of the reliance list?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, it's a difficult question to answer. say the question again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Let me ask it this way.
A. Yeah, ask it again.
Q. Let me ask it this way, I won't ask it again so much as I will change it around and hopefully that will clarify what I'm
trying to ask you.
In looking at your reliance list, you include -- one second -- well, it's actually a bit confusing because I'm looking at both reliance
lists and -- here you go, you include several public opinion polls, correct?
A. Yes, I think I do. what subheading is it under?
Q. well, it's under subheading “other materials.” I think it's the last three items.
MR. CONGROVE: very last page.
THE WITNESS: uh-huh, I do see that, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And you include certain public opinion polls from 1954, another one from 1954, and one from 1957, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. My question basically is, are you aware of public opinion polls which you do not include which would potentially be
evidence -- well, which would potentially lead to opinions with which you disagree?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: The question is too general. I, as a cultural and social historian, I don't rely on public opinion polls for my
conclusions about public awareness. These happened to be significant because they are related to specific scientific studies
that were being publicized at the time and so are relevant in that sense but not relevant to my overall conclusions about public
awareness.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. what is the 1957 Gallup poll public opinion?
A. That poll is one which was commented on extensively in the newspapers and some of the national magazines because it
showed -- the question had to do with whether the people interviewed actually knew about a specific American Cancer Society
report that had come out in that year, a Hammond & Horn report, and as I recall, 77 percent of the people said, indeed, they
had heard about that report.
The specificity of the question is what makes that poll stand out because Gallup himself was later interviewed and the story
was carried in newspapers that he thought that was a phenomenally high figure for the general public to be aware of a specific
report. So it's a kind of a unique moment in polling history, even according to Gallup himself.
Q. Okay. And because it was covered so extensively in the newspapers and the secondary sources, you felt the need to include
it as its own individual reliance material, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. But you didn't feel the same need with regard to the Frank Statement.
A. Because -- well, there was never a specific poll that I know of or question by Gallup about the Frank Statement. I may be
mistaken, but I don't think there was.
Q. Okay. Let's take -- how much time do we have left on this tape?
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: 7 minutes.
MR. GDANSKI: 7 minutes, okay, let's maximize our time, I suppose. DO you all anticipate taking a lunch break? You know,
the time zones are different. I'm not sure what your schedule is.
THE WITNESS: Yes.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. I thought you would say “yes.” D you all want to take it after this break? It's up to you, Dr. Hoff.
THE WITNESS: I think this would be a good time, after this video break.
MR. GDANSKI: Right. I was about to start going through the Notice of Taking Deposition so maybe just so that we don't stop
fives minutes through it, we can stop a few minutes premature on this tape.
Is that all right with you?
THE WITNESS: Fine.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, then let's go off the record.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 12:06 p.m. This is the end of Tape 2, we're off the record.
(There was a lunch recess taken. After the lunch break
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MS. Anna Craig replaced Mr. Neil Kodsi in the deposition.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 1:14 p.m. This is the beginning of Tape 3, we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay, let's -- or. Hoff, do you have the Notice of Taking Deposition in front of you, by any chance?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. very good.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm not sure if we marked it or not before the break. Let's go ahead and mark that if we have not, as the
next exhibit.
(Exhibit No. 2 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. or. Hoff, when was the first time you saw this Notice of Taking Deposition?
A. Oh, I'd say a couple/three weeks ago, perhaps.
Q. Okay. And who sent it to you?
A. Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. HOW did you receive it, electronically or through hard, old-fashioned mail?
A. Yes, through FedEx.
Q. Through FedEx, okay.
Was there a letter accompanying it?
A. No.
Q. Okay. How do you generally communicate with Shook-Hardy?
A. Occasionally by phone and sometimes by e-mail, sometimes in person, but usually by phone or e-mail.
Q. And specifically with regard to this case, the Barbanell case, who have you communicated with at Shook-Hardy?
A. David Boman, as I think I mentioned before, and Vicki Thompson, and, obviously, Tim Congrove, toward the end of the
process.
Q. Okay, that's David Boman.
Who is the second person?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Vicki Thompson.
Q. Is she an attorney?
A. Yes --
THE WITNESS: (TO Mr. Congrove) No, she's a paralegal?
She's a paralegal.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Paralegal, okay, thank you.
MR. GDANSKI: Thank you, Tim, for clarifying.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And, of course, Mr. Congrove, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. Anybody else?
A. Yes, one other attorney, Tammy Webb.
Q. Tammy Webb.
All with regard to this case?
A. Yes.
Q. what did you talk to Ms. Webb about with regard to this case?
A. Nothing, really. I first talked to her this last Friday. I mean, I didn't -- she wasn't involved in my initial communications
with the firm over this case.
Q. Okay. when you spoke to her on Friday, what did you talk to her about?
A. we talked about preparing for the deposition.
Q. what, specifically, did you talk about?
A. In particular, we talked about this disclosure or this deposition notice that I have in front of me.
Q. Okay. I saw earlier that you had a version in front of you that was all marked up and written on.
What's that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. well, this version simply has on it that we were to meet here in Bozeman at 8 o'clock Monday morning and I didn't know
where this building on campus was, so I have a note saying, “Find out where the building is.”
Q. Okay. Any other notes on the next page or the third or fourth?
A. NO, I don't think so. It looks pretty clean. Well, let's see, might be -- where I had to bring something, I noted that.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, let's go ahead and mark that copy as the third exhibit.
(Exhibit No. 3 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. what did you tell MS. Webb with regard to the notice?
A. That I hadn't seen one before.
Q. And you got it three weeks ago?
A. No -- no, but I had not been -- I had not received a notice of this nature for the previous depositions that I had given.
Q. what did you generally receive?
A. I didn't receive any kind of a question list as is here under Schedule A.
Q. Okay. In past depositions have you had to bring anything with you to the deposition?
A. AS I recall, no, other than what would have been provided to the Plaintiff's counsel, as you have been provided with material.
Q. Gotcha. Okay, well --
A. This is the first time I've had to bring individual material myself.
Q. All right, that's interesting.
And when was the first time you spoke to Timothy Congrove regarding this case?
A. Regarding this specific case, it would have been sometime in the middle of February.
Q. Okay. And did he call you or you called him?
A. well, you could check the e-mails on it. I think he may have called me, I'm not sure.
MR. CONGROVE: Joan, you and I never spoke independent of talking with Dave Roman.
THE WITNESS: NO.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm sorry, I missed whatever --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: The question was about Boman, wasn't it?
MR. CONGROVE: (TO Mr. Gdanski) No, you asked about me.
THE WITNESS: Oh, I'm sorry, I misheard the name. I only talked to David Boman in the middle of February.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Gotcha, so let's go back.
My question was actually about Mr. Congrove, who is with you today, correct?
A. uh-huh -- yes.
Q. Okay. when was the first time you spoke with him regarding this case?
A. I think that was last Friday in a conference call.
Q. was that the same call that you spoke with
MS. Webb?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. was anybody else on that conference call?
A. Yes, David Boman and Vicki Thompson.
Q. Okay, they were all on the call.
How long did that call last?
A. I think that lasted between three and four hours.
Q. That's quite awhile.
Did you talk at all during that phone conference about your opinions in this case?
A. we generally went over them simply to kind of indicate for me to think about specifically how my general opinions would
relate to this case.
Q. But you had already developed both your general and case-specific opinions before Friday, correct?
A. Yes -- yes.
Q. Did they help reinforce your opinions over the phone or analyze your opinions and critique them?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. well, it was what I thought would have been a normal call about, for example, what information I had found in the depositions
which they really wouldn't have known until I had read the depositions. So it was kind of a back-and-forth on what specific
information I had gleaned from the depositions themselves and particularly from the Sun Sentinel paper.
Q. Okay, all right. Let's go ahead and try and go through the schedule attached to the notice, okay?
The first number on the schedule is “documents, reports, records, data, or other materials prepared, retained, possessed, or
produced by Philip Morris USA or any other defendant in this action or any officer, director, agent, or employee of Philip
Morris USA or any other defendant upon which or. Hoff relies in formulating” -- it should say “her” -- “opinions in this case.”
Do you have any such documents?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And you don't rely on any documents or records or anything that was produced by Philip Morris or any of the tobacco
companies; do you?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I'd say “no” to that. It's sort of general. what do you mean by “any documents” produced?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. You know, I mean documents produced by the tobacco companies.
A. No -- no.
Q. YOU are aware for years they had been creating their own internal documents, research analysis, public opinion polls,
scientific studies, they have a vast amount of such documentation.
You don't utilize any of those in formulating your opinions; do you?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I really don't, except to the degree that any information about Philip Morris would appear in the public
record of newspapers.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. The next item asks for the same thing, “documents, reports, records” -- et cetera -- “attributed to Philip Morris USA
or any other defendant in this action.”
Do you have any such documents?
A. The word “attributed” would mean that I did references to Philip Morris in the national media that I would have surveyed.
Q. Okay. So you read this as including any document that mentions Philip Morris or any of the other defendants? And again,
it says “Philip Morris USA or any other defendants,” of course, including all the defendants we spoke about earlier.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
You're including in response to No. 2 any document that mentions those companies?
A. well, those references to Philip Morris and some individual tobacco companies would occasionally, obviously, occur in the
newspaper stories I was reading or the magazine stories or in the television productions that were produced in the '50s and '60s.
Q. okay. All right, No. 3 asks for “reports, summaries, impressions, memoranda, and evaluations that Dr. Hoff has prepared
relating to this litigation or to” -- it should say “her,” I'm sorry -- “opinions in this case.”
Have you prepared any notes or memoranda?
A. I think you have them, if I'm not mistaken.
Q. I actually don't.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, you know, what we have, and I mentioned this before we started today, before going on the
record, there are two items that Dr. Hoff provided to me when we met yesterday, being notes from her deposition -- from her
review of the depositions of the Barbanell family, and also notes from her review of the Sun Sentinel. And we have those here,
obviously, and I know we're thousands of miles apart, but they're here with Dr. Hoff today.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. Can we maybe during the next break have those sent over here by e-mail?
MR. CONGROVE: If I can find a fax machine here in the building, we can do that.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. I know during one of the breaks the court reporter mentioned that there's a scanner and we could
potentially e-mail documents, that would be a better alternative, quicker and cleaner alternative.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I didn't hear that, I'm sorry, but, yeah, if there's a scanner, we can go that route.
THE REPORTER: Counsel, I was talking about after the deposition from my office.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. well, during the next break we can see if we can get them over here, because, of course, I'd like to
look at those, if at all possible.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Other than what Mr. Congrove just mentioned, and that was your notes from reading the depositions and your notes from
reviewing the Sun Sentinel newspaper articles, do you have anything else that you've produced?
A. No.
Q. Okay. No. 4 asks for “articles, books, book chapters, or other scientific publications” that you rely upon in forming your
opinions in this case.
Are there any that you have not produced on your reliance list?
A. No, they're on the reliance list.
Q. Okay. No. 5 asks for “documents, literature, and/or data” that you rely on to form your opinions in this case.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
I imagine that's your reliance list, correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Okay. Have you reviewed any medical records in this case?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And No. 6 asks for medical records but it also asks for documents, data, and literature reviewed by Dr. Hoff in forming
your opinions or preparing to give testimony in this case.
Other than what is on your reliance list, is there anything that is responsive to No. 6?
A. No.
Q. Okay. No. 7 asks for “all scientific publications, documents, literature” -- et cetera -- “forwarded to Dr. Hoff by any lawyer
representing any defendant in this case.” Let's talk about that for a moment.
Your reliance list, do you know how many items -- well, do you know how many pieces of paper are on your reliance list, on
all the documents and all the Cos if I was to print them out?
A. If you were to print them out? No.
Q. Yeah.
A. No.
Q. How did you read all of them, on the computer?
A. NO. I mean, some of them I read in hard copy, others, you know, depending on the format. I read hard copy of some of the
earlier newspapers I studied, some of the newspapers I read on disk. The historical ones, I read hard copies of. The legislation,
I read hard copies of. It depends.
Q. Okay. But you've read them all, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And --
A. Yes, I've read them all, but not all specifically in the last two-and-a-half weeks or three weeks.
Q. which ones did you read specifically in the last two-and-a-half/three weeks?
A. well, I would have read all of those that pertained specifically to this case. I had to read the depositions and then I had to
work on the Sun Sentinel disk.
Q. when did you receive a Sun Sentinel disk?
A. Sometime after, I guess, the middle of February.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. How many hours did you spend reviewing that disk?
A. I think that might show up on my invoice. I don't --
Q. Okay, we'll get to that.
Well, did you review anything else on this list in preparation for today's deposition, as opposed to having reviewed it at some
point in the past?
A. Anything else on this list?
Q. Other than the Sun Sentinel list, yes.
A. well, the Sun Sentinel list, I had to review or I had to work on for the first time. I did have to go back and review what
previous research I had done in the New York newspapers for an entirely different case.
Q. uh-huh. So when was the last time you read the article “Making Life Healthful” by John Guy Fowlkes?
A. Can you see where it is on this reliance list?
Q. It's Page 4.
A. My pages aren't numbered.
Q. Third one from the bottom.
A. Okay, that is part of the textbook material and I would have looked at that probably back in the, oh, late '90s, maybe early
part of this decade, for textbooks that had been indicated in the New York legislation about -- or in New York guidelines for
textbooks for New York. I probably have a xerox copy of it but I'd have to take a look at it to refresh my memory completely
on that item. I haven't looked at it probably in maybe as many as a half a dozen years.
Q. Okay. But you rely on it in this case, correct?
A. Because it pertains to the state of New York, yes.
Q. How do I know that that pertains to the state of New York?
A. Because it would have been one of the mandated textbooks.
Q. Okay. where do you have on here a list of the mandated textbooks for the state of New York?
A. They were mandated or given out as guidelines for these health classes periodically, so there is no one single list of all
mandated textbooks. what I did was to go back to look at the ones that were mandated over a decade period in the 1930s, in
particular, and a number of these textbooks, as you look at the dates, do come from either the 1920s or 1930s.
Q. without having to go through this list in it's entirety because that would take a substantial amount of time, can you tell me
what documents on this list you found on your own and what documents had to be provided to you by attorneys for shook-
Hardy or attorneys for Philip Morris -- attorneys for Philip Morris and Shook-Hardy.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I could probably do it section-by-section if you --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah.
A. well, if you just look at the section we're in, on the educational materials, because I lived in New York for a while, I worked
both at the Teachers College Library in New York, I worked at the City Archives in New York to find these guidelines and
references to textbooks. I accessed information from the university at Albany because they were putting out guidelines and
curriculum for health classes. So that is most of the educational material I was able to see, personally, and gather, personally,
for another case, and in some instances, I have xerox copies of the relevant pages.
Q. Okay. when were you first contacted by attorneys for Philip Morris?
A. In what sense?
Q. In whatever sense they contacted you.
A. Not in this case, you mean.
Q. NO, I mean in general.
A. In general when I first started to do work for research?
Q. If that's what you call it, yeah.
A. well, I was contacted by Shook, Hardy & Bacon. I wasn't contacted by Philip Morris.
Q. Okay. I'm sorry if I misspoke.
When were you first contacted by attorneys for Philip Morris?
A. In 1994.
Q. who contacted you?
A. A man named “Alan Purvis.”
Q. Does he still work at Shook, Hardy & Bacon?
A. I don't know.
Q. Okay. where were you teaching at the time?
A. Indiana University.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. How did Mr. Purvis contact you?
A. I don't actually recall. I think he had spoken to other historians who had then indicated to him that he contact me because
I might be interested in doing some research.
Q. So he had spoken to other historians who said you might be good a person to be in touch with for purposes of doing research;
is that about it?
A. I think so, yes.
Q. DO you know who those other historians were?
A. I don't recall. I think he might have mentioned a few individuals -- he might have mentioned a few individuals, but, no, I don't.
Q. How did he contact you, was it by phone, letter?
A. By phone.
Q. By phone.
A. uh-huh.
Q. Okay. And he introduced himself as an attorney for Philip Morris?
A. I'm not sure he introduced himself as an attorney for Philip Morris. He did introduce himself as an attorney who at that time
was compiling some kind of archive on tobacco material.
Q. And what did he ask you to do?
A. well, very generally, at first he asked if I was interested in doing the kind of research we've talked about before, historical
research about the general impression of tobacco use going back to when it was first introduced into Europe, and to carry
forward that research to see the points of view held by either scholars or preachers or prominent people or average people about
the use of tobacco, and ultimately getting into the use of cigarettes.
Q. Okay. And he asked if you'd like to be a part of that research team? Explain a little bit more to me. I'm not sure I understand.
A. well, what I said is that -- and I think he may have obtained this information from another historian who might have
recommended me, was that I had a number of graduate students who were doing social and cultural history studies and that
it seemed to me this kind of research into the impressions of the products coming from tobacco and leading up to the use of
cigarettes might lend itself to that kind of methodology. And so I said that I would talk to my graduate students about it to
see if they were interested.
Q. Okay. And were your graduate students interested?
A. Not all of them were, but enough of them were far enough along in their -- it depended on how far along they were on
their PhD dissertations. You reach a point in the academic system where the university is no longer funding the completion of
your dissertation. And so there were a number of graduate students whose dissertations I was directing who actually needed
the money to complete their own writing of their dissertations.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. At what point in time did Mr. Purvis let you know that he was an attorney for Philip Morris?
A. I'm not sure he ever said he was an attorney for Philip Morris. I thought -- my recollection is his connection was with shook,
Hardy & Bacon. I may be mistaken on that.
Q. who did you understand Shook, Hardy & Bacon to represent in this case?
A. well, in most of the cases I've been involved in, it's been Philip Morris, but it's been other tobacco companies as well.
Q. who else have they represented?
A. In the cases I've been involved in?
Q. Yes, Doctor.
A. I don't know.
Q. Okay. But it's almost always been Philip Morris, right?
A. I think so.
Q. Okay. Mr. Purvis never told you he actually represents them, he just said, I'm an attorney from a firm called Shook, Hardy
& Bacon?
A. well, I don't think that -- as I recall, you know, this has been, what, how many years ago, whether he mentioned Shook,
Hardy & Bacon before he mentioned Philip Morris, I don't know.
Q. Right. But at some point it maybe was aware to you that his firm was working for Philip Morris, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you know when that was?
A. No, not exactly. I think -- I don't know exactly when it was.
Q. If you could -- well, when did you first testify as a witness on behalf of the tobacco companies?
A. In 1996.
Q. Okay. So at some point between 1994 and 1996 when you testified, you became aware of the fact that this law firm you
were working for represented Philip Morris, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. But you don't recall at what point in time.
A. No, because it just simply doesn't stand out in my recollection specifically when I found this out.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. And you don't recall having asked Mr. Purvis, who are you? why are you interested in this? what are you coming -- why
are you coming to me to do this research?
A. well, no doubt I asked him at some point if I could get my graduate students to agree to this, what, indeed, we were supposed
to be doing with the research we were doing and what use was going to be made of it.
Q. Right. And he gave you direction and answered your questions, right?
A. Yes.
Q. So before you started really doing the research, you had an idea that you were working as an attorney who represented the
tobacco -- working for an attorney who represented a tobacco company, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think that's generally correct, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you ever been approached by an attorney who represents a major corporation in the past for purposes of starting a
research project?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Did you think that was a little odd?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Not particularly.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. why not?
A. Given the kind of research that he wanted done or that I thought we would be doing in terms of social and cultural history, it
seemed a logical topic. Now, we do train historians in history to do corporation history, so it's not something that's completely
unusual.
Q. Right. And you've done no corporation history research; have you?
A. No, but I've been associated with the public history program at various universities where students are trained to do that.
Q. And you certainly never thought to look into the history of the corporations that you're now providing testimony for; did you?
A. NO, that's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. And would that have made your research more thorough and accurate and made your opinions, opinions which are composed
of all of the information?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Ask the question again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah. I'm asking if you would have undertaken to actually look into the history of the companies that you're now here to
provide testimony on behalf of, if you would have done that kind of research, do you think that would have made your opinions,
opinions which are based on all of the facts and all of the data and all of the available information?
A. well, all of the facts and all of the data and all of the valuable information pertaining to public awareness and individual
history of companies would not have necessarily been the first thing I would look at to determine public awareness.
Q. Right. well, they're not the first, the second, and if I count how many things you have on your reliance list, they're probably
not anywhere near the first or the, you know, 20,000th right?
MR. CONGROVE: objection, object to the form; argumentative. There's not even a question pending; is there?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Do you know if the tobacco companies have any internal data on what the public perceived to be dangers associated
with smoking cigarettes or of the addictive nature of cigarettes?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Ask the question again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure. Do you know if the tobacco companies have any of their own internal data which discussed the public's recognition
of the dangers or the public awareness of the dangers associated with smoking cigarettes or the addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes?
A. whether they had information about public awareness? Is that how that question breaks down?
Q. Yes -- yes.
A. I'd say no.
Q. Yes -- no. They can do polls and sponsor polls to that effect?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Did you ask them for this information to see if they had it?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Ask whom?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Lawyers representing Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds or Liggett or Lorillard.
A. No.
Q. No. And if you did ask them if they had such documentation regarding the public awareness of these issues you're to testify
to, and they said “yes,” would you want to look at that information?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I'm having difficulty with the question because I'm not sure what you mean by what information they
would have had about public awareness.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Polls that they sponsored.
A. I'm aware that they -- because it appeared in some of the secondary material I read, that they did do some internal polling
but -- through Roper, but that's about all I know about it.
Q. Did you ever look at those polls?
A. No, I never looked at the Roper polls.
Q. why not?
A. Because the newspapers and magazines quoted the Gallup polls. You scarcely can find a reference to Roper polls in the
time frame that we're looking at.
Q. well, sure, they were internal tobacco polls.
But my question is, those polls would relate to tobacco companies understanding of the public awareness, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: They might, but not having seen these polls or seen the questions, I couldn't answer that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Have you ever asked to look at them?
A. NO.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. wouldn't you be interested in knowing what the tobacco companies perceived to be the public's awareness of the health
hazards of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Not really, unless the companies were going to make that information public.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, that information was based on public data. I mean, there's two different types of documents. I understand that answer
would be applicable for the internal tobacco documents dealing with the health effects of smoking and that they potentially
knew about them in advance of certain scientific studies. I'm not talking about that. I understand that answer would be your
answer for those things.
I'm talking about tobacco companies' internal polling data which would be representative of what the public thought to be the
general awareness -- what the public's general awareness was as to the hazards of smoking.
Those would be interesting to you; right?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form. Counsel, you're asking her about documents that, in all fairness, she's not seen and
it's very abstract to your question.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But can you answer it?
A. The only way that material would be relevant would be if a representative for an individual tobacco company or a
representative for all tobacco companies had made public that these internal polls they were taking differed or contradicted the
public Gallup polls which were evident in the literature I looked at.
Q. Okay. Do you know who -- well, strike that.
I'm going to list off a bunch of individuals and you can tell me if you have heard of their names and if you have, then we can
talk about your relationship or association with them, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. John Burnham.
A. I know his work, his book.
Q. what's his book?
A. “Bad Habits.”
Q. “Bad Habits.”
And have you ever spoken to him?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. No.
Q. Have you read his book?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. All right. And what conclusions does he reach in his book?
A. It's an interesting study of how, with respect to the topic under consideration here, how smoking started out, smoking
cigarettes started out, and even cigars, started out as a kind of a lower-class habit, and in the course of the early part of the
20th Century, became a middle-class virtue. It's a very interesting study because he shows these socioeconomic changes in the
acceptance of smoking cigarettes and cigars, among other things.
Q. Sure, I understand.
Do you have an opinion as to why people start smoking?
A. I don't think he does in his work.
Q. I'm asking you, Dr. Hoff --
A. what?
Q. -- if you have an opinion why people started smoking.
A. No, I really don't.
Q. Okay. would you agree that at certain points in time smoking was glamorized and made to look very cool by certain
individuals in Hollywood or in the media?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you would have to give me a more specific time period for that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. The 1930s.
A. well, again, if you are going back to the Burnham book, he shows that it achieved middle class acceptance but certainly not
exclusively through any one form of media or any one factor. It was a combination of things --
Q. I'm sorry, go ahead.
A. It achieved acceptance, and whether it achieved acceptance because it was portrayed as glamorous, is perhaps one factor,
but not the only factor.
Q. So you would agree, then, at least at certain points in time it was portrayed as glamorous, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: On occasion, but you would have to be much more specific in asking that question.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Then let's talk about the decade of the 1930s.
During the '30s was there any point in time that smoking cigarettes was portrayed as being glamorous? And when I say
“glamorous,” I'm not using that one adjective, there are several that can go with it, you know, cool, hip, popular, the “in” thing
to do. I'm just using the word “glamorous.” I think you used that word or maybe I did. But I'm referring to the notion that
smoking was the glamorous thing to do.
A. And you're just referring to all media or what, exactly?
Q. If an individual was 10, 11, 12, 13 years old in the '30s growing up, what they were exposed to. So, yes, I'm referring to
television, movies, books, what they would be exposed to.
A. You are not referring to television in the '30s.
Q. well, no, not quite, just yet. But I'm referring to what a person would have been exposed to in that decade. And the next
question will be the '40s. So if you want to give a -- and the following question will be the '50s. So if you want to broaden your
response to incorporate those decades, that's fine with me.
A. Again, on occasion, I think you could say that, but you'd have to look at specific instances. Keep in mind the '30s was a
decade of depression so that while there were happy movies put out in that time period, I don't think they focused necessarily
on presenting a particular view of cigarettes.
Q. Okay. In the '40s?
A. In the '40s, again, you have movies that would have cigarettes in them, obviously you have that down to the present day,
and again --
Q. Not so much anymore.
A. Yeah, they haven't been -- the movies I've been seeing, they're still there.
Q. Yeah? Like what?
A. well, I'm trying to think. I just saw a couple of movies in New York recently. In all the foreign films I see, they're smoking,
but they're smoking -- I'm trying to think of the most recent American film I've seen -- ahhh. Schenectady, New York with
Hoffman, Philip Seymour Hoffman, they're smoking. They're smoking -- there's been a move to try to eliminate smoking, but
to eliminate smoking from movies which are historically placed in a time when people smoked, is inaccurate.
Q. HOW about this individual, Kenneth Ludmerer?
A. HOW is it spelled? I don't think so.
Q. K-E-N-N-E-T-H -- next and last name is L-U-D-M-E-R-E-R.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. No, I don't know that name.
Q. Okay. Stephen Ambrose, do you know who that is?
A. I knew who he was and actually knew him. He did a lot of work here in Montana.
Q. All right. How about his work related to tobacco litigation?
A. NO, I don't know about that.
Q. Okay. And how about Jonathan Bean, do you know who that is?
A. Jonathan Bean or Deem?
Q. B-E-A-N, “B” as in boy.
A. No.
Q. No? HOW about Robert Norell, do you know who that is?
A. I don't.
Q. Okay. Do you know the names of any other individuals who have testified as historians on behalf of the tobacco companies?
A. I really don't.
Q. You don't, okay.
How about Michael Shaller, do you know who that is?
A. Yes, I know Michael Shaller's work, I know him.
Q. DO you know if he's testified as a historian on behalf of the tobacco companies?
A. NO, I don't. He's a Far Eastern specialist, as far as I know.
Q. well, your specialty in history doesn't limit your ability to testify as an expert tobacco historian; does it?
A. NO, it doesn't.
Q. And did you consider yourself a tobacco historian prior to Alan Purvis contacting you?
A. I don't consider myself a tobacco historian.
Q. Do you consider yourself a historian of the public's knowledge of the health effects of smoking throughout the 20th Century
in the united States?
A. I consider myself knowledgeable about that subject matter, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. were you knowledgeable about that subject matter prior to Alan Purvis contacting you?
A. No.
Q. And now you consider yourself an expert in that subject matter, correct?
A. On awareness, yes.
Q. Okay. would it be fair to say that shook-Hardy really created you as an expert in this field?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I think that's an exaggeration. “Created,” I think, is an exaggeration. I'm doing consulting work for them --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, you had no knowledge before they came to you, and after they dealt with you, you are now an expert.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form. Is there a question?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, I'm asking if you agree they created you as an expert in this field.
A. No. I've done it on my own, through my own research. This isn't something --
Q. Okay. Go ahead, I understand, continue.
A. well, I think you're implying and I'm inferring from your implication that somehow this is a cloning process, which it isn't.
Q. Do you know if they have done -- strike that.
Do you know one way or another whether or not Shook-Hardy has contacted other historians and requested that they familiarize
themselves with the field of literature in the united States regarding the health hazards of smoking and the public's awareness
and that they, in turn, testify on their behalf in litigation?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: what was the first part of the sentence?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure. DO you know if Shook-Hardy has gone and done that with other historians like they have done with you?
A. I can only assume they have, but I don't know specifically.
Q. well, I think you mentioned earlier that you didn't know the name but somebody had referenced you, given -- someone has
referenced you to Shook-Hardy, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes, originally, yes.
Q. And what was that person's relationship with Shook-Hardy?
A. I don't know because I can't remember the name of the person who referenced me to Purvis.
Q. Okay. But you can't recall what they had to do with the tobacco companies, if anything?
A. No, I don't recall anything about it.
Q. Gotcha.
How long before Mr. Purvis asked you to be an expert witness and testify at deposition, at trial, how long before that time did
he contact you with regard to familiarizing yourself with the literature?
A. You're asking then --
Q. In other words, you said that it was in 1994 that he first approached you, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And I'm imagining sometime prior to 1996 when you gave your first deposition, he asked you to now become an expert
witness, right?
A. Yes. I'm not so sure it was he who asked whether I'd become the expert witness but he contacted me in June or July of '94.
Q. Okay. June or July of '94 and -- all right, in June or July of 1994, I think I asked you this but I'm asking it again, I'm sorry,
I just didn't write it down.
What was it specifically that he asked you to do?
A. AS I said, to look at the past history of tobacco use and the impression that the tobacco use -- impressions of tobacco use as
it was conveyed by either historical figures, heads of state, or as it was talked about by other groups or individuals in society
and how it came to be viewed, perhaps, by the average person.
Q. Gotcha.
And how many students did you utilize in initiating this research?
A. I would say at the time, because we were doing such original research on our own, at any given time I may have had three
or four working on what became an Indiana case.
Q. Okay. Do you know their names?
A. I'm not going to recall them now. There was one young woman, in particular, who stayed with me longer than the others.
The graduate students came and went, as graduate students want to do.
Q. Sure.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Her game was Gayle Fischer, actually, I do remember it.
Q. Gail Fisher.
A. uh-huh.
Q. And did any graduate students say “no” to the opportunity to partake in this research project?
A. I think a couple of them might have.
Q. And did any of them say “no” based on, you know, reasons associated with the fact that maybe they didn't want to work
at the behest of the tobacco companies or their attorneys?
A. No, that was never given as a reason to me.
Q. Okay. Has anyone ever not wanted to work on this project with you for that reason?
A. No. I mean, I've only worked with other graduate students.
Q. Right. I'm saying any of the other graduate students ever turned down the opportunity for those reasons?
A. No, not for those reasons.
Q. Prior to becoming an actual witness for the tobacco companies, what attorneys did you deal with, in addition to Mr. Purvis?
A. The major one in that time period was Bill Ohlemeyer.
Q. Do you know where he works now?
A. AS far as I know, he went to work for Philip Morris.
Q. Okay. what does he do for Philip Morris?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you know if he teaches?
A. In a university setting?
Q. Yes.
A. I don't know that.
Q. And who else, in addition to Mr. Purvis and Mr. Ohlemeyer?
A. It's mainly Ohlemeyer that I remember for that first case in Indiana.
Q. Right. what case was that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. It was the Rogers case.
Q. Okay. And that was the first time you had ever testified on behalf of the tobacco companies, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And the attorney who represented Philip Morris in that case was Mr. Ohlemeyer, in addition to other attorneys, but
he's the one who handled your portion of the testimony, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. who else, in addition to Mr. Ohlemeyer and Mr. Purvis, did you deal with at Shook-Hardy?
A. on that case?
Q. well, up until, let's say, 1996.
A. Those are the only -- well, Ohlemeyer is the only one I can remember. I probably dealt with others but they're not really
in my mind right now.
Q. Sure. How about attorneys at firms other than shook-Hardy, do you recall any back from those early days of your working
with them?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Do you consider yourself an employee of Shook-Hardy?
A. No.
Q. How do you frame your relationship?
A. I frame my relationship as a consultant to the firm.
Q. A consultant of Shook-Hardy.
A. on individual cases, yes.
Q. Have you ever met with anybody who actually works for Philip Morris?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Other than, of course, I'm excluding Mr. Ohlemeyer who now works for them. Individuals who at the time you met with
them were actual employees of Philip Morris.
A. Of the company?
Q. Yes. And the same question for the other tobacco defendants. I'm sorry for singling out Philip Morris.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. No.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, we're coming up on an hour and I know you and or. Hoff are starting to talk over each other so
maybe it's a good time for a break. I know our poor court reporter was getting a little flustered there. Thank you.
MR. GDANSKI: I've got no problem with breaks.
MR. CONGROVE: okay, 10 minutes, 5, 10, whatever it takes.
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, yeah, sure, sure.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 2:08 p.m., we're off the record.
(There was a short break taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 2:29 p.m., we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Let's turn our attention back to the schedule and try and go through that and touch on some sub points within the
schedule.
MR. CONGROVE: You're talking about Exhibit No. 3, the Schedule A to the subpoena?
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah -- yeah. Do you have another schedule?
MR. CONGROVE: No. when you said “the schedule,” I wanted to make sure we were talking about the same thing.
MR. GDANSKI: Sure, sure, I understand. I was just kidding.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Mr. Congrove, he just told me when we were off the record that y'all were in the process of sending me e-mails and faxes
between you and Shook-Hardy, so I'm going to skip that one for the moment, hopefully I'll remember to get back to it.
I assume you have not corresponded at all with any physicians who treated Shirley Barbanell, correct?
A. Yes. what number are you on?
Q. I'm on No. 10, Dr. Hoff.
A. okay, all right.
Q. Are you waiting for me?
A. Yes. I'm sorry, No. 10, yes.
Q. The answer is “no”?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. The answer is “no,” -- yes, the answer is “no.”
Q. Okay. I'm sorry for that miscommunication there.
No. 11 is “correspondence, including e-mails and faxes” between you and the Defendants in this case. And that's, of course,
different than No. 9 which requests communications between you and any lawyer representing any defendant.
A. uh-huh.
Q. So I'll ask you, do you have any correspondence, e-mails, faxes, written correspondence between you and any actual cigarette
manufacturing defendant in this case?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Have you ever had such correspondence?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And No. 12, I think you've already noted that you don't have any medical records, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. Apparently you don't have pathology or radiology, hopefully you don't have pathology.
A. No, I don't.
Q. Okay. No. 14 is there by accident.
No. 15, the transcripts or testimony which you've reviewed.
And just to go over again, which depositions have you reviewed in this case?
A. I've reviewed the decedent's husband, Leon Barbanell, and the daughter and the sister-in-law and her two sons.
Q. Okay. If you can go ahead and -- well, we'll get to it, I guess.
Okay, No. 16 asks you for a list of all cases in which you testified either at deposition, trial, and/or other hearings during the
period of 2004 to present. I understand on your disclosure it indicated that you have not testified in the past three years.
Is that correct, that you have not testified in the past three years?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, and let me ask you these questions.
How many times have you testified at a deposition in a tobacco case?
A. I think in each instance where the case has gone to trial, I've given a deposition, and that would be four or five.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. well, have there been situations where you've provided a deposition but the case has not gone to trial?
A. Conceivably, but I can't remember specifically. very often the cases I work on simply die before I get to the deposition
stage or go someplace else.
Q. Okay. well, here's my understanding of cases you've provided, for example -- strike that last comment.
For example, on the Rogers, the R.J. Reynolds case, you recall that case, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. That was your first case, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you recall having provided a deposition in that case?
A. I'm not sure whether I did or not.
Q. Okay. And my understanding is that your next case was the Dunn case, D-U-N-N?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. And in that case you provided a deposition and trial testimony; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And my understanding is your next case was the Whiteley case, correct?
A. The Whiteley?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. And when I say “your next case,” I'm assuming there's nothing in between these cases, no deposition or trial testimony. If
that's inaccurate, let me know.
MR. CONGROVE: (To witness) If you know, Joan.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. If you know.
A. Yeah, I'm not sure about that. I was under the impression there were some other cases before Whiteley, but maybe I'm
mistaken.
Q. Okay. well, after Whiteley, my understanding is it was the Tompkin case; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes. I thought Tompkin was before Whiteley, so it was my mistake.
Q. I could be wrong.
But other than Dunn, Rogers, Tompkin and Whiteley and, of course, today, Barbanell, have you given a deposition in any
tobacco-related case?
A. I might have given one in Conley, but I'm not sure.
Q. Conley, when was that?
A. It would have been back in the late '90s.
Q. Okay. Did you testify at trial in Conley?
A. No.
Q. HOW come you let Mr. Congrove call you “Joan”? Am I allowed to call you “Joan”?
A. If you'd like to.
Q. Okay, I'm not going to. I'll do my best to stick with “Doctor” or “Professor” or sometimes just nothing.
And other than the Conley case, was there anything else?
A. Anything else?
Q. That you may have testified to in a tobacco case.
A. No.
Q. Okay. So to the best of your recollection, Dunn, Rogers, Tompkin, Whiteley, Conley and Barbanell is the list of your tobacco
and cigarette case testimony.
A. Yes.
Q. DO you have any depositions currently scheduled --
A. No.
Q. -- in the next 30, 60, 90 days?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Do you have any dates reserved for depositions?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. All right. And I think you testified earlier that there's probably four or five other cases you believe that you've been disclosed
in as an expert; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you received materials for review in those cases?
A. NO, I haven't.
Q. Okay. So you just know you've been disclosed but you haven't started any work on them.
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. Throughout the course of working with Shook-Hardy, how much have you been paid by them as a consultant?
A. Since I began work for them?
Q. Yes.
A. Since 1994, I've been paid approximately $160,000.
Q. And you get 1099s for each year that you've been paid?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And you said $140,000?
A. I said $160,000.
Q. $160,000, okay. And I don't have your invoice in this case in front of me -- but let me strike that, we'll get to it on the list.
We went through your CV earlier or at least you told me that the copy that I have -- well, strike that.
Let me take out your CV real quickly. we can mark it as the next exhibit.
Do you have a copy of your CV with you today, Dr. Hoff?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Can you take out a copy for me, please?
A. Yes, I have it.
Q. Great. I received a copy of your CV a few months back and it's 25 pages.
Is that how many pages yours is?
A. I have 27, but I was using a different printer than probably the one you have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. I didn't print it, it came to me in the mail from shook-Hardy.
A. Yeah, it's the one I sent them.
Q. Okay. well, let me ask you this question.
Underneath where it says “Resume for Joan Hoff,” what's the date?
A. This one I have, it says December 2008.
Q. Yeah, mine says February 2008, so without getting into --
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. -- without getting into the details of each little thing, what would be the substantive difference between a February 2008
resume and a December 2008 resume?
A. I think only if you look under -- depending on your copy, if you look under what is Page 4 on mine, it might be Page 3 or
4 on yours, if you look under “books,” the only difference perhaps from February would have been the publication of a book
called “A Faustian Foreign Policy.” DO you have that?
Q. I have it.
A. All right. Then the only --
Q. Sorry, go ahead, sorry, I thought that was it.
A. No, that's it. And then the other change would be if you look, I forget what page, it's a page that starts with “interviews,”
let me find it a second and I'll give you the page number there because I'm doing these interviews, it seems, sporadically so
that there -- okay, it's on Page 8 here, and I don't know, what's your top interview there? Is it with a Sally Mauk from KUFM
Montana Public Radio?
Q. It is not.
A. what do you have?
Q. I have an interview with Tiffany Sharples from Time Magazine.
A. what's the date?
Q. February 8, 2008.
A. Okay.
MR. CONGROVE: You've actually got an older version.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Mine's older than yours.
A. Yes, it is older than this one.
Q. No worries, nothing that --
A. Yeah, the only changes would be under the “books” and under the “interviews,” otherwise, the resume is static.
Q. Okay, let's go ahead and mark the version of the resume that you have there with you as the next exhibit, please.
(Exhibit No. 4 was marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. There's nothing on your resume that talks about any work that you've done in the field of tobacco-related research; is there?
A. No.
Q. Okay. And going back to the schedule, No. 19, I don't think you have anything responsive to that.
No. 20 -- go ahead.
A. Yes, you are correct on No. 19.
Q. No. 20, I think you indicated that you have not made any programs, announcements, or written any literature relating to
tobacco litigation; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. No. 21 is your invoice, records, receipts for payments or other documents identifying or relating to any compensation paid
to you in this litigation for services rendered, including but not limited to testimony and consultation.
And you have brought with you today your invoices, correct?
A. I just have the one for this case, yes.
Q. Okay. I just had now the faxes that you all sent to me, brought in, so let me look for your one-page invoice.
A. It's two pages.
Q. Your two-page invoice, I'm sorry.
Okay, I found it.
MR. GDANSKI: Let's go ahead before we start talking about them and mark them as the next sequentially numbered exhibit,
please.
(Exhibit No. 5 was marked for identification.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, how much do you charge per hour for your time spent reviewing materials?
A. $250.
Q. Is that the same amount you charge for deposition testimony?
A. Yes.
Q. And how much do you charge for trial testimony?
A. The same.
Q. There's no daily rate or daily fee?
A. No.
Q. Do you charge for travel time?
A. No. well, for travel, for time, for consulting purposes, yes, or to travel to a trial.
Q. Right. Have you ever received anything from Shook-Hardy?
A. I'm sorry, I don't travel -- I don't charge for travel time. I charge only for what it costs to get me back and forth.
MR. CONGROVE: Oh, for expenses.
THE WITNESS: Expenses.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Gotcha, gotcha. YOU don't charge for -- in other words, if you have to fly three hours to Florida, you don't charge for those
three hours.
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. Have you ever signed an agreement with Shook-Hardy not to work, for example, with Plaintiff's lawyers in tobacco
litigation?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Have you ever received any written materials regarding the procedures for billing Shook-Hardy? You know, how
much money you're supposed to spend on hotels or airlines or flying coach or first class, or anything related to that?
A. I received material that indicate when the invoices should be received and it might possibly contain some of that information,
but mainly my concern is to get them in on time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. what's “on time”?
A. well, to get them in so that payment can be received the following month.
Q. Right, sure. Okay, let's take a look at your invoice here on the top. It says “Hoff and Associates, LLC.”
When did you incorporate that company?
A. when I moved to Montana in 2001.
Q. Okay. when Shook-Hardy writes you a check, it's made out to “Hoff and Associates, LLC”?
A. uh-huh -- yes.
Q. Okay. Are there any other owners of that corporation, other than yourself?
A. No.
Q. Any other officers or principals or shareholders or anything like that?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Then beneath that it says “legal, political, diplomatic, social, and cultural historical consulting.”
A. Yes.
Q. DO you do consulting work with anybody other than Shook-Hardy?
A. Not presently, no.
Q. Okay. Have you in the past five years?
A. No.
Q. How about since you opened up Hoff and Associates, LLC, have you?
A. No, I have not -- I have not.
Q. Okay. And then it has your two addresses, which we went over.
A. uh-huh.
Q. And it says beneath that, “Invoice: 10064.”
Is that a, you know, a randomly-generated number or is that a sequential number from prior invoices?
A. It's arbitrary to the degree that it doesn't represent 10,000 invoices. It represents simply a sequence of invoices.
Q. Gotcha, okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
And this invoice was generated March 11th, 2009, correct?
A. Yes -- uh-huh.
Q. All right. And beneath that it lists a whole bunch of things, and we'll go through them now.
The first is a receipt for airplane tickets to Kansas City for January 16th for $436.90.
A. uh-huh -- yes.
Q. For what purpose did you fly to Kansas City on January 16th?
A. I flew there because I was doing research on the Gelep case.
Q. Okay. And you're billing that to the Barbanell case?
A. No. The only Barbanell billing occurs below on that page.
Q. Okay, that was my question then.
Is there -- so you're telling me that the first one, two, three, four, five, five items have nothing to do with this case and were
not billed for the Barbanell case, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. So your first time spent on the Barbanell case is February 19th, '09; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And that's for the review of New York materials from Gadeleta?
A. Yes.
Q. what is “Gadeleta”? is that a person?
A. Yes.
Q. who is that?
A. It was the Plaintiff in the case who happened to live in the New York area.
Q. Okay. And were you deposed in that case?
A. I don't think so.
Q. Okay. And that was a New York case?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Do you know if it was in state court or federal court?
A. It didn't get that far, so I don't know.
Q. Okay. The next item on the list is February 20th, phone call with Boman and Thompson, and that was for 48 minutes.
Do you recall what you spoke about with Mr. Boman and Mr. Thompson on February 20th?
A. It's MS. Thompson, but I don't really.
Q. MS. Thompson.
A. I may have been -- I had received the depositions, it looks like I might have been requesting some Sentinel material.
Q. A guess.
And on February 27th you spend some time regarding the Barbanell depositions, some additional time, 15 minutes on March
2nd; March 9th, an additional hour; and on March 10th, an additional hour and 20 minutes.
Is that about right?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Okay. And then at some point you received the Sun Sentinel materials and you spent, roughly, five-and-a-half hours reviewing
those, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And on March 8th and 9th you spent some time reviewing the New York Daily News, correct?
A. Yes. I was actually doing research for that two-year period, which I hadn't covered previously.
Q. Okay. why did you review the Daily News for those two years in this case?
A. Because the time frame was nearer to when the Barbanells left New York for Florida.
Q. Okay. And have you been paid by Shook-Hardy for the time spent on this case?
A. NO, I have not.
Q. Okay. when did you submit this invoice? You submitted it on March 11th?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And, generally, what's the turnaround time for paying you?
A. The turnaround time is usually the middle of the next month.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. Are they ever very late?
A. No.
MR. CONGROVE: objection -- objection.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm just kidding.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. If we can go ahead, I have now what was faxed to me, the string of e-mails between you and, I imagine, individuals
at Shook-Hardy. Let me go ahead and try and straighten out my papers, they seem a little out of order.
Dr. Hoff, how many pages of e-mail communications do you have there with you?
A. I'd have to count them.
Q. Yeah, I'm counting mine, so hopefully we'll reach the same number.
A. Five with Boman.
Q. Okay.
A. Eight with Thompson.
Q. Okay, all right. I'm not sure if mine are in date order, but the first one I have here is, the top of my page is an e-mail from
you to DBOMAN at Shook, Hardy & Bacon, and the date of your e-mail is 2/23, and it's in response to an e-mail from him
earlier that date.
Is that the first one you have?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. okay. Let me take a quick look because I haven't had an opportunity to read these, let me just look at them real quickly.
(Counsel reviewing document.)
I'm just going to read through these, if that's all right.
A. That's fine.
Q. (Counsel reviewing document.)
Okay. If you can turn to what I think would be the fourth page.
A. okay.
Q. At the top of that page is an e-mail from you to David Boman which says -- well, it looks like he had asked if you're available
for a quick call, and you give him your phone number.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
94In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Is that what that is?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Do you know why he wanted to talk to you quickly?
A. It might have concerned some scheduling matter, I'm not sure. It was a very short call as I --
Q. Okay. You didn't bill for that.
A. No, I did not.
Q. Okay.
MR. GDANSKI: while I'm reading through these, maybe the court reporter can mark your string of e-mails between you and
Mr. Boman as the next exhibit, and then as a separate exhibit, mark the e-mails between you and
MS. Thompson. Thank you.
(Exhibit Nos. 6 and 7 were marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm looking at an e-mail now between you and
MS. Thompson. It's dated March 13th, 2009, and it looks like she's giving you the toll free call-in number and a participant
pass code; do you recall that?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Did you all have a conference call on March 13th?
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, she's going to refer to the invoice.
(To witness) But your invoice is dated March 11th and that was afterwards.
THE WITNESS: That was afterwards so --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right, that's why I'm asking.
A. Yes, it would have been a conference call.
Q. Let me ask you this question, since March 11th, do you know how many hours you've spent on the Barbanell case?
A. I was calculating that the other night. I would say it's at least 12 hours more, given if I include the phone calls.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
95In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. At least 12 hours more?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And you haven't generated an invoice yet; have you?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Okay. Do you keep a logbook of hours or some, you know, place where you track the hours you spend on a particular case
or for a particular client?
A. I keep notes which then allow me to prepare these invoices, and then I toss the notes because they have no more value.
Q. Okay. And is this 3/13 phone conference that you reference here in the e-mails between you and MS. Thompson, is that the
conference call that we spoke about earlier where Mr. Congrove participated and you all discussed this case?
A. No.
Q. Okay. So what was this 3/13 phone conference about?
A. That was simply going over some of the reliance materials, we were double-checking on the dates of the New York
newspapers, as I recall, and generally just seeing how the material had come together for the case.
Q. what does that mean, “the materials had come together for the case”?
A. well, in terms of the reliance materials and their relationship, now that I had read the depositions, how they could apply
to the case.
Q. Okay. Do you have copies of the Barbanell depositions here with you today?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Do you have copies at home?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Are they marked up with your notes and thoughts and lines or however you do it?
A. NO, they're not.
Q. Okay, they're clean copies?
A. They're absolutely clean.
Q. Okay, that makes things easier. All right, let me keep looking through here.
(Counsel reviewing documents.)
Who's Phil Bachus?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
96In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. where does that come up?
Q. He invited you to attend an on-line meeting.
A. oh, oh, he is one of the, I think, paralegals at Shook, Hardy & Bacon.
Q. okay.
A. He may be some kind of a technician, too, because he was facilitating this call.
Q. Okay. And this is now dated March 20th, 2009, I'm not familiar with what this is, “webEx with Dr. Hoff.”
What is that?
A. I don't know. It was -- we were going over the reliance list so that I could see it on my screen and, consequently, that's the
program for doing that, I think.
Q. They kind of got into your computer system to show you certain documents?
A. Exactly.
Q. Did they open up certain documents on the reliance to show you, you know, particularly important ones?
A. No.
Q. No, okay. Did they ever tell you that, You know, Dr. Hoff, we think you should include this document on your reliance list
or that document on your reliance list or anything like that?
A. By the time we were going over this revised one, I had made all my recommendations to them and it was fairly complete,
I thought.
Q. Okay. And last but not least, this is a little bit hard for me to read, but if you can go ahead and take out the notes you have
generated on the notice and the attached schedule, I would appreciate that.
A. (witness complies.)
Yes -- yes.
Q. Let's have the court reporter mark this -- oh, we marked this already, I'm sorry. Let me look at it real quickly and see what
I see here.
Okay, if you can go to the page where it actually lists the items on the schedule?
A. Yes.
Q. what does that say underneath the No. 1?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
97In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. understand I haven't ever looked at one of these before, so I was asking questions about it and that says that with respect
to No. 2 in terms of attributed to Philip Morris that that -- would it be on my reliance list in terms of articles I had read. YOU
can see there it says that.
Q. Okay. How about beneath the first paragraph, what does that say?
A. That's what it says.
Q. It looks like it says “unless on reliance list.”
A. Yeah, “unless on reliance list,” and it comes from the newspaper articles.
Q. Oh, wow! Okay, gotcha.
A. Okay.
Q. Now, NO. 2, what does it say underneath that?
A. what it says underneath that pertains to No. 3.
Q. Okay. what does it say?
A. It says -- it's a reference to the word “summaries” and it refers to the list of headlines that either I have generated from
specific newspapers or that my graduate students have for various newspapers. I was confused about what that term meant.
Q. Okay. what does it say underneath there “will you produce -- (dash)” and I can't read those next words.
A. It says on whether or not that I would produce those summaries, I'm to let the attorney answer that question.
Q. So what are those words then, “will you produce (dash)” and what are those three words?
A. It says “let him answer the question.”
Q. who is “him”?
A. In this case, it would be Mr. Congrove.
Q. Okay. Did you ask him whether you're supposed to produce those?
A. I think the decision was -- the decision would be made whether they needed to be produced.
Q. Okay. And then what's that to the right of the third paragraph, “only the cute”?
A. Oh, only this case. That is only the summaries of headlines that would pertain to this case.
Q. Okay. And you have not brought with you today the summaries of the headlines; have you?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
98In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay.
MR. CONGROVE: John, are they --
(To witness) Dr. Hoff, are they summaries or are they headlines?
THE WITNESS: They're headlines. They're lists of headlines from various newspapers.
MR. GDANSKI: I understand, I understand that.
THE WITNESS: So that's why there was some confusion over the word “summary.”
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. And go down to No. 11, you have written there something in P.M.
A. It was correspondence between the Defendants in this case, which would be Lorillard and P.M., and that's just clarified for
me, I said “no” at the side there.
Q. Gotcha.
And No. 16, you have written, you circled the words “period of 2004 to the present” and then you wrote and looked like you
highlighted the words “look up but don't bring just.”
A. Yes. I just -- I was unclear as -- about what cases had preceded 2004, and I was just going to look up a list of the cases but
I didn't need to bring them to the -- to here.
Q. Okay. And then next to No. 17, you have the words “object to this,” is that what this says?
A. Yes.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, our objections, we object to producing any book chapters ever contributed. Basically we said if
she has anything in press, we would give it to you, and you'll see from our objections she has nothing currently in press or that
is under submission to be published, and so --
MR. GDANSKI: No, I understand that.
MR. CONGROVE: -- basically I think she's referring to the fact that we were making an objection beyond that.
(To Witness) And I don't think you have anything that falls into that category anyhow.
THE WITNESS: I don't.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, I understand.
Next to NO. 22 -- well, it really is next to No. 21, you have the word “bring.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
99In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Is that what that is?
A. Yes, “bring the invoice.”
Q. Okay. And then on the top of 22, you have two words “only” and then something else.
A. “Only one” because there's only one invoice.
Q. Okay. You do have invoices for other cases in the past five years; don't you?
A. I did no work at all in 2007, so I would have invoices for 2004, 2007, perhaps -- or yes.
MR. CONGROVE: Counsel, as you know, in our objections we object to, under Florida rules, to providing additional
information beyond related to this case, and that's why -- that's the instructions that we gave Dr. Hoff here.
MR. GDANSKI: I understand.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, my understanding is that prior to today, the last time you testified in a tobacco-related case was in Tompkin in
2001; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. So what work have you done between 2001 at the Tompkin trial testimony and when you started doing work in the Gelep
case?
A. I did consulting and research on other individual cases where I had to read depositions and look to see how my general
awareness information would apply to those individuals.
Q. But they never got to the point where a deposition was necessary.
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. Do you know how many cases there are like that?
A. I think if going from Tompkin, I'd say Tompkin was, what, the fourth or fifth case on the list you have?
Q. Yeah, Tompkin was one of four. Again, it was Dunn, Rogers, Tompkin, and Whiteley, not in that order.
A. Yes. There would have been at least -- let's see, if you have four, there would have been eight or ten additional cases.
Q. Okay. Any in Florida?
A. None in Florida. There was one where the person had lived briefly in Florida and I looked up some early Florida legislation
but it was minor research.
Q. Okay. Has Shook-Hardy ever come to you with a potential case and you turned them down?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
100In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I don't think so, no.
Q. would you have any reason to turn them down?
A. It would, I guess -- well, not off the top of my head, no.
Q. Okay, all right. I'm going to put these down and now I have what was brought to me, it's one, two -- and you can go ahead,
or. Hoff, and take a minute and count how many pages of notes you have, I would appreciate that.
A. On the Sun Sentinel?
Q. well, it's not clear to me. Hold on a second, actually.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, there should be a page break hopefully between the two.
MR. GDANSKI: I was wondering what that was. Let's separate it that way then, thank you.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. HOW many pages do you have on the Barbanell depositions?
A. I think they may be numbered already.
Q. They are?
A. Yeah, they are. So, what did it turn out to be? Well, one number doesn't show up clearly.
Q. Mine is 7.
A. Mine is 7, too.
Q. Okay. And at the top of this fax it looks like you sent a copy of the same document to Shook-Hardy at an 816 fax number
yesterday; is that right?
A. No, I sent the deposition, the notes from the depositions to them when I was in New York and I sent them FedEx. I'm not
sure where that fax number comes from.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, just so the record's clear, those were faxed to us yesterday when we were meeting, Dr. Hoff and
I were, so that fax number is from the firm. I didn't have them with me before that and I had not seen them before yesterday.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, gotcha, okay. So then those are faxes from your partners or your associates to you, right? I mean, I'm
talking now to Tim, but, okay, I don't know how I can do that.
MR. CONGROVE: It's okay, I think we can.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. So that's what these are, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
101In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, great. I don't know how much time I want to spend going through reading it because the handwriting is hard, Dr.
Hoff, I'm sorry.
A. well, I apologize, too.
Q. No, it's okay. I think I can try to make out most of it, you know, I mean.
Real generally speaking, what was it about Leon Barbanell's deposition that was of significance and importance to you?
A. Mainly that he made quite a few references to how many times he tried to get her to cut down on her smoking. He used
the words that he “bugged her from time to time,” saying to her that it wasn't good for her to smoke so much, and he referred
specifically to her shortness of breath with respect to why he kept trying to get her to cut down.
Q. Okay. And do you recall Leon mentioning that Shirley would watch TV, and specifically recalls her watching or viewing
the “Last Call” for the Philip Morris commercial?
A. I think he recalls that slogan in his testimony or in his deposition but I would have to see the deposition again to know if
he was referring to his memory or her memory.
Q. Okay. And you're familiar with that commercial?
A. Yes.
Q. Tell me a little bit about that commercial. what was that commercial?
A. well, just exactly what he said. A small person using that particular slogan, “Last Call for Philip Morris.”
Q. what does that mean, “Last Call for Philip Morris”? I don't understand.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't say anything more than that. It's simply that's what the commercial said or the language used.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. It was an advertisement for cigarettes, right?
A. well, yes -- yes.
Q. Do you know how much money the tobacco companies have spent in the last hundred years advertising their product?
A. No.
Q. No? DO you know how much they spent in, let's say, the 1930s?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
102In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. 1940s?
A. No.
Q. '50s?
A. No.
Q. And 1960s, you don't know?
A. No.
Q. '70s, you don't know; '80s, do you know any of those years? '90s?
A. No to all of those years.
Q. Okay. Have you ever looked into that subject?
A. No.
Q. when analyzing the general awareness of the risks associated with smoking cigarettes and the addictive nature of smoking,
you don't think it's important to take into account how much money the manufacturer of the product is spending on advertising
that product and putting it out there as a product that people should enjoy and purchase?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: In terms of the research I do for establishing general awareness about the health hazards of smoking, “no”
is the answer to your question. I'm not an advertising expert. There would be no reason for me to look into the exact funding
of these ads.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. well, you've included advertisements in your reliance list, correct?
A. Yes. AS they would appear in some of the newspapers and magazines.
Q. And did any of the Philip Morris advertisements say, Hey, our products might be dangerous, you may not want to buy them,
if you buy them, they may kill you, but we're still going to sell them to you, and you can buy them if you like?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: There's no way I can answer that, except to say that warnings did appear on the ads in the '70s and '80s.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. HOW about in the '50s and '60s, were there warnings on the products?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
103In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. And have you seen any evidence that there was general knowledge that cigarettes were hazardous to your health in the
'50s and '60s?
A. Any evidence?
Q. I think this answer is “yes.” I mean, you are aware you've submitted an exhaustive list of reliance materials which you
maintain is evidence to your conclusion that there was awareness of the health hazards of smoking in the '50s and '60s and
'40s, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. were the tobacco companies aware of those health hazards?
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: I wouldn't have researched whether or not they were.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. But you're aware of that and you have it in some of your reliance materials and some of the publications where they
came out and refuted the assertion that it was hazardous to your health, correct?
A. Exactly, but I didn't research that, I simply read about it.
Q. Right, I understand that you chose not to research that area.
And let's say I called you up, Dr. Hoff, in a few months and asked you to do that research on behalf of the Plaintiffs in a tobacco
lawsuit, would you be interested in doing that?
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: Researching what, exactly?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Researching the tobacco company's knowledge in the '30s, '40s, '50s, and '60s regarding the health hazards of smoking.
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't understand to what end I would be doing that. I certainly wouldn't --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. TO document what internal paperwork they had while they were externally maintaining that cigarette smoke was not harmful
for your health or it was an open issue.
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
104In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. would you be interested in doing that project?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: It doesn't relate to my study of general awareness, public awareness.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, I understand that.
I'm asking as a separate research project, would you say “yes”? would you be open to doing a project on what the tobacco
companies knew internally by examining some of the documents you're choosing to not examine now to see what, perhaps,
they had knowledge of?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: And I'd say “no” to that. I don't see the purpose of it.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. wouldn't that be a fascinating study in corporate behavior, to see if internally they had documents relating to the health
hazards of smoking and externally they maintained a position that they knew of no such link between the health hazards of
smoking or the addictive nature of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form; argumentative; and assumes facts not in evidence here.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. That wouldn't interest you, that subject matter?
A. It wouldn't interest me. It has interested others because there have been a number of publications about it.
Q. And who has it interested, that you're aware of?
A. Someone like Kluger has written about it, published a book using these kinds of documents, and there have been others,
but it's an interesting subject, but it's not something that I personally am interested in or that forms my opinion on common
knowledge.
Q. I understand that.
And when you included these advertisements from the tobacco companies, many of these advertisements, and you can tell me
if you agree with me or not, would they in and of themselves, speak to the fact that cigarette smoking was not harmful to your
health; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: They would speak to the fact that the company was selling cigarettes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
105In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Like, for example, and this is included in your materials, “More Doctors Smoke Camels Than Any Other Cigarette.”
What's the year of that ad; do you know?
A. No, I don't. I'd have to see the document.
Q. Okay. well, I'm not going to be able to reference you to it on your reliance list because I have three DVDs and there are
thousands of documents with hundreds of thousands of pages.
But you're familiar with the famous ad; aren't you?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
(To witness) If you recall the ad --
THE WITNESS: I would have to see the ad to make sure that I'm recalling it.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I can try and hold it up to the screen, maybe that will help you. See if you can look at it.
(Counsel displaying advertisement.)
Can you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Are you familiar with that ad?
A. I've seen an ad like that or similar to it.
Q. This came from your reliance materials.
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. why do you have that on your reliance materials?
A. Simply to show the representativeness of the research that I've done that I didn't exclude of tobacco ads.
Q. Okay. And if you are reaching a conclusion that the public was aware of the health hazards of smoking, how can you do that
while including advertisements such as these? I mean, wouldn't these speak to just the opposite?
A. Ask the question again.
Q. Sure. I'm asking how you can reach the conclusion that the public was generally aware of the health hazards of smoking
and then include an ad like this one from the manufacturer of Camel cigarettes which states that “More Doctors Smoke Camels
Than Any Other Cigarette.” And then it also says that that conclusion is according to “repeated nationwide surveys.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
106In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. You're asking me to interpret the response of a viewer of that ad as a specialist or an expert on ads would do, and I can't do that.
Q. But everything that you're doing is interpreting the newspaper articles, the columns, the polls, advertising, and then you're
reaching a conclusion by making an inference from interpreting those sources, right?
A. I'm not interpreting all of the ones that you've just listed. I don't interpret polls, for example. I'm not a polling expert.
Q. Okay. But you interpret newspaper articles, right?
A. I see what newspaper articles say specifically related to any health risks or habit-forming qualities about cigarette smoking,
and that's, in essence, what I testify about. I don't testify about people's reactions to individual ads.
Q. But you testify about people's reactions to newspaper articles dealing with the health effects of smoking.
A. Yes.
Q. why not ads?
A. Because ads appear on such a variety of products, there's no way I can begin to analyze ads on a particular project because
I don't do that kind of research.
Q. Newspaper articles also appear about a variety of subjects, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And yet, you're able to interpret society's response to newspaper articles, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. But not to ads.
A. Not in the same way, because the newspapers and magazines are read by people in a specific manner and way, they take them
home, they're looking for the news of the day, and, consequently, I think they're more actively seeking out what information is
in the newspaper, generally speaking, than they would be simply flipping through to look at ads.
Q. And an advertisement like this where they have statements such as the “Doctor's Choice is America's Choice,” for Camel
cigarettes and statements -- for 30 days -- “test Camels in your ‘T’ zone - T for Throat, T for Taste.” Or where they have quotes
from individuals who are purported to be doctors which say, “I pick Camels, they agree with my throat and taste wonderful!”
Or another quote which says, “I get more pleasure from Camels than from any other brand.” Or another quote from a purported
doctor that says, “Camels suit my taste and throat. I've smoked them for years!”
That wouldn't have an effect on the public, is that what your opinion is?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: My opinion would be that if you read that type of ad, you might, and I can't really say this is the case, you
might wonder why there was a “T” zone of irritation that had to be presented to the viewer and why doctors had to testify on
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
107In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
behalf of the cigarette. It seems to me it would raise perhaps to an individual the question about the safety of cigarettes if this
type of ad had to be presented to the public.
MR. CONGROVE: Hey, Jonathan --
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah.
MR. CONGROVE: If you want to continue this, but it may be a good time to look for another break here in a little bit. we've
been at it an hour, we've got 10 minutes on the tape.
MR. GDANSKI: If we have two minutes, let's go ahead and take a break.
MR. CONGROVE: No, I'm sorry, he said 10.
MR. GDANSKI: oh, 10 -- 10. Okay, hold on a second then, let me look at this.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. If I understand what you just said, your testimony is that you included this ad as evidence to support your conclusion of
people that are aware of the health hazards because this ad explicitly implied references to the fact that there must be something
wrong for camel cigarettes to now be supported by doctors.
A. I just said it could. I am not a person who analyzes ads. It could mean that, it could mean something else to --
Q. Go ahead, I'm sorry.
A. -- an ad expert. I think it attests to the comprehensiveness of my research that I would include an ad that would be advertising
a particular brand of cigarette.
Q. why was that the comprehensiveness of your research? I would expect you to include the ad for cigarettes, that's part of
the public's general awareness, right?
A. The ads were viewed by the public but I have no way of knowing how an individual, an average person, would react to an
individual ad. There's no way for me to know that.
Q. And there's no way for you to know how an average individual would react to an article or newspaper in response to the
mass test performed; is there?
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form.
THE WITNESS: AS I said previously, newspapers are read, the stories in newspapers and magazines and other publications, I
think, are read or viewed differently by the average person than simply ads which appear constantly in all of these magazines
and newspapers.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. what do you base that on?
A. I don't think anyone necessarily picks up a magazine, perhaps unless it's a fashion magazine, to read the ads.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
108In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. So is --
A. But again --
Q. -- Morris, R.J. Reynolds, or Lorillard, or Liggett or whatever tobacco company, foolish for spending hundreds of millions
or billions of dollars in advertising; is that what you're saying?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form; argumentative.
THE WITNESS: I can't answer it because I'm not an ad specialist.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Prior to working with Shook-Hardy, were you a specialist in analyzing how society reacts to articles and newspapers?
A. I certainly was with respect to some of the political research I've done in terms of looking at newspapers for political research
or economic research.
Q. Sure. But you're not simply in this case looking at newspapers for research. You're looking at newspapers for research and
then inferring that the public reacts in a certain way in response to the articles in those newspapers, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm looking at the newspapers to see if there's -- there are repeated or continuous references on certain topics,
whether it be politics or whether it be on the safety of cigarettes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Do you know if it's true that more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I have no idea.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Did you ever think to ask shook-Hardy or the attorneys that represent the manufacturer of Camels for the nationwide surveys
that they took which purport to conclude that more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette?
A. No.
Q. And you don't know what year this ad is from; do you?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form and, I mean, if you've got it on there, why don't you let her know?
MR. GDANSKI: I don't have it on here, I would let her know in a second.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
109In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. GDANSKI: The ad doesn't have a date on it. I mean, it does not have a date on it, no.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm sure one of us -- you may know, but I don't know offhand the date of it.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. In any event -- okay.
Is this the only ad you included on your reliance list?
A. No. There would be others in those lists of newspapers.
Q. And you included all of those ads just to document the comprehensiveness of your research?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I included them simply as a representative sampling of what also would have been in these newspapers and
magazines.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And you are not willing to conclude that these ads may have had an effect on people's understanding of the health effects
of smoking; are you?
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't because I'm not an expert at interpreting ads.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And you are an expert at interpreting newspaper articles? I'm not sure I understand the difference. I'm really sorry, Dr. Hoff,
can you explain to me the difference?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form; asked and answered.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm sorry if I'm repeating. I genuinely don't understand the difference.
The ads are here because that was in the newspapers which the public was looking at. The newspaper articles are there because
those articles are in the papers that the public was reading.
What gives you the ability to say, well, I can't look at the ad and say the public looked at that and had a response which affected
their understanding of the health effects or the addictive nature, but I can look at the article which is perhaps on the other
page and conclude that they did take that into account in formulating their opinions and understanding of the health effects of
smoking and the addictive nature of cigarettes. I don't understand.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
110In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form and I'm not sure exactly if I could even specify the objection, there was so much in
there, Jonathan.
MR. GDANSKI: Here, we can take a break. I'm sure the tape is going to go off in a second. If I repeat myself, it might go on for
awhile again, and then the break will come after the question. So I imagine the break is coming up any minute, right, on the tape?
MR. CONGROVE: Yeah, this is perfect.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. So let's break and try and understand my last question, okay?
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 3:35 p.m., this is the end of Tape 3, we're off the record.
(There was a short break taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 3:45 p.m., this is the beginning of Tape 4, we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. All right, before we broke I asked a question which I'm going to try and ask in a little bit simpler form.
My understanding is that what you've now explained is that with regard to the advertisements contained in your reliance list, you
can't actually look at those advertisements and reach a conclusion as to how the public responded to those ads; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you also can't look at those ads and say, well, you know, these ads potentially speak to the fact that these cigarette
companies were marketing their product as a safe one; can you?
A. Marketing the product what?
Q. As a safe one.
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay, you can't do that.
A. NO, I can't because I would be interpreting the ad in a way that I don't think I'm qualified to interpret it.
Q. Okay. And then if you can now look at a newspaper article which doesn't specifically reference the public's knowledge or
understanding of the health hazards of smoking but simply talks about the fact that a certain study was published which suggests
that there is an association between chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, and smoking.
You can look at that article and say, well, the public, in all likelihood, would have seen this by virtue of the fact it's in a
newspaper and, therefore, the public is aware of the hazards; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
111In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: I can't answer it as being correct because I think what we're missing here is that the newspaper articles, the
scientific studies that were ultimately reported on and the educational materials that existed for any given state or area that I've
studied and the idea that you would have had religious figures and prominent figures for the time period of Shirley Barbanell's
life, all of those kinds of sources which did indicate something about health hazards and the habit-forming nature of cigarettes,
simply overwhelms and informs my opinion that -- is the overwhelming bulk of the data that would allow me to say or have
the opinion that there was a general awareness out there.
So that the ads are a component of that but they are simply a part of the general comprehensive view I took of the subject matter.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. So now you're telling me that you can look at the ad and take that into account as a component of what was out there,
but it's your opinion that the vast majority and the overwhelming amount of what was out there, was negative.
A. Yes, to the degree that I've described negativity, yes.
Q. Right, okay, I understand.
But you'd also agree that there was some documentation, be it advertising or responses to publications by the Tobacco Institute
or TIRC which said that it's not bad for you and it may not be bad for you, right?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form; states facts not in evidence.
THE WITNESS: Yeah, those terms were not used, as far as I can remember, in these articles by the tobacco company, not in
the kind of didactic way you've just stated.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay, I understand that. I guess the terms were a bit broad.
But you would agree that oftentimes when a publication or an article would come out, a journal would come out discussing the
health hazards of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking, sometimes a day later or two days later or sometimes that same
day, maybe an article -- maybe in a paragraph in the same article or in an article in a different section of the paper, there would
be some mention of the fact that there is this company, it's the manufacturer of the product, who maintains that the literature
is inconclusive, additional testing needs to be done, there's no link between health hazards and smoking cigarettes, there's no
link between addictiveness -- addiction and cigarettes.
Would you agree with that?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form; and that's impossibly compound.
THE WITNESS: And, again, the language is exaggerated.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, is it exaggerated?
A. I think --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
112In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. You're familiar with the responses from the tobacco industry where they said additional testing is necessary to prove the
link between the health consequences and smoking cigarettes.
A. Additional testing, yes, but not the remainder of that sentence that you just made.
Q. You're not familiar with comments by the tobacco companies, made in the public, which said that there's no -- that cigarettes
are not addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I'd have to see or look back at the specific comments that would appear in my reliance materials, but
you're talking about a kind of what, authoritative statements that don't often appear in the press releases when they're referring
to tobacco companies.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I have here, and it's on your reliance materials, an article from 1957 Consumer Reports, volume II, and the article is entitled,
“The Cancer Linkage Is Still Not Clear.”
Are you familiar with that article?
A. Yes, I am. I've looked at it, but I would need to see it now to comment on it.
Q. Okay. Can you pull it up on your reliance list?
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I'm going to be the driver on the computer here. what's the source you say?
THE WITNESS: Consumer Reports.
MR. GDANSKI: well, it's a Consumer Report from March 1957. It says volume 22, Page 100 through 110, and it's a ten-page
PDF. But I don't know what DVD it was on or where it's located on the DVDs.
MR. CONGROVE: Date again?
MR. GDANSKI: March 1957.
MR. CONGROVE: what's the title?
MR. GDANSKI: The title of the document is “The Cancer Scare Has the New Filters and New Present Medical view of
Cigarettes.” But now that I'm seeing that, that may be cut off. Beneath that is “tests for nicotine and tar in the smoke of 33
brands.”
MR. CONGROVE: we have found it. I hope we -- maybe Dr. Hoff can be able to see it from here. I don't want to get in front
of the video camera.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. There you go and I just want to turn to Page 6 of the PDF, I think.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
113In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Okay.
MR. GDANSKI: Before I forget, maybe the court reporter can take a minute to mark the -- if we haven't done this, the notes
on the deposition as the next exhibit.
Did we mark those?
MR. CONGROVE: No, we didn't.
MR. GDANSKI: okay. So let's mark Dr. Hoff's notes on the deposition as the next exhibit and then also mark her Sun Sentinel
notes as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit Nos. 8 and 9 were marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, have you had a chance to pull up this document and take a look at it?
A. Yes. Is this the one with the illustrations?
Q. No.
A. That's Page 6 here.
Q. Page 6 on mine is Page 107 of the Consumer Report. I'm sorry, Page 8, I'm sorry about that, Page 8. Page 6 does have the
illustrations, though, you are right.
A. Okay.
Q. Okay. And the title of this article, you agree, is “Medical Aspects, the Cancer Linkage is Still Not Clear,” correct?
A. Yes.
Q. All right, and this is 1957, correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. And it goes on in this article to talk about a bunch of different studies and conclusions and, I mean, there's not one specific
point I'd like you to focus on.
But you would agree that this article certainly presents both sides of the issue. It talks about the fact that there is this, you know,
that testing -- I'm sorry, that testing has been performed and that there may be a link between smoking and lung cancer, smoking
and certain illnesses, but that link is inconclusive and that additional testing may be done or the testing timing performed may
be inadequate, right?
MR. CONGROVE: (To witness) Dr. Hoff, before you answer, do you want to read the entire page before you --
THE WITNESS: well, I'd like to read the entire article to answer the question because you're taking this headline out of the
middle of an article and out of context. I don't know whether the bulk of this article says what you've just said.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
114In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. CONGROVE:
Q. I'm not alleging that the bulk of the article says what it says. I'm just saying that certainly a portion of this article is talking
about the fact that the cancer linkage is still not clear, right?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And this is in your reliance materials, correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Okay. And you know if you look -- well, I'll just read the -- I'll read the first paragraph for you into the record: “Although
smoking has been a human activity for hundreds of years, it is only the last decade or so that it has become something of
scientific study. Occasional reports of the effects of smoking on both body and mind have appeared since the middle of the last
century when a famous Irish physician, Dr. Robert J. Graves, found heart disturbances with heavy smokers. However, most of
the studies on living subjects were made without adequate statistical control, diagnostic precision or the benefit of chemical
and pharmacological analysis.”
And then it says, “Often the emotional attitude of the observer toward smoking would result in either exaggeration or
underestimation of the effects of tobacco.”
And then if you turn to the next -- two pages later, on Page 109, it says: “However not” -- well, I'm sorry, I'm on Page 110, it
says: “Experiments with the different animals to learn whether suspected substances in tobacco or tobacco smoke, or in cigarette
paper can actually produce lung cancer have so far provided inconclusive clues.”
So, you know, and I'm not trying to cherry-pick those quotes and take them out of context and I do understand there's a wealth
of documents on your reliance list which only talk about the negative health effects of smoking, but you do agree that this is an
example of a document that presents both sides of the issue. There's been some testing, it may cause lung cancer, but perhaps
additional testing is necessary, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form, and, I mean, Dr. Hoff said she'd like to read the report in its entirety and its context.
(To witness) But you can answer the question, if you can.
THE WITNESS: Again --
BY MR. CONGROVE:
Q. I'd like to, then, go on the record, I have no objection to you reading the entire article. I assume you read these articles at
some point prior to putting them on your reliance list, but I have a little bit of questioning to go and it's a little bit late already
as it is. So to the extent you want to take the time and read the whole article, go ahead. I just don't know if there's any time
issues at the end, that's all.
THE WITNESS: YOU want me to read the entire article now?
MR. CONGROVE: (TO witness) wait, Dr. Hoff, let me just speak real quick.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
115In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
I mean, if you want to ask a question about a document that's 11 pages long, and you said you weren't cherry-picking quotes,
but to ask that question when it's one of a number of documents she's relied upon in the past and in this case, and then to ask
her to agree to something based upon you picking out a few quotes and trying to get her to, you know, make a conclusion based
upon that, I think that's unfair. And this is part of the record in this case and I expect our witness to have that opportunity if she
wants to read the document in its entirety to put it in the context of this and other material that she has reviewed.
MR. GDANSKI: okay, I understand, and, obviously, I agree with you. I mean, I would like her to read it so that her answer is
responsive to my question and also takes into account the entirety of the document. But I also plan on asking a question or two
about the surgeon general reports and I don't want to sit here and have her read those in their entirely either.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. So, I mean, if there's a way, Dr. Hoff, for you to answer the question without reading it, please. If you need to read the whole
article, then we'll take the time for you to read the entirety of the article. It's completely up to you, Dr. Hoff.
A. I think I would have to read the entire article. The section that you chose was the medical section from the article which is
probably, for Consumer Report, more technical than the other aspects of the article. I don't know until I would review it.
Q. Okay, then I'll withdraw my question as it relates to this.
I mean, would you like to read the entire article or just the medical aspect section?
A. No, I'd like to read the entire article to put the medical aspect section into context.
Q. Okay. Then let's put that by the wayside for a moment. I won't ask another question on that article and if we have some
time, we can get back to it, okay?
A. Yes.
Q. Now --
(There was a brief interruption in the proceeding.)
MR. CONGROVE: okay, we're ready.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm going to ask you to the extent that it's possible, I have here an article from your reliance materials from the Fort Lauderdale
Daily News, and the date of this article is June 6, 1955. You may need to pull it up to review it.
MR. GDANSKI: And I'm not sure what CD it's on, Tim, but it's the Fort Lauderdale Daily News, June 6, 1955.
MR. CONGROVE: I've got it already. How's that for efficiency?
MR. GDANSKI: very fast. If you can tell me how you did that, it would make my review of these things much easier.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And I know I received this article -- it's an article of “Lung Cancer Risks Being Less as Cigarette Smoking Halted.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
116In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Do you see that article, or. Hoff?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And it looks like this is in response to an article that came out of a response to the May 1955 report, correct?
A. I can't read the text here, we'd have to enhance it a bit.
Q. It's very difficult to read. It's very difficult to read even if you enhance it. You can pull it up real quick.
MR. CONGROVE: The print is small and --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. The print is very small on the printout as well. You know, I know you'd probably like to read the article, but, really, the
only portion I'm going to ask you about for the moment is what I think is the -- well, I'm not sure what this is. It's the third
page, I'm not sure if it's the third or second in my printout I have here, the first and second pages are identical, that may be
something on my end. I'm not sure what that's about.
A. Just a second here.
MR. CONGROVE: what are you looking for, Jonathan?
MR. GDANSKI: I think where it says “more about continued from Page 1-A.” It's the portion where they reference to it's Mr.
Hartmitt speaking on behalf of the tobacco committee or tobacco industry, I'm sorry.
THE WITNESS: Now we have a bigger version of that article and we're going, I think, to the page you're referring to.
MR. GDANSKI: Thank you.
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
MR. CONGROVE: Okay. we found that spot and --
THE WITNESS: Yes, we're on the page now.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. My only question, Dr. Hoff, is my understanding of this article, you know, based on its title, talks about the cancer
risks being less as cigarette smoking is halted, but in the end there it also a quote from an individual speaking on behalf of
the tobacco industry where he says that (quote): “Statistical experts point out that the study ignores important environmental,
geographical, occupational, physical, and emotional factors that affects disease and longevity.”
And then he goes on to say that in his opinion (quote): “It is obvious that cancer authorities realize no link has been proven and
do not accept this study and statistics as the answer to the lung cancer problem” (end quote).
Do you see that there?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
117In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Yes, I do.
Q. And is this representative of the media coverage and the public's awareness in the '50s of the health hazards of smoking
insofar as when there would be a study on the one hand documenting the health hazards of smoking, there would be a responsive
comment from the industry saying that whatever study came out today is unproven, scientifically unfounded, is statistically
wrong, or what have you?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
(To witness) If you can answer.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. There wouldn't always be this response, but in this case, this is a representative response of what you
would see in some of these articles and you also will note the placement of the response which is toward the end of the article.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure, I understand.
But it's fair to say that this is not uncommon in the literature and in the sources on this subject in this time period, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Not uncommon for the tobacco companies to say this and have it appear sometimes in these articles.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. NO, not uncommon for the public to get this kind of mixed message where on the one hand the article may say that a new
study reports these findings, and on the other hand, the tobacco industry disagrees and they say it's inconclusive or it's not
proven to be related to lung cancer.
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: It didn't always, the statements of the tobacco companies didn't always appear in articles like this. It appeared
sometimes, yes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. My question is that it's not uncommon for the public to have received this kind of mixed message.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: It's generally correct but not universally correct because these words and these statements didn't appear in
all the articles.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I understand, but it's generally correct that this kind of mixed message was out there, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
118In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to the form and that mischaracterizes her past testimony. She's not used your testimony
terminology “mixed message.”
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. It's generally correct that -- it's hard for me to play with the semantics of the sentence, but it's generally correct that
the public, while they may have been made aware of some studies that documented the relationship between certain health
risks and smoking, they were also presented with responses which said that those relationships may, in fact, not be true or that
additional testing is necessary; is that correct?
A. It's generally correct that sometimes that occurred when there was publicity given to a particular scientific study, as in this
case, that you would sometimes find these kinds of statements from the tobacco companies. Not all the time.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. Let's go ahead and mark this newspaper article as the next exhibit, if we could, please. I don't know if
you guys have a hard copy or if you can print one out or I could fax it over later to the court reporter, whatever you all want to do.
MR. CONGROVE: we do have hard copies with us but we have --
MR. GDANSKI: If it's okay with you, you know the document I'm talking about and I can just e-mail it to the court reporter
and then I'll “cc” you so you see what I'm sending her and she can attach them as the exhibit that we're labeling them as now.
MR. CONGROVE: we're fine with that. And right now so you're marking the June 6, '55 article as the next exhibit in this case.
MR. GDANSKI: Yes.
MR. CONGROVE: Or are you talking about a new one?
MR. GDANSKI: I'm sorry, say that --
MR. CONGROVE: You said “this next article,” this next article, did you mean this one or are you talking about another one
that you're getting ready to turn to?
MR. GDANSKI: No, I'm talking about this one for now.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay, good. And I'm fine with that practice, too, that's fine with us, if that works for you.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, so this is No. 9, we have it as.
THE REPORTER: NO. 10.
MR. CONGROVE: For the record, I'm going to let the court reporter know the date on that, that was, and for completeness,
just a moment, let me pull it up again. This is a June 6, 1955 article from the Fort Lauderdale Daily News and Sentinel.
MR. GDANSKI: Yes. And just before I forget, I'm going to do the same thing with the “More Doctors Smoke Camels” ad. I'm
going to send that to the court reporter and mark that as No. 11, okay, Tim?
MR. CONGROVE: That's fine.
(Exhibit Nos. 10 and 11 were marked for identification by Counsel and subsequently remarked by the Reporter.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
119In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, one quick question for you and I don't know if Mr. Congrove has the article up in front of him, but I see that in a
lot of these articles there's been a notation made or some kind of writing has been made on the article itself where, for example,
this one says “FL News P (something) A, 3 (dash) AP 12 A (dash) 2 and June 6, '55.”
Did you make those notations?
A. No, those were on the document when I received it.
Q. Okay. Do you know who made those?
A. It would have been whomever did the digitizing of the document or whoever did the original microfilming of the document.
very often, as you can see from the first page you had, you can't read the dates very clearly and the person making the copy,
either on microfilm or for electronic communication, would put in the abbreviated title of the newspaper and then the page.
Q. Okay.
A. And the section, usually, of the newspaper.
Q. Okay. Do you know who Elmer Roper is?
A. Elmer Roper?
Q. Yeah.
A. No, I don't. I mean, are you referring to Roper polls?
Q. I am, I am referring to Roper polls.
Do you know if he did any polls on behalf of the main cigarette companies?
A. It's my understanding that he did.
Q. Okay. And have you seen those polls?
MR. CONGROVE: objection, asked and answered, I believe.
THE WITNESS: No, because they were internal polls.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. In the past, or. Hoff, have you included a significant amount of polls on your reliance list?
A. No.
Q. No, you've never included more polls than you currently have on the reliance list in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
120In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I may have included more but not a significant number of additional ones.
Q. Okay, one second. I apologize if when I'm asking this question it comes out unclear.
But if the public was so aware of the health hazards of smoking and they had sufficient materials to reach that conclusion, why
did the tobacco companies continually challenge that conclusion?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Say or ask me the question again. If the awareness was so generally out there --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right, if the awareness was so generally out there, why didn't the tobacco companies believe it to be the case?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection, well, that's a different question, sorry.
THE WITNESS: It is a different question. I have no way of knowing what the tobacco companies believed.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. If the awareness was so out there, why didn't the tobacco companies agree with what you maintain was information
that the public was well aware of?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: It was an internal tobacco company decision about which I know very little.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But they took positions in public. I mean, they took very public positions.
They weren't just internal positions, correct?
A. That's not the question you asked me previously.
Q. NO, I'm asking a different question.
I mean, they didn't just maintain internally that it's not harmful and they weren't silent on the issue, they had a public position,
a public policy on this issue.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form -- never mind, John.
THE WITNESS: It seems as though I've answered that question. what I know about them is what their public statements
indicated from time to time in such articles, as we've just looked at.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And you don't believe that the public was informed and relied upon the positions taken by the tobacco companies.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
121In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I'm basically saying that with respect to all of the evidence out there, which formed my opinion about general awareness,
these kinds of statements were one fraction of that and were simply not as important in the long run, if you're looking at the
entire picture, as all the other evidence because the evidence I relied on was far beyond simply newspaper evidence.
Q. Okay. what other forms of evidence did you rely on?
A. well, as I said in the beginning, to make sure this case relevant to the Barbanell issue or case, is that I looked at educational
materials, I looked at popular magazines, I looked at the documents that were written by people who were trying to convince
people in the '30s and '40s not to smoke. The Ford article, for example, on the little white slaver. I looked at an abundance
of material both from popular culture from the regular national magazines and newspapers. I looked ultimately at television
coverage. So that all of that together forms -- allows me to form this comprehensive picture of what awareness was out there,
not simply the newspaper articles themselves.
Q. Sure. If at any point in time I'm referring to making reference or assuming that you've relied upon just newspaper articles, I
don't mean to say that in the slightest bit. If anything, it's just the opposite, you've relied on quite a bit in excess of just newspaper
or magazine articles.
Can you explain the concept of presentism?
A. Yes, I think I can from a historical point of view.
Q. If you can explain it for purposes of this case and how it may play a role, that would be good, too.
A. I'm not exactly sure I can do that given what I'm going to tell you about the definition of presentism within the historical
profession.
It is a term that's used to describe someone who on the basis of information or events that that individual is aware of because
he's living in this contemporary time period, that they apply those values or those views or that information in some way to
the past and interpret past events based on only their contemporary values or views, and that's known in the profession as
practicing presentism.
Q. Okay. And that would be inappropriate in this case for purposes of what you're doing.
A. It's inappropriate, period, within the historical profession.
Q. Right. But the notion exists because people have a tendency to do that when they're making historical -- doing historical
analysis, correct?
A. Not everyone but some individuals do.
Q. But it would be very important in this case, for example, for the jury, even though they may not be familiar with the term
“presentism,” it would be very important for the jury not to utilize that kind of analysis in reaching their determination as to
perhaps what Shirley Barbanell was aware of when she began smoking.
A. That's an interesting statement, but the jurors, for the most part, will not be historians, so will have no concept or idea of
presentism and whether or not they're practicing it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
122In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Right. And that's why they may not be familiar with the term, but the notion that when one is trying to answer the question
of what society knew about a given subject at a point in time in history, it's very important to put yourself at that point in time,
as opposed to taking what your current understanding is of that subject matter at the present time and imparting it on what
individuals knew in the past time, if that makes any sense.
A. It only partially does, but I think I would agree with what you're saying.
Q. That would be presentism, right?
A. Yes, that would be.
Q. Okay. It's two hours later for me than it is for you so -- I don't know if that helps my poor questions.
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
THE WITNESS: That's my phone.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. DO you want to take it?
A. No, I don't, we'll just let it ring. I'm worried about the weather and that may be a weather report.
Q. I hope not. All right, give me one second.
Would you agree with me, Dr. Hoff, that the following statement is or was at any time a matter of public or common knowledge,
and when I make the statement, again, the tobacco industry refers to the tobacco manufacturers and the Tobacco Institute or CTR.
And the statement is that the “Tobacco industry groups concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or
available knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or
addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.”
Would you agree that that is a matter of public or common knowledge?
A. It would, again, depend on the time period because the information about internal company documents came very late in the
last century, so that, generally speaking, the answer would be, no.
Q. I'm asking if -- excuse me, I'm asking if currently, today, the public would be generally aware of that statement.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form; calls for a legal conclusion.
THE WITNESS: The portion that you read me is complicated and uses terms like “conspiracy” and the rest of it, it would be
difficult for me to answer the question simply because my cutoff date for most of the research I've done in this case and other
cases is before 1994.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And, well, are you aware of that as an individual in society? Forget about doing research and trying to impact your research
onto the public's general understanding. Are you aware of that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
123In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form. Aware of what?
MR. GDANSKI: Aware of the statement being accurate, and I can read it back, if you'd like.
THE WITNESS: Read the statement again.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Sure: “The tobacco industry groups concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing
that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature
of smoking cigarettes or both.”
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form; calls for a legal conclusion.
THE WITNESS: It's too complicated for me to answer. All I can say is that from the Waxman hearings on, I was personally
aware that there were internal tobacco company documents. That statement is an interpretative one about what those internal
documents may or may not have said.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. DO you think that the tobacco companies thought the public knew that smoking caused lung cancer back in the 1950s?
MR. CONGROVE: Just a second.
(To Reporter) Can you read that back for me?
MR. GDANSKI: Sure. Do you think that the industry, the tobacco companies, share your opinion regarding the public awareness
of smoking? And, you know, the specific question was, do you think the tobacco companies shared your opinion in the 1950s
that the public knew that smoking caused lung cancer?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form; calls for speculation.
THE WITNESS: And, again, I have no way of knowing what the tobacco companies internally knew.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, you have reached a conclusion that people knew about the health effects of smoking, so why wouldn't the tobacco
companies know that people were aware of the health effects of smoking?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, you're asking me to evaluate individual opinions within these tobacco companies, I can't do that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. If, in fact -- and this is a hypothetical, so hypothetically, if it was, in fact, true that the tobacco companies concealed and
withheld information regarding health effects of smoking, okay? Take that as the operating premise for just a moment, why
would they do this if the public was so well aware of the health effects of smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
124In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to the form; calls for speculation.
THE WITNESS: I can't tell you why they would have done that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Going back to your disclosure, I don't think we need it, but it's your opinion that Shirley Barbanell knew or should have
known of the dangers of smoking, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. what dangers?
A. Pardon me?
Q. what dangers?
A. The general dangers that smoking was unhealthy. She was being told that, in particular, by her daughter.
Q. when she started?
A. Not when she started initially, obviously there wouldn't have been a daughter. But when she started at the age of 16, again,
which would have been in '39, she would have come out of an educational system that had systematically taught its students
about the health hazards of smoking. And as I've indicated previously, the New York system, educational system, was very
sophisticated on this topic and very organized in terms of the way it presented this information in textbooks, in syllabi, in
curriculum guides, and teachers, moreover, had to be certified in the state of New York to teach the subject matter.
Q. Okay. But going back to my question, what dangers should she have been aware of? Lung cancer? Should she have been
aware that lung cancer is caused by smoking cigarettes?
A. Not in 1939, but she would have been aware from the textbooks of a variety of diseases and problems associated with
cigarette smoking because the textbooks reviewed these, shortness of breath, the fact that it could stunt growth, that it inhibited
athletic performance, that it did a variety of things to your body, your circulatory system. This was all in these, especially in
the high school textbooks.
Q. And was the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes also in those textbooks?
A. The habit-forming nature was. I don't think in the time period that she was in school, “addiction” was necessarily used. It
was mainly that it was a dangerous habit to take up and that is in her own -- or in her daughter's deposition that she called
it a “bad habit.”
Q. when did the united States Surgeon General determine that cigarettes are addictive?
A. Not until the late '80s. I think it was in the '89 report.
Q. I think it was '89, too.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
125In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
So is it your understanding that society as a whole understood the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, understood the
addictive property of smoking at some point in time to call it “habit,” they understand that, and yet, it took decades for the
surgeon general to reach that conclusion, even though the public was generally aware of it?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I can only answer that by saying that the terms “addiction” and “habit forming” were used interchangeably
for some time. Surgeon General Koop chose in his report to indicate the addictive nature of it in a scientific sense which, in
essence, simply confirmed the relationship between habit-forming and addiction that the public was already aware of, but he
was doing it in a scientific way in that particular report.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And did the tobacco companies agree with him in the 1989 report?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: In the 1989 report they would have responded in some way but I don't have any specific reference in my
mind about whether or not they agreed with his scientific definition of addiction as of 1989 because he was relating addition
to narcotics of all kinds, not simply through tobacco.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. But as it relates specifically to tobacco, is it your understanding that the tobacco companies disagreed with the surgeon
general and their understanding was that cigarettes are not addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I have no way of answering that except on the basis of a specific document where they may have done that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. You don't know of any of the documents that you've come across where the tobacco company has refuted the 1989 surgeon
general report which concluded that cigarette smoking is highly addictive?
A. Not right now that I can remember one where they specifically refuted the addiction in the scientific definition he gave of
it. For -- and that's simply my answer on that. But his definition was highly -- it was very narrow and technical.
Q. Okay. Is it your understanding that -- and I think you said -- this is a moment I just want to clarify, that when Shirley
Barbanell began smoking, she would not have been aware and shouldn't have been aware of the relationship between smoking
cigarettes and lung cancer, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form. I'm not sure that correctly characterized her testimony.
(To witness) But that's for you, Dr. Hoff.
THE WITNESS: Yeah. what I said was that in the textbooks there were direct indications and statements and graphs and pictures
of the problems incurred or the problems or that the effect, I should say, of smoking on the human body, and lungs were part of
that educational system that she came out of. That is, they were referring to lungs and heart, throat, and the circulatory system,
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
126In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
as I said. So while the term “lung cancer” wasn't stressed in these textbooks, diseases of the lungs or anything associated with
the lungs was.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Did the books also talk about growth stunting as a result of smoking cigarettes?
A. Yeah, this was very often, I think, to appeal to younger boys, particularly, because they also used athletic performance as
an example for the boys to avoid smoking cigarettes.
Q. So she should have been equally concerned about growth stunting as a result of smoking as she would have been with
developing a potential problem of her lungs, with her lungs, I'm sorry, as a result of smoking.
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't speak for her, personally, but I know she would have been in these classes, informed of all the problems
associated with cigarette smoking, whether she would single one out as more important than the other, I can't say.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, you also can't say one way or another whether this was actually taught in her class; can you?
A. No.
Q. Okay. You have no idea what they taught in Shirley Barbanell's class; do you?
MR. CONGROVE: objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: I know that they would have been teaching what was mandated in these various textbooks and in the curriculum
guides and in the syllabi that were being handed out with great regularity to teachers who were certified to teach this subject
matter. The chances of her not being taught something on the subject matter would be very rare.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I want to turn your attention to one of the articles on your reliance list and I'm not really sure where it comes from,
to tell you the truth. But it's an Encore article, 1939, you may be familiar with it. offhand it's titled “Club women Get Lessons
in Cigarette Smoking.”
Are you familiar with that piece of literature?
A. I'd have to look it up.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, Tim, I think it's from Life Magazine but I don't know what else to tell you.
THE WITNESS: what was the date again?
MR. GDANSKI: There's no specific date, but the year is 1939.
MR. CONGROVE: I may have to go to the next disk. I'm through the “Gs” -- nope, I'm into some Life. Date again, 1939?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
127In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. GDANSKI: The year is 1939. There's no month date.
MR. CONGROVE: well, you know what? I may have just found it, so hang on a second.
MR. GDANSKI: You are very good with searching through the documents.
MR. CONGROVE: Does it say “Toothbrush with a Twist”?
MR. GDANSKI: Nope --
MR. CONGROVE: December 4th --
MR. GDANSKI: -- it does not.
MR. CONGROVE: December 4th, 193 --
MR. GDANSKI: No. There's no date, as far as I know, on the article. well, hold on a second. I'm not sure. You know, it may --
MR. CONGROVE: Hang on a second.
THE WITNESS: what's the picture?
MR. GDANSKI: It may be a 1986 publication reproducing a 1939 article. Now that I'm looking at the side it says “copyright
1986” of Renfield Importers Limited, New York, New York, and I don't know where we took it from or I took it from.
MR. CONGROVE: Did you get it from her reliance materials?
MR. GDANSKI: That I did, yes, yes, yes.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay. You said Renfield and what? I'm looking to see if there's --
MR. GDANSKI: Renfield Importers -- maybe I'll bring it up to the screen so you maybe can take a look at it so you can see
what I'm talking about.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, if you recognize it, you can certainly -- it's very hard to see. And this is the second page, it's like an editing on
a smoking article, perhaps you recall it.
A. Not offhand. I'd have to take a look at it.
Q. Right.
A. It was from 1939 republished when?
Q. well, no. I don't know that it's republished. The front of the first page says “Encore 1939,” and that's the first page and it's
continued on to a second page, which is six pictures and a description of the pictures. But on the side of the second page, I
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
128In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
just noticed now when I look real close, it says “Copyright 1986, Renfield Importers Limited, New York, New York. Jewelry
by Bucallaly Inc.” I don't know.
A. So we don't know whether it was reprinted by Life in 1986.
Q. I do not know. I don't know that Life was around in 1986.
MR. CONGROVE: Life is still around.
THE WITNESS: They're still around but it doesn't come out as often as it used to.
MR. GDANSKI: Right. But, I mean, as a weekly publication.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I am sorry.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay, let me put it aside.
MR. CONGROVE: If you know which CD you got it off of, I could maybe make some progress there but without --
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, I've got to be honest with you, I do not know what CD it came from.
MR. CONGROVE: okay.
MR. GDANSKI: Sorry, give me one second here.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, while we have this CD perhaps open, are you familiar with the article from the Good Housekeeping Magazine,
April 1926, which talks about Antioch on the witness stand?
A. IS this the question of whether there should be smoking at Antioch College?
Q. I think this is the one that talks about -- and I'll just read it -- hello? Are you guys there?
MR. CONGROVE: we're here.
THE WITNESS: we're here.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Hold on a second, hold on. My system just -- that's when you know it's a long deposition, when the machine assumes that
no one is here because it's been on too long.
MR. CONGROVE: Probably, Jonathan, while you're -- I think I have found the Encore 1939 thing that you were asking about
earlier.
MR. GDANSKI: Great!
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
129In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. well, then, Dr. Hoff, can you go ahead and take a look at that, please.
A. Yes, I can.
Q. And you can spend a few moments reviewing it to familiarize yourself with it.
A. (witness reviewing document.)
Okay, I'm looking at the pictures now. Okay, seems to be kind of on the etiquette of smoking.
Q. Okay. And this is a two-page document that you would agree was published in Life Magazine in 1939.
A. Yes.
Q. All right. And that's the year that Shirley Barbanell began smoking.
A. At the age of 16, yes.
Q. Right. And this is talking about the proper ways to smoke a cigarette; is that correct?
A. It would seem that that's the indication, proper way of handling the cigarette, perhaps, so not to enrage men who didn't like
the way women were smoking.
Q. Right. Men who didn't like the physical mannerisms in which women were smoking, right?
A. Exactly.
Q. You know, for example, the way they held their cigarette, the way they blew out the smoke, or those types of certain
mannerisms associated with smoking, right?
A. It would appear to be that way, puffing like a steam engine.
Q. Right. This article doesn't talk about anybody being afraid of smoking or any of the health risks associated with smoking;
does it?
A. It would not appear to mention that at all. what's interesting about it, though, if you move up to the text that's right under or
above the first picture, it says that they're doing this to report on -- the succinct reports on customs and curiosities of the day.
What it represents is really what the John Burnham book talks about, how smoking by that time had become a virtue for
especially middle-class women and this would document his thesis very nicely.
Q. okay, sure, that is true.
But this is, if you take a look at the article, it looks like Philip Morris sponsored a pretty nurse and ex-actress to go around the
country giving seminars on the appropriate way to smoke a cigarette.
Is that what it looks like to you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
130In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I'm trying to find that.
Q. It's all in the first paragraph.
A. Let's see.
(witness reviewing document.)
“Women who were mostly over 40, lecture about habits and manners” and, let's see, “and not only the statements were that
women over 40 do not smoke in the lecture sponsored by Philip Morris.” Yeah, I see that.
Q. uh-huh. And when a young girl like Shirley Barbanell sees this in a magazine, and I'm not saying she did see it, but when
someone you know who is 16 years old sees this in a magazine, does this represent smoking as being a glamorous thing to do,
as being a pleasing thing to do? And to even in some morose fashion, as being a socially acceptable thing to do, providing you
actually hold your cigarette the right way or blow out your smoke the right way?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: This targets, of course, club women over 40, which does not describe Shirley Barbanell in that particular year.
THE REPORTER: Counsel, the teleconference lady has come into the room, hang on just a second.
MR. CONGROVE: Yeah, can we go off the record real quick?
MR. GDANSKI: Sure.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 4:51 p.m., we're off the record.
(There was a short break taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 5:00 p.m., we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I think the last thing we said was that the article was meant for women above 40 years old and that was not Shirley
Barbanell in 1939, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And just so I'm clear, the lessons that were given on how to smoke a cigarette properly, those were for individuals over 40.
The article is not meant for any specific age demographic; is it?
A. No, not on the face of it, but if you look at the headline “Club women,” you would probably react hard to it if you were
a club woman.
Q. Sure. I mean --
A. I don't think Shirley Barbanell would have to have worried about how she held her cigarette.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
131In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. why is that?
A. Simply because starting to smoke at 16, I don't think that's a major concern.
Q. No. And just so I'm clear, I'm not -- I think that -- and you can tell me if you agree with me, that this is, you know, one of
the many potential pieces of information that were out there that talked about the glamour associated with smoking cigarettes
and it had nothing to do with the health effects associated with smoking cigarettes, correct?
A. Yes, this particular article, yes.
Q. Okay, right.
MR. GDANSKI: SO let's go ahead and mark this as the next exhibit. I think it's No. 11, correct?
THE REPORTER: NO. 12.
MR. GDANSKI: 12. I want to make sure I have -- one second, I'm sure I have it somewhere, but okay, No. 12.
(Exhibit No. 12 was marked for identification.)
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, do you want me to read this for the record? I'm going to read what the exhibit is for the record.
MR. GDANSKI: That's fine.
MR. CONGROVE: It's the special anniversary Life issue, fall 1986, and it's an Encore presentation in the Life Magazine
reflected back on something -- a reprint of something from 1939, and it's on Disk No. 1 of Dr. Hoff's reliance materials.
MR. GDANSKI: okay, thank you.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. The next one I want you to maybe take a look at was the Good Housekeeping from 1926 where it was Antioch College and
the question was whether or not smoking has an effect on grades.
Are you familiar with that article?
A. I'm familiar with the issue. I'll take a look at the article in a minute. Smoking on campuses of women's colleges was an
issue in the 1920s.
MR. CONGROVE: DO you have a date on that, April 26th?
MR. GDANSKI: Yep.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay, I think we found it here. Does it say, beginning, “Gallant Lady, by Margaret Widdemer” on the
first page?
MR. GDANSKI: Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
132In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: “TO Smoke Or Not to Smoke”?
MR. GDANSKI: Yes, it does.
MR. CONGROVE: “TO Smoke or Not to Smoke”?
MR. GDANSKI: Yes, it does.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay. Just give me a moment and I'll put this in front of or. Hoff so she can take a look at it. It's a two-
page article in total.
THE WITNESS: (witness reviewing document.)
I can't read all of the very last paragraph, but otherwise, I think I have the general --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And I don't have very many questions on this document.
But you're understanding, and you can agree with me if it's true, is that this was a 1929 document -- 1926 document, that talked
about potentially banning smoking on campus because it may have an effect on the students' grades, correct?
A. Yes, that's how it starts out.
Q. Okay. And does it at all talk about lung cancer as a result of smoking cigarettes?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Do you know if it's been scientifically proven that smoking cigarettes can have an impact on your grades as a student?
A. I don't know if it's been scientifically proven. I think there have been more recent studies than this about it.
Q. Do you know what those studies have concluded?
A. NO, I don't. I just have a vague memory of having looked at some.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. I'm going to mark this as the 13th exhibit.
(Exhibit No. 13 was marked for identification by Counsel and subsequently remarked by the Reporter.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, do you agree with me that sometimes common knowledge can lead science? So, in other words, if the common
knowledge of the community is ahead of the science, it's possible for the community to have an understanding of a subject, but
the scientific literature to still maintain that that subject matter is yet unproven?
A. I only understand the first part of the question.
Q. Sure.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
133In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I have testified in the past that sometimes common knowledge was ahead of scientific proof and sometimes it was simply
wrong or sometimes it lagged behind science. So that's where I generally have come down to thinking about that subject.
Q. Okay. is that true in the area of smoking cigarettes, tobacco smoke, and the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes, that the public awareness was ahead or common knowledge was ahead of the scientific understanding of the health
effects of smoking?
A. Yes, I've testified to that effect.
Q. So when did the scientific community accept the fact that smoking was hazardous to your health and caused a certain number
of diseases and was addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to the form.
THE WITNESS: I can't answer that, it's too general.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. when did the scientific community conclude that smoking causes lung cancer?
A. Again, I can't answer that specifically.
Q. when did the scientific community conclude that smoking cigarettes was addictive?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: All I can say is that beginning in the late '30s, going into the '40s, '50s, and '60s, scientific reports began to
fill in a good deal of information about the problems of cigarette smoking and the health hazards associated with it.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. So the '30s, the '40s, the '50s, culminating in the '64 surgeon general report, the warnings on the pack, the change in
the language from “may” to “is a cause,” rotating packs, all of that was developing awareness of the linkage between smoking
cigarettes and lung cancer, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form; misstates prior testimony.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm asking --
THE WITNESS: There was an increase in awareness of the seriousness of the problems of cigarette smoking due to the scientific
studies, many of which did mention lung cancer.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And then at some point the surgeon general determined that, in fact, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, correct?
A. I don't know if the surgeon general determined that, but reports that he was given from the scientific community determined
it, statistically speaking.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
134In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. And then he issued a report, the Surgeon General of the united States, an individual appointed by the President, authored
and issued a report concluding that cigarette smoke causes lung cancer, correct?
A. well, not every surgeon general, but increasingly in that time period, they focused more and more on the causal relationship.
Q. Okay. would you agree that, let's say by 1980, the general consensus in the scientific community was that smoking cigarettes
causes lung cancer or generally stated another way, lung cancer is caused by smoking cigarettes?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't answer that because I haven't studied the scientific community in that way.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. would you agree that by 1980 the public's awareness, and I'm not sure if you will agree, is it your opinion that by
1980 the public had a pretty good understanding that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer?
A. I think the public by 1980 certainly had a reinforced concept of awareness about lung cancer and cigarettes.
Q. But they didn't know that it caused lung cancer?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't deal with what would be a belief or a thought question with respect to what an individual in 1980 would
have thought about that relationship. All I know is the studies up to that point would have reinforced the general awareness of
the public about the health dangers, specifically the fact or the idea that you could contract lung cancer from smoking.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Then certainly by 1990, ten years later, that would have even more so been reinforced, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And if you were to ask the tobacco companies in 1990 whether or not there was any link between smoking cigarettes
or lung cancer, do you know what their response would be?
A. No.
MR. CONGROVE: objection.
THE WITNESS: No.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Are you familiar with the letters written to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company by the students of the willow Ridge Elementary
School?
A. No, I'm not familiar with those.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
135In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Okay. Have you ever came across those documents during the course of your research?
A. No. were they published letters?
Q. well, it depends how you define “published.” They are letters that were on R.J. Reynolds's website and were produced
by R.J. Reynolds as a result of litigation, but it's my understanding that you didn't look at those documents in reaching your
conclusions; is that correct?
A. That's true.
Q. Even though R.J. Reynolds actually responded to the children's letters and gave them their opinions and informed these
children about the health effects of smoking.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection as to form.
THE WITNESS: And when was this done and how many letters were there?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. It was done in 1990.
A. And --
Q. That was during the time of your research, correct?
A. Yes. And how many letters?
Q. At least two students, perhaps more, wrote letters to R.J. Reynolds as part of a project and the public relations department
responded to those letters.
And you are not aware of their response?
A. No, I'm not, but I also need to know the exact number. It sounds like you're dealing with an insignificant number of letters.
Q. I said there's two, two students, at least two students wrote letters.
A. Okay.
Q. My question isn't so much with the numerosity of the letters, but it's with regard to what the tobacco companies were telling
people as late as 1990 regarding what you allege to be a long-standing belief that cigarette smoke -- smoking cigarettes caused
lung cancer.
And you're not aware, are you, of what the tobacco companies' position was as late as 1990; are you?
A. No.
Q. You are not aware of what the tobacco companies' position was at any point in time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
136In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form.
THE WITNESS: Not on the basis of internal documents. The only thing I know about the tobacco companies is what would
have appeared in the time period that I've studied the general awareness question with respect to cigarettes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And you've attached to your reliance list a 1989 surgeon general's report, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. If you can remind me again why you attached that report.
A. we discussed it earlier, because he announced for the first time officially that tobacco was addictive and he compared
cigarettes and nicotine to other narcotics.
Q. uh-huh.
MR. CONGROVE: AS a point of clarification, Jonathan, the '88 surgeon general report is the one that dealt with the issue --
the surgeon general's report on addiction. what's on the reliance list is the 1989 surgeon general report which dealt with other
issues but not the addiction issue.
MR. GDANSKI: Oh, then I don't understand.
THE WITNESS: I thought I was asked earlier about that.
MR. CONGROVE: (TO witness) Yeah, you were asked about -- I think that you were asked about the '89 report, do you recall
it being the addiction report, you were a year off.
THE WITNESS: Okay -- okay.
MR. CONGROVE: And the '88 report is the addiction report; the '89 is not the addiction report. I can't exactly remember what
'89 is, but it's not the addiction report. I know '88 is the addiction report.
MR. GDANSKI: I agree with you.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, Dr. Hoff, if '89 is not the addiction report, then why didn't you include the '88 report?
A. Perhaps because I was confusing it with the '88 report, that I simply made an error in the date.
Q. well, that makes it very difficult for me to question you about the reports that are on your reliance list.
The '89 report, I understand, and if you have it in front of you, has -- it may be the '88 report, I'm not -- it may be the '88 report,
it's Chapter 4. Can you go ahead and take a look at that.
MR. CONGROVE: If you give me a moment, I'll find it. I have to switch disks, okay?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
137In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Real quick, Dr. Hoff, I mean, do you agree that the surgeon general reports are authoritative documents?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I think as the surgeon general himself proclaims on certain issues like addiction, very specifically, they can
be regarded as that. But you have to keep in mind that the surgeon general reports, particularly this '89 one, was a compilation
of chapters written by a variety of social scientists.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. I think Chapter 4 is called “Trends in Public Beliefs, Attitudes, and Opinions About Smoking.”
Are you familiar with that chapter of the report?
A. I am.
Q. Okay. And you've read that chapter, correct?
A. I think I've read most of it. I've certainly read the introduction and some of the conclusions.
Q. And --
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, I'm sorry, I chose the wrong disk, it's 2, it must be at the end of 2 instead of at the beginning
of 3, sorry.
MR. GDANSKI: Because I know that time is of the essence, I'm going to try and ask some questions and, Tim, if you want
me to hold off, I will.
MR. CONGROVE: Go ahead and ask her generally -- yeah, you can ask in general.
MR. GDANSKI: Exactly, exactly.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, would you agree with the surgeon general where he says that there are few data regarding Level I beliefs, consequently,
use of the term “awareness” and “public awareness” is generally avoided?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Yeah, for one thing, the surgeon general didn't say that. The author of that particular chapter said that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But the surgeon general published the report and adopts what the author is saying, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
138In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I'm not absolutely sure that's the case because in that particular chapter I read, and I must confess, I respectively disagreed
with it.
Q. Okay. So this is the Surgeon General of the united States of America that you disagree with.
A. No, I'm disagreeing with the author of this particular chapter.
Q. DO you know who authored this chapter?
A. I think it was -- I'm not sure whether he was a psychologist, I think his name was Finebein, I'm not absolutely sure of the
last name.
Q. And in his report he has a whole series of Roper polls.
Do you recall seeing those polls in his report?
A. In this chapter or --
Q. Yes, Doctor.
A. -- or in the report itself?
Q. No, in this chapter, I'm in this chapter.
A. NO, I don't recall that.
Q. Okay. And without belaboring the point because there's quite a bit to this report, do you agree or disagree with the conclusion
that -- and I'm quoting here: “Despite the impressive gains in public knowledge, substantial numbers of smokers are still unaware
or do not accept important health risks of smoking,” and this is from 1989.
Do you agree or disagree with that conclusion?
A. I can't say, I would have to look back at the article itself. I have genuine methodological problems with the article in the
sense that it does make generalizations about what people think. Read the last part that you just said -- that you just quoted.
Q. “Or do not accept important health risks of smoking.”
A. Yes. I think that's a value assumption on the part of the author of this particular chapter that I'm not sure is absolutely true.
Q. I'm going to, and I'll e-mail this later on to the court reporter, go ahead and mark chapter 4 of the surgeon general's report
as the next exhibit and that would be No. 14.
(Exhibit No. 14 was marked for identification and subsequently remarked by the Reporter.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. or. Hoff, did you attach the movie or a clip from the movie “Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo” in your reliance materials?
A. Yes. I've had that in previous reliance materials.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
139In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. And why did you attach that movie or a clip from that movie?
A. I attached it because of the reference to cigarettes in the compartment of the airplane where they were flying over Tokyo.
MR. GDANSKI: Before I forget, I've done this in prior depositions and forgotten about it.
Have we marked the initial reliance list and the revised reliance list, Tim?
MR. CONGROVE: I'll check that while you're going and then we can -- but I'll make sure. I'll let you know, if you have some
other questions.
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, I would like to mark them so we have it done, but I just saw I didn't have a number on mine.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. Going back to “Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo,” or. Hoff, you attach, I think, a scene of about 30 seconds, maybe a
little longer.
Have you seen the entire movie?
A. I did see it, actually. when I was at Berkeley we were looking at some old-time war movies.
Q. Okay. Do you know if there are any other scenes in that movie where individuals are depicted smoking cigarettes?
A. I think there are. I've seen it so many years ago, I'd be awfully surprised if they weren't smoking cigarettes previous to the
clip that I inserted.
Q. And do you know of any other scenes where people are smoking cigarettes and they are talking about the health effects of
smoking or they are smoking in what could be perceived as a, you know, joyous manner or a happy manner, one way or the other?
MR. CONGROVE: object to form.
THE WITNESS: It's a war movie and, again, you have to put it in context. Most war movies will show soldiers smoking
cigarettes and obviously under wartime conditions, I don't think it's logical to think that you're going to have them talking about
the health hazards of smoking under stress. But the clip is telling in that it does make reference to a common slang term used
to refer to cigarettes.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. what was that term again?
A. “Coffin nails.”
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, while you're waiting, I've checked these reliance lists, we've not yet marked them, but they are
ready to be marked whenever you're ready.
MR. GDANSKI: Let's mark the initial reliance list and the revised reliance list, please. So that's 15 and 16.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
140In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
(Exhibit Nos. 15 and 16 were marked for identification.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Is it possible to have public awareness or a common knowledge of a subject which turned out to be not true?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Okay. So then wouldn't it really be better to frame it as a belief, that the public believed this?
A. No, because common knowledge has very little to do with actual belief.
Q. Do you know what Shirley Barbanell became aware of when she was 16 years old?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: DO I know what she became aware of?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, when she was 16 years old.
MR. CONGROVE: what are you referring to? Are you talking about the risk of smoking?
MR. GDANSKI: I don't know if she doesn't know what she became aware of then, I'm not sure. I mean, depending on what
Dr. Hoff answers.
THE WITNESS: There is no answer to your question. She became aware of what?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. well, you're going to testify that she was aware of the health hazards of smoking at a certain point in time, and I'd like to
know what she became aware of when she was 16 when she began smoking.
What did she become aware of? what did she know?
A. There is no way in which I can get inside the mind of a 16-year-old to tell you why she decided to smoke at that age or --
and I simply -- there's no way of answering that question.
Q. All right. DO you know what the tobacco companies knew about the health hazards of smoking in 19-, let's say, '49?
MR. CONGROVE: object to the form; asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry, the answer is “no.” I didn't think I had to answer.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay, okay. And is it your opinion that in 1929 there was public awareness or common knowledge that cigarettes caused
lung cancer?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
141In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form; asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Yes, I've answered that before.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. And what was your answer? I think it was “No.”
A. My answer was a specific causal relationship between cigarettes and lung cancer was not evident or prevalent in common
knowledge awareness.
Q. Okay. How about in 1932?
A. Again, I've answered that question. The scientific proof or the connection or linkage between cigarettes and lung cancer
became only prevalent beginning in the late 1930s.
Q. Okay. So she would have been smoking for a nice ten years before that even entered the public's consciousness, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection, I think Dr. Hoff just said by the late 1930s there was information about cigarette smoking and
lung problems, and I'm not sure, but she said by 1930, late '30s. So I think it misstates her testimony.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I thought you said -- I'm sorry, I misheard you.
MR. CONGROVE: I think we're getting tired.
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, it's been a long day.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I'm going to try and breeze through my notes here and touch on some random topics quickly so I can get rid of them and ask
you a few questions about them. So, hopefully, you can bear with me and we can do that.
Have you had prepared, Dr. Hoff, any exhibits for use at trial in this case?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Have you prepared a list of certain documents you plan on using in a trial?
A. I'm not sure I understand the question.
Q. well, maybe a rough list where you start to narrow down which documents you plan on presenting to a jury --
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
142In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. -- at a trial in this case?
A. No -- no.
Q. Okay, just one second.
Okay, I'd like to go back to something we touched on a little earlier and kind of explore it with a little bit more depth.
You mentioned that you didn't include the “Frank Statement TO Cigarette Smokers” on the reliance list because that's not so
important to you as much as the documents and the text and the articles that discuss that statement are important to you; is
that accurate?
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think I said that.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah. Can you clarify for me why you didn't include it?
A. Because it was talked about in some of these articles and because it was a one-day advertisement that the tobacco company
sent out in response to the tremendous publicity that had been given to the mouse study at the end of 1953.
Q. Okay. But that would have been the tobacco companies, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, their first public statement,
their first comment to the public regarding what they thought to be the health effects of smoking; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think it is. It's their first paid advertisement on the subject of the mouse study.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. And that's also the first time that they've addressed the issue in the public arena; is that accurate?
A. No.
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I would have thought that there would have been some stories in relation to the publicity given the mouse
study where they would have been quoted.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay. But not publications where they're quoted. I'm talking about their first direct comment, their first time that they,
themselves, communicated to the public what their message is, their believe, what their understanding would be of the “Frank
Statement” they had published.
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
143In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure I can say that because they would have issued other statements prior to issuing a paid
advertisement. There's a difference between a paid advertisement and a press release.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. The difference is you know exactly how many people are going to buy the paper with the paid advertisement and you
know exactly what's going to the printer, as opposed to a press release.
A. Yes.
Q. But as far as answering the question, you'd agree that the “Frank Statement” was a pivotal point, a sentinel point in the
tobacco companies' response to the health hazards of smoking.
MR. CONGROVE: object as to form.
THE WITNESS: It certainly was a response. I don't know if it was pivotal or crucial because there's no way to really judge
its impact.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Are you familiar with the tobacco companies' (quote/unquote) “holding pattern”? Do you know what that means?
A. I don't think I do.
Q. Okay. Are you familiar with the notion that, or this phrase, that “doubt is our product”?
A. That “doubt is our product”?
Q. Doubt.
A. Doubt.
MR. CONGROVE: Object as to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah.
A. No, I'm not.
Q. No. Do you think it's fair to my client, to Shirley Barbanell, to the deceased, for you to come forward now and pick the
documents that you want to rely on and to exclude the internal documents of the tobacco companies, not to take into account
what the tobacco companies were aware of, not even taking into account the “Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers” when
they first spoke to my client, and then to come to court and tell a jury that the public was aware of the health hazards?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form. That's incredibly argumentative, Counselor.
(There was a brief interruption in the proceedings.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
144In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
THE WITNESS: And it asks for a subjective response on my part, do I think it was fair.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. I mean, do you think you're telling the whole picture?
A. Yes.
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think, again, as I've said, in terms of presenting, I think, a fairly comprehensive documented picture of
public awareness, common knowledge about the health hazards of smoking, and in this case related to lung cancer and the
habit-forming qualities or nature of cigarette smoking, that I have presented a comprehensive picture. If the documents you're
referring to were released by the tobacco firm, it would have simply reinforced my comprehensive view of general awareness.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And yet, you don't include the most -- I mean, you don't include the first document released by the tobacco companies in
your reliance.
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to the form; argumentative.
THE WITNESS: That's true, I didn't.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. One second.
Are you aware of a committee called the “special Trial Issues Committee”?
A. I don't believe I am.
Q. Go ahead.
A. I'll say, no. Put it in some context for me.
Q. It's hard to put it into context. My understanding is that it was a committee that would consider certain defenses in tobacco
litigation and one of the conclusions of that committee or one of the activities related to that committee was to go out and find
people like you, like or. Joan Hoff, who had become experts in the field of public awareness of the harmful effects of smoking
cigarettes and the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and then would come and testify on behalf of Philip Morris, that's
my understanding of the committee.
A. And the committee was formed by?
MR. CONGROVE: (To witness) Excuse me, Dr. Hoff.
Objection to form, and is there a question pending?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
145In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. NO. She asked what the committee was, so I was trying to, you know, explain it, and if you've ever heard of it or not heard
of it, but that was the committee. And my understanding, it was formed by attorneys representing the tobacco companies to
help defend these cases.
A. I'm unfamiliar with that.
Q. You are?
A. Yes.
Q. I'm sorry, you were unfamiliar or you are familiar?
A. I'm unfamiliar with its creation.
Q. You're unfamiliar, okay. A few quick questions.
Were you ever in the military, or. Hoff?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Have you ever been arrested or convicted of any crimes?
A. NO, I have not.
Q. Okay. Have you ever been sued, personally?
A. My husband and I were sued in an accident case involving automobiles, an automobile accident.
Q. Okay. How did that resolve itself?
A. It was settled out of court finally.
Q. Have you ever initiated litigation, personally sued anybody?
A. No, I never have.
Q. Okay. Do any of your family members work at the tobacco defense firm, Shook-Hardy or Jones-Day or Sedgwick Law
Firm, or I think we have someone on the phone from Carlton-Fields, I don't know if they're still there, but any of your family
members work at those law firms?
A. NO, my entire family is in Butte, Montana.
Q. Do you consider yourself personal friends with any of the attorneys for the tobacco companies?
A. NO, not personal friends; colleagues, perhaps, but not personal friends.
Q. colleagues, okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
146In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
[ DELETED ]
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. [ DELETED ] [ DELETED ]
A. It wasn't one of my concerns -- it wasn't one of my concerns.
Q. Okay. In your prior deposition testimony you provided opinions which are substantially similar to the opinions you're
providing today, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And over the course of the last 15 years since you initially provided opinions on behalf of the tobacco companies, have any
of those opinions changed or been altered in any way?
A. I think perhaps over the years they've been reinforced to a certain degree, but not basically altered from the original studies
that I did.
Q. Okay. And currently your expert disclosure indicates that you devote less than 1 percent of your time to working as an
expert witness.
Is that true still?
A. It may not be true for the immediate future, but it certainly was true when I submitted that evidence because I teach and I
was fully engaged from 200- -- I don't know, 200- -- well, I've been engaged in writing a book from 2001 until the present.
Q. Do you know who -- one second, Robert Soble is?
A. I do if you mention the name of the book. I'm not bringing the book back to mind.
Q. I don't have the name of the book. I can have it one second, I'll give it to you, though.
A. Okay.
Q. You know what? I'll get it for you in a minute, hold on.
Attached to your reliance list, do you have any of the press releases put out by Hill & Knowlton when they worked with the
tobacco companies?
A. No, I don't.
Q. No? Any reason for excluding those materials from your reliance list?
A. Because I would only have been aware of them if the material had appeared in the public medium.
Q. And you're familiar with the 1954 Reader's Digest article that concluded that medically speaking tobacco is not habit forming
and that it went on to state that smoking is habit forming the same as eating three meals or eight hours of sleep or wearing
clothes are habit forming? Are you familiar with that article?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
147In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. If you give me the title of the article, I might very well be.
Q. I think it's “HOW to Stop Smoking.”
A. I vaguely remember that title. I would have to look at the article again.
Q. Okay. Do you know if you included that article in your reliance list?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. So is that the message that was out there in the public's eye that, you know, tobacco was as habit forming as eating
three meals a day or sleeping eight hours a night or wearing clothes?
A. Not certainly from that one article itself.
Q. That was one of the messages that was being put out there, right?
A. Yes, in that particular article. It's kind of a flip comment or a flip way to end that article which was quite a serious article
on how to stop smoking.
MR. CONGROVE: Jonathan, we're down to three minutes on the current tape.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. Let's go ahead and change it and we may do some things and we're obviously almost done.
MR. CONGROVE: Okay, thank you.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 5:51 p.m., this is the end of Tape 4, we're off the record.
(There was a short break taken.)
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 5:53 p.m., this is the beginning of Tape 5, we're on the record.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Dr. Hoff, who is Dick Haynes?
A. I don't know. Haynes?
Q. Dick Haynes, H-A-Y-N-E-S.
A. I don't know.
Q. No? Are you familiar with the ads put out by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for Camel cigarettes where they had him
featured and he had a whole line of comments including, quote: “TO a singer, cigarette mildness is important.” And he also
said, “I find by steady smoking that Camels suit my throat.” He also said, “I found that I get more pleasure from Camels than
I get from any other brand.”
You're not familiar with that ad?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
148In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. Not from my memory right now, but I probably saw it in reviewing materials.
What's the date on it?
Q. unfortunately, like the first Camel ad, there is no date. I'm sure there is somewhere, just not on this piece of paper, which
was on your reliance list. I'll show it to the screen real quick so you can take a look at it and you can tell me if you recall it.
(Counsel displaying advertisement.)
A. I really don't recall the layout of it but there's no doubt that I saw it probably several years ago.
Q. Okay. And is this another example of cigarette advertising to the public where it tried to imply that smoking cigarettes was,
at the very least, not bad for you?
MR. CONGROVE: Object to form.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And potentially was soothing to your throat?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I would answer it the same way that I did on the other ad, that it raises health questions as well as anything else.
MR. GDANSKI: Sure. I'm going to go ahead and mark this as the next exhibit, I think it's No. 17.
(Exhibit No. 17 was marked for identification by Counsel and subsequently remarked by the Reporter.)
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Okay, just a few closing questions then, Dr. Hoff.
I imagine that your opinions in this case are final, correct?
A. TO the degree unless there's some other evidence that comes up on the part of the Plaintiffs that I should look at or, for
example, I think it was referred to earlier, any expert reports from the Plaintiffs that might come up that I would need to look at.
Q. Right. And you may have extensive rebuttal opinions, but your opinions, the opinions that you've generated, are final.
A. Yes. Given the materials I've looked at to date, yes.
Q. And do you anticipate requesting from Shook-Hardy any additional materials or researching and locating any additional
materials on your own?
A. Not at this time.
Q. Okay. And have you ever read any of the deposition testimony of Robert Proctor?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
149In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. NO, I have not.
Q. How about of Louis Kyriakoudes?
A. I don't know whether it was deposition testimony or an expert report that I read a number of years ago.
Q. Okay. And do you disagree with his opinions?
A. I had questions about them, but I would have to look at them again or at any more recent things he's written to discuss it.
Q. Okay. Have you read anything that he's written?
A. Other than this deposition or expert report?
Q. Yes, Doctor.
A. No.
MR. GDANSKI: Just for -- I don't think I have any additional questions, but just for record-keeping purposes, we've marked
the notice, correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Yes.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. And we marked both reliance lists?
MR. CONGROVE: Yes.
MR. GDANSKI: we marked the disclosure?
MR. CONGROVE: Yes.
MR. GDANSKI: we marked Dr. Hoff's notice with the notes on them; is that correct?
MR. CONGROVE: Correct.
MR. GDANSKI: okay, and we've marked the notes that or. Hoff took from the reading of Leon Barbanell's deposition?
MR. CONGROVE: Correct.
MR. GDANSKI: And the notes that she took from reviewing the Sun Sentinel newspaper.
MR. CONGROVE: Correct.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay. And we marked her e-mails with David Boman and with -- I forget.
MR. CONGROVE: Vicki Thompson.
MR. GDANSKI: Vicki Thompson, yeah, v. Thompson, V.com, all right. Real quickly, I'm looking at them now on the floor, I
threw them there, and I don't have much time left and I don't have many questions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
150In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. But can you tell me, and I know you spoke about this briefly, but in the period of 1954 to 1964 what type of coverage the
Sun sentinel had with regards to health effects of smoking?
A. 1954 to 1964?
Q. Yes.
A. I would have looked specifically at or closely at the years '60 to '64 when they were in Florida.
Q. Okay. How about between '60 and '64 then?
A. AS I said before, the publication somewhat surprised me in its editorial policy with respect to the scientific studies which
were coming out and its support for anti-smoking campaigns in the South Beach area or in the Broward County area.
Q. Okay. You said South Beach area?
A. well, it covered, the newspaper was distributed in Broward County and South Beach, Florida.
Q. Okay, right. But I'm talking just specifically between '60 and '64. I understand you referenced this column which was put
in the paper in the mid '80s.
A. Yes, that column, yeah.
Q. I'm talking about between '60 and '64. If you can quickly take out your notes, I'm looking at them now, your notes on reading
through the Sun Sentinel. It's hard to kind of have an understanding of the flow and what notes you're making, it's a little bit
difficult, but I'm looking at the dates and years of the articles that you're --
A. wait a minute.
Q. Sure, do you see it there?
A. I see the notes only for '84.
Q. Yes, I see '84, '85, the next page is '86, '87, '88, it goes then to '89, '90, '91, '92, '93, '94, '95, '96, '97, '98, '99, 2000, 2001,
2002, 2003.
Do you have notes from prior to 1984?
A. No, I don't. I looked at the years '60 to '64 and then jumped to the time period when they were back in Florida.
Q. when did they come back to Florida?
A. They came back to Florida in '82 or '83.
Q. Okay. Any reason you didn't take notes on what was in the paper from '60 to '64?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
151In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
A. I wasn't convinced at that time, the time was so brief that I wasn't sure, among other things, that they had even subscribed
to the Sentinel. I think the subscription came after they moved there permanently to retire.
Q. Okay. Let's assume for a moment that Shirley Barbanell was addicted to cigarettes.
Why does Sun Sentinel coverages of the health hazards of smoking cigarettes in 1984 have any significance in the case?
MR. CONGROVE: objection to form.
THE WITNESS: The question again is?
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Yeah, I mean, the question simply is, why -- and I'll take away the first part of the question.
So the question on itself is, why does Sun Sentinel coverage of the health hazards of smoking in 1984 until 199- -- well, until
2003, have any significance in this case?
MR. CONGROVE: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: One reason would be that, again, according to the depositions, she would have, to a certain degree, been still
trying to stop, and the Sun Sentinel did carry information about clinics and advertisements about anti-smoking substances. So
the Sentinel could have helped her, perhaps, try once again to stop smoking because of those kinds of articles and forums which
were being conducted in the area. The Smoke Out, for example, publicity was extensive in that paper. So that --
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. And she --
A. It might have helped her but, obviously, it didn't.
Q. But this has nothing to do with the common knowledge of the health risks of smoking; does it?
MR. CONGROVE: objection.
THE WITNESS: That already existed.
BY MR. GDANSKI:
Q. Right. And this has -- okay.
A. And the articles which were in the paper on smoking would just have generally reinforced the general awareness of that
area, people in that area, about the health hazards of smoking.
Q. Right, right. or. Hoff, did you include in your reliance list the warnings which were placed on cigarette labels throughout
different periods of time?
A. You mean the specific wording outside of what would have appeared in the ads?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
152In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
Q. Yes. I mean the actual warning labels as a separate item on the reliance list -- which I seem to have lost.
A. No.
Q. And why not?
A. why not the specific warnings as they begin to appear on the packs in '66?
Q. Yes.
A. Because they were talked about in the newspaper articles and on the television programs for the period and they were short
and direct and there would be no need to have a special listing of them in the reliance materials.
Q. Are you of the opinion that those warnings helped create the public's understanding and, I suppose, strengthened the public's
understanding of the health hazards of smoking? Is that your opinion?
A. They reinforced these attitudes, yes.
Q. They reinforced?
A. Yes.
Q. well, I don't think I have any further questions, or. Hoff. I would ask that if you do review Plaintiff's experts' testimony and
you have any opinions, you notify the lawyers for Philip Morris in this case or lawyers for the Defendants and hopefully we
can straighten that out. But I do thank you for your time, it's been a long day. I hope the weather is okay at your house.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm sorry, I see now, can we go ahead and mark the disks, the CDs as a composite, we don't have to take
them, let's just mark them for the record.
MR. CONGROVE: Sure. I mean, these were -- I brought an extra set so I definitely can leave those with the court reporter, if
that's what you want. Is that what you want, Jonathan?
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah.
MR. CONGROVE: I just had another set and I don't need to take them home with me, so I'll mark those.
MR. GDANSKI: I don't need a copy so you can keep your set, Tim, but just mark them for record-keeping purposes as exhibits
to the deposition, but I don't need a copy.
MR. CONGROVE: Gotcha.
MS. CRAIG: Good night, everyone, this is Anna Craig.
MR. CONGROVE: Good night, Anna.
Jonathan, just to kind of wrap up, in the interest of time, I take it you're concluded with your questions.
MR. GDANSKI: Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
153In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5061522...
MR. CONGROVE: Okay.
MR. GDANSKI: Do you have any?
MR. CONGROVE: I really do not this evening. No, I do not. I'm ready to wrap it up, too.
MR. GDANSKI: I was getting worried there. All right, that sounds good then. Thank you all.
THE VIDEOGRAPHER: The time is 6:09 p.m., this is the end of Tape 5, and concluded the deposition.
(Exhibit No. 18 was subsequently marked for identification.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
154
