In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Original Image of 2009 WL 5133569 (PDF)
2009 WL 5133569 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
17th Judicial Circuit.
Broward County
In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION.
Pertains To: Cohen.
Nos. 07-11515, 08-80000(19).
January 19, 2009.
Complex Civil Division
(Deposition of Dr. Luis Martinez-Fernandez)
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Broward County, Florida
Name of Expert: Luis Martinez-Fernandez, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
Appearances of Counsel:
On Behalf of the Plaintiff: Gary M. Paige, Esq.
Paige, Trop & Ameen, P.A.
4000 Hollywood Boulevard
Suite 425 South
Hollywood, FL 33021.
On Behalf of the Defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.: Christine Lawson, Esq.
Jones Day
1420 Peachtree Street, NE
Suite 800
Atlanta, GA 30309.
On Behalf of the Defendant Philip Morris USA, Inc.: Luis Suarez, Esq.
Boles, Schiller & Flexner, LLP
100 S.E. 2nd Street
Bank of America Tower, Suite 2800
Miami, FL 33131.
Video Conference Deposition of DR. LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, taken on behalf of the Plaintiff, pursuant to Notice,
in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, before Louise Nielson, Certified Court Reporter, at 1420 Peachtree
Street, NE, Suite 800, Atlanta, Georgia, on the 19th day of January, 2009, commencing at the hour of 10:06 a.m.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
INDEX TO EXAMINATIONS
DR. LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ ... Page
Cross-examination by MR. PAIGE ... 3
PLAINTIFF'S EXHIBITS
TABLE
(Whereupon, disclosure as required by the Georgia Board of Court Reporting was made by the court reporter, a written copy
of which is attached hereto.)
DR. LUIS MARTINEZ-FERNANDEZ, having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
CROSS-EXAMINATION
BY MR. PAIGE:
Q Please state your name for the record.
A Luis Martinez-Fernandez.
Q And would you prefer if I call you Dr. or Professor Fernandez -- or Martinez-Fernandez?
A Either way is fine.
Q Either way. And, Professor, how many times have you testified?
A Testified once in court.
Q Okay. And who was that on behalf of?
A This was the Cruz-Vargas case in Puerto Rico, and I was working with Jones Day.
Q And then what about by deposition? How many times have you given a deposition?
A This is the first time.
Q Okay. And when were you first hired -- well, strike that.
Have you, have you done work for -- I thought I heard something. Have you done work for any -- do you hear that, or no? It's,
like, when I talk maybe there is a little delay.
(Whereupon, a discussion was held off the record from 10:08 to 10:10 a.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) Professor, when was the first time you were -- well, strike that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
You've been retained by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And have you been retained by any other law firms or tobacco companies other than Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds?
A No, sir.
Q Okay. And the only other case prior to this one that you've been retained for was the case in Puerto Rico?
A Well, that was a case in which I testified in court.
Q Okay.
A There were other cases.
Q Okay. So other than this case and the Puerto Rico case, you have not given any other sworn testimony, though, correct?
A Sworn testimony, no; affidavits, yes.
Q Okay. And tell me about other case -- well, when was the first time you were hired by Jones Day on behalf of R.J. Reynolds?
A This began early in 2001.
Q Okay. And how did it all begin?
A I received a call from a lawyer from a law firm in Puerto Rico, and we had an initial conversation. And then a few weeks
later, we had an initial meeting to learn about the nature of the cases and my work.
Q Okay. How did -- do you know how they heard of you or how they got your name?
A I really don't know.
Q Okay. When they called you, did you ask how they got your name?
A No, I didn't ask.
Q Okay. And did you have involvement prior to being -- prior to your being contacted, did you have any involvement in tobacco-
related research?
A Well, as part of my studies on Latin America and the Caribbean, tobacco is a component of the history of the society, so I
did have, and particularly in terms of tobacco production and tobacco trade.
Q Okay. So part of your expertise prior to being contacted was tobacco production and tobacco trade in Puerto Rico?
A Cuba, Puerto Rico; also in the in Key West. And I would also add the aspect of tobacco culture, the meaning of tobacco
within the various cultures, whether it's Cuba, Puerto Rico, or exile communities in Key West and Tampa.
Q What do you mean by that? What do you mean by “tobacco culture”?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Well, for example, the meaning of tobacco as an economic activity within certain parts of the island of Puerto Rico; some
things having to do with the relationship between that kind of production and democracy, for example, in the Caribbean.
Q Okay. So the economic impact on the communities and on the governments?
A That's right.
Q Okay. So if I understand you correctly, your, your expertise prior to being contacted by Jones Day as it related to tobacco
was about tobacco production, tobacco trade and the economic impact of the tobacco production and trade in the Caribbean
and Key West?
A Yes. And I would also add tobacco culture.
Q Okay. That's what I was asking. What do you mean by “tobacco culture” in addition to what I just stated?
A Well, for example, in some societies, tobacco is so important that it permeates many aspects of society; for example, the
arts and culture, things of that sort.
Q And that -- you had -- what had you done in that regard prior to being contacted in 2001? Had you published on that?
A Yes. In my, my dissertation -- which became my first book by a university press -- paid a lot of attention to the links,
commercial links between the Caribbean and the North Atlantic, including the United States. So that did figure prominently
in that research, yes.
Q For this case and -- you've done some additional research in terms of public awareness of the health hazards of smoking and
the addictive nature of nicotine, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. Had you published, taught or done any research prior to 2001 on the topic of the public awareness associated with the
health hazards of tobacco and the addictive nature of nicotine?
A Not in -- I did not either write or publish on that.
Q Okay. Did you, did you teach on that?
A No, I didn't.
Q So what was your ex -- in this case, as I understand it, you're going to be giving expert opinions. I can read from your
disclosure, but would it be fair to say generally you're going to be testifying about the public awareness of the health hazards
of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine, correct?
A That's correct, and if I may add something. Public awareness is a, a part of social history where the focus is not necessarily
on government actions or the activities of the so-called great men of history, but an understanding of common individuals, their
consumption habits, their popular culture, vocabulary. So as part of my training as a social historian, awareness is certainly
something that fits in there. And, also, part of my research in Puerto Rico had to do with a political party; some polls, for
example, were an important component of that study.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q What? Polls?
A Polls and surveys; yes.
Q In Puerto Rico?
A Yes.
Q Okay. But the -- you're going to be talking about the public awareness of the health hazards of smoking and the addictive
nature of nicotine in the United States for this case, correct?
A Correct.
Q You conducted -- and I've seen your reliance list -- a pretty good deal of research into that area, correct?
A That's right.
Q You consider yourself an expert in those areas now, correct?
A I do. I've been working on that for eight years. In my exposure to a variety of materials over that time, I do consider myself
an expert in that; yes.
Q Okay. When do you, when do you believe that you became an expert on the topics of the public awareness of the health
hazards of smoking in the United States and the addictive nature of nicotine?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I started researching in 2001. And even though the cases centered on Puerto Rico, there were several of the,
of the cases that had to do with individuals who had lived in different parts of the United States. So early on I began to look
at U.S. publications, newspapers, magazines and the like. And, also --
Q (By Mr. Paige) When was that? When was that? When?
A I would say as early as I started; maybe the summer of 2001.
Q Okay. And when did you complete that research?
A Complete the research. You mean for Puerto Rico?
Q Yeah.
A Well, for Puerto Rico, I completed it when I had the last case there. And if I recall correctly, this would have been maybe 2005.
Q Okay. And then when was the first time you were hired to testify in the United States regarding the public awareness of the
health hazards of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: If I recall correctly, it was 2006.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) That what happened? What happened in 2006?
A I started expanding the research to cover U.S.-based cases. And depending on the particulars of the case -- for example, I
did expand quite a bit in terms of focus on materials from Florida, but also national publications which I had been familiar
with dating back to 2001. Because as I was looking at the Puerto Rico cases and doing the research, The New York Times,
for example, was very important and so were --
Q In the Puerto Rico case?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. The -- what case were you contacted on in 2006?
A There have been several I do recall, and I can't tell you for sure which one was the first. But there was a Levine case; a Brown
case, also from Florida; the Cohen case. There is an O'Hara case. I believe there is another one, Rodriguez. There may be --
and there are two or three others that I've been contacted in the past couple of months about, but I don't recall the names.
Q Have you testified -- you've not testified in any other trials or depositions other than this one and the Puerto Rico case, correct?
A Well, trials having to do with tobacco, no, I haven't.
Q Right. Have you participated in any mock trials regarding tobacco?
A No.
Q Have you reviewed any testimony of other historians in tobacco cases?
A Yes, I have.
Q What have you reviewed?
A I've reviewed some depositions by Kyriakoudes. I may -- and I also have seen some depositions by Professors Lacy Ford
and Schaller.
Q Why, why were you -- do you know who Lacy Ford and Schaller are?
A I have met Lacy Ford. I don't believe I met Professor Schaller.
Q Okay. Professor Lacy Ford is a tobacco expert, correct?
A I believe so; yes.
Q And so is Professor Schaller, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know who Professor Schaller is?
A I don't know enough about him really.
Q Well, when you read his deposition -- what deposition of his did you read?
A Let's see. I believe the Sherman case. I may be wrong on that.
Q That would have been Lacy Ford in the Sherman case, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. THE WITNESS: I can't connect the two really. I would have to look at those. But I know for
sure that I read two depositions, one by each historian.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Were they depositions that I was taking?
A If I recall correctly, you were part of one of those; yes.
Q Well, did you, you -- did you read those in preparation for your testimony today?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I read them as part of the general preparation for, for the cases.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. For -- including this case?
A Including this case, yes.
Q Did you bring them with you?
A No, I didn't.
Q Did you take notes when you read those depos?
A Yes, I did take notes.
Q Did you bring those notes with you?
A I'm not sure whether I did or not.
Q Well, can you look?
A I don't have those here with me at the desk.
Q We asked you to bring copies of all documents you reviewed in preparation of your testimony today, correct?
A That's correct.
MS. LAWSON: And let me, let me just represent. We do have copies of his notes. I'm not sure if we have those notes. We
can check on a break, if you like.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Do you think those are -- I tell you what. We can check on a break, if you like.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So what was your understanding of the reason that you were reviewing depositions of other tobacco experts
in preparation of your testimony today?
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, this is my first deposition, and it's a genre that I'm not that familiar with. And I thought that it would
help to, to be able to know about the kind of format, about the kinds of questions that I would be able to expect.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, you understand that we're asking you questions that you're to answer under oath, correct?
A Yes.
Q It's not a test that you need to study up on, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, this is not a test. I'm aware of that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So was it your suggestion that you review the depos of other tobacco historians, or did somebody
else suggest that to you?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I, I believe I received one of them from the lawyers here at Jones Day, and I believe that I asked if there were
others and one was given to me.
MR. SUAREZ: Gary -- Mr. Paige, consistent with past practice, you'll agree that the objection of one defendant --
MR. PAIGE: Can you hear Luis?
MS. LAWSON: Yes.
MR. PAIGE: One objection, that's fine for everybody.
MS. LAWSON: No. I heard him. That's fine.
MR. SUAREZ: Thank you.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So in preparation for your testimony, you reviewed the Schaller depo and the Ford depo, but you don't
have them with you and you may have the notes with you, correct?
A That's right. If I may something -- say something about that. I recently had back surgery, so I'm avoiding carrying too many
things with my luggage on the advice of my doctor.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay. I'm sorry to hear about your back, but I'm sure if we need to -- your lawyers need to make arrangements, they can get the
materials to us. Because of your back, did you neglect to bring any other materials with you today that we asked you to bring?
A Not that I can think of; no.
Q Well, what -- tell me everything that you reviewed in preparation for your testimony today other than the depos of two other
tobacco historians.
A I looked at the various depositions from the Cohen case. I looked over some of my notes that I took pertaining to those. And
just to -- trying to refresh in my mind some information that might be relevant in this instance.
Q I'm sorry. What was the last part?
A That I did review some information from my notes.
Q Okay. What -- did you bring all that with you today?
A I brought, I brought quite a bit of materials. I brought my CV. I brought my -- the reliance list. That would be the extent of that.
Q Okay. If we can -- we don't have to do it right now, but if we can attach to the deposition the CV as Exhibit 1, the reliance
list as Exhibit 2.
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit Nos. 1 and 2 for identification.)
(Whereupon, a discussion was held off the record from 10:20 to 10:21 a.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) And then we asked you to bring copies of all notes that you created in connection with this case. I understand
that the attorney may have copies of your notes from the Schaller and Ford depositions. Were there also notes that you made
in regards to all depositions that you read?
A I -- my practice is to -- whenever I read a deposition, to take notes.
Q Okay. So do you have all the notes with you or does your attorney have the notes or are they at your house or your office?
A Well, something else that I brought was an entire collection of, of CDs, which include these notes that I've been taking for
a long time.
Q Okay.
MS. LAWSON: Just for your purposes, let me tell you, we have copies of his notes. We have a Bankers Box here that has
copies of the notes that I think you're asking him about.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So we can mark the -- we can do it at the end or we can do it now, if you want, Christine. The notes,
if we can have them marked as Exhibit 3.
MS. LAWSON: Well, let me put it up here where you can see it. There is a Bankers Box of materials that's responsive to
your subpoena.
MR. PAIGE: Right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: A good portion of that will be his notes. Do you want to mark the whole box? Do you want to go through
and try and pull out --
MR. PAIGE: Well, why don't we go through the box.
Q (By Mr. Paige) If you could tell me -- pull out the notes and let me see the notes, Doctor -- Professor, and I'll let you know
if I want them attached or not.
MS. LAWSON: Let's just start from the beginning.
THE WITNESS: Thank you. Well, here is -- beginning with materials from the Southern Baptist periodical literature. And I
looked at these materials. Some of them are pamphlets, some of them are Sunday school materials, some of them are various
publications put out by the Southern Baptist Convention. And I read them and I took notes of what I believed was most pertinent.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Is that stack, Professor, is that -- just tell me: Is that all the notes in front of you, or is that something else?
I just want to see if you can show me all your notes that you took.
MS. LAWSON: Well, we showed you the Bankers Box.
MR. PAIGE: Right.
MS. LAWSON: That contains his notes.
MR. PAIGE: So that Bankers Box is only notes in there? There is nothing else but notes in there?
MS. LAWSON: Well, no. These are the things that are responsive to your duces tecum, and it includes his notes. The vast
majority of these are notes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. What is that big book in your hand? Is that notes?
A In my hands?
Q Your pages there. Is that your notes?
MS. LAWSON: That's the first portion of the notes from the Bankers Box.
MR. PAIGE: Because it looked like there is a cover to that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Is that notes, all notes?
A This is a blank pink page, and everything else is notes. Now, there are notes of two different kinds: notes that I, that I took
as I was reviewing the materials, but another style of notetaking is to actually make photocopies of the materials themselves.
Q Right. I don't want the photocopies. I just want to see your handwritten notes. So do you have the handwritten notes so that
I could see how many are really handwritten notes and not photocopies of materials?
A Well, these are not handwritten. These are typed.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay. Handwritten or typed notes.
A Yes. So we have these two and then there are some, some more, page 6. Then there is a section on notes that I took from
pamphlets. This is from a pamphlet again, Smoke Gets in Your Eyes. These are notes. Some of the notes include photocopies
of illustrations, but these are my notes.
Q I'm going to want all these notes. It's okay. We don't have to go through them like this. But let me ask you: You mentioned
you brought some CDs with you today. Tell me about the CDs that you brought. What are on those?
A The CDs include these notes. They also include my list of documents that I have looked at. They include, in some cases,
scans of publications say, by the American Cancer Society; that sort of material.
Q How many -- but all your notes are on the CDs?
A I believe so; yes.
Q And how many CDs did you bring?
A I don't know the exact number, but I can look through them. Let's see. One, two, three, four -- there is also some video --
five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen.
Q Are these in addition to the reliance material discs that we already got? We already got discs of all your reliance materials.
Is this what you're showing me, or this is something else?
A I believe you have them, but I'm not a hundred percent sure.
Q No, no. I have your reliance materials. I do have those.
A Okay.
Q I have your reliance materials. So if you could take the discs that are your reliance materials and put them aside. I don't need
those. But I do need any discs that you have there with notes or other things that I have not seen. So whatever -- your reliance
materials, I don't need, so if you could put those aside.
A Okay.
Q And then tell me what other discs you have other than your reliance material discs.
A Okay. Let me go over them and you please let me know if they're relevant. I have some footage, TV programs, anti-smoking
ads on TV, the same --
Q But were these, were these in your reliance materials, or are these new materials?
A When you say “reliance materials,” do you mean the list that I keep of my materials?
Q Yeah. You had --
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q -- you had a list that your lawyers gave me already. I already received copies of discs with your reliance materials.
A Okay.
Q Okay. So if that's what you're telling me, I don't need those again. If you want to give them to me again, I can look at them
again. But what I'm looking for is the discs that have your notes and other things on it. Is that difficult to understand, what
I'm talking about?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, it's not difficult.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So why don't you take the ones that are your reliance materials and put them aside. You don't have to
tell me about those. I already have those. And tell me what other discs you have.
A Okay. I'm doing that now. I have one that says notes on TV movies, which I believe you have. I have another one entitled
“transcripts,” and these would be from magazines or newspapers or books; another one with the same title. And here I have
notes from The Miami Herald, and that's it.
Q Okay. So when you say notes from The Miami Herald, are those your notes that you took from The Miami Herald articles?
A These are notes that I -- for the most part --
Q Don't put those away yet.
A Okay. For the --
Q Here is what I want you to do. Any of those discs that have your notes on them --
MS. LAWSON: Let him answer the question that you had pending first, if you don't mind. Don't interrupt him.
MR. PAIGE: No problem.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Any of your discs that have notes on them, I want to attach them, that have your -- either the typed or the
handwritten notes. So if you could remove those, that's what I want. Everything else I'm not interested in. Can you do that?
A Yes. One, two, three, four, five. And then I have three more, but these are materials --
MS. LAWSON: Those are your reliance.
THE WITNESS: This is reliance. So as far as I can tell, there are five here.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Now tell me about those five, what they are. Let's do one at a time. Tell me about one because I might
have a follow-up question. So what is the first one?
A There is one that the title says “transcripts.”
Q Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A I couldn't tell you for sure what specific materials are here, but these are transcriptions from books, pamphlets, newspapers
and the like. And there are two of those.
Q Okay. So those two. Okay. I'm interested in those. And tell me the other ones.
A There is one here that says “notes on TV programs and movies.”
Q Okay.
A There is one that's entitled “The Miami Herald.”
Q Okay.
A And there is just one that says “chart book,” which I believe is from one of the books that I used. I can't tell from the title
right away.
Q Okay. So if you could put those -- so there was five of those. And then those I would like -- if we could have copies made
and have those as the next exhibit, Exhibit 3, I guess, of the deposition.
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 3 for identification.)
MS. LAWSON: Okay.
MR. PAIGE: Is that okay?
MS. LAWSON: Yes, yes.
THE WITNESS: Five, five.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Now, you also mentioned you had notes from the depositions that you read of Schaller and Ford. Are those
notes you're talking about on those five discs somewhere?
A Some of them I -- well, some of them I read very recently, but I do have notes on them.
Q Professor, my question was: Are the notes that you took on -- somewhere on those five CDs or are they somewhere else?
A They're somewhere else.
Q Okay. What other notes do you have, do you have that are not on those five CDs?
A Other notes?
Q You have notes from Schaller, you have notes from Ford. Do you have other notes that are not on those five CDs?
A There may be some notes here which were done by hand, but you already have those.
Q Well, I have your reliance materials. I didn't know that you had handwritten notes with those. I was not aware of that. But
that's okay. Other than notes on your reliance materials, do you have any other notes other than what's on those five CDs and
the notes from Schaller and Ford? For example, did you take notes when you did the -- read the deposition of Robin Cohen?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Yes, I did.
Q Okay. Where are those? Are those on a disc, or no?
A I believe I have -- I brought some of them with me.
Q Okay. Can you -- that's what I'm trying to find out. So tell me what other notes you have, then, that you brought with you
that aren't on the discs anywhere.
A There is some notes pertaining to the historians' depositions, which I don't have with me. There is some notes pertaining to
the various Cohen depositions. Some of them I read more than once, so there may be more than one set of notes on those. For
example, the Robin Cohen deposition I read again and I took another set of notes from that.
Q And that would be the extent of your notes then?
A Yes.
Q Okay.
A As far as I can tell.
Q Okay. Thank you.
MR. PAIGE: Christine, as far -- I understand that you do have the historian deposition notes somewhere there. Is that correct,
or no?
MS. LAWSON: I don't know if we have his notes on -- and I'm not sure which historian you're talking about. I don't know if
we have those historian notes. I can tell you we have a box here that does include his notes on the Cohen case and includes his,
I guess, sort of more generalized notes in his Florida research, and that's what's in the Bankers Box.
Q (By Mr. Paige) All right. What's in the Bankers Box is copies of what the notes are -- that are contained on the CDs, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Are you asking me or him?
MR. PAIGE: I'm asking him.
MS. LAWSON: Okay.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I believe so.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So in addition to what's in the Bankers Box and what's on the CDs, you took handwritten notes from
the depositions of Professor Kyriakoudes, Schaller, Ford and the depositions that you read in the case, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Okay. You didn't bring them with you, but you can obviously get those to your attorney, correct?
A That's right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MR. PAIGE: Christine, can we just -- can you give them to the court reporter in the next week so we can have them attached
as Exhibit 4?
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 4 for identification.)
MS. LAWSON: Well, I need to look at the notes. I don't know if they're actually responsive to your subpoena duces tecum. But
I will be happy to make that evaluation as soon as I see those notes. I haven't seen them.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Are you working on any other Engle cases right now other than Robin Cohen?
A Yes, sir.
Q Are you giving depositions in any other cases in the near future?
A I haven't heard specifically about a deposition, but I'm aware that I've been disclosed as an expert in this case and in other cases.
Q But the review of materials that you've done that we've discussed, you've been conducting in connection with this case so
far, correct?
A Well, I would say that I've been looking at material for various cases. Obviously the ones that refer to, say, the Cohen case
depositions, those will be, for the most part, relevant for this case in particular.
Q Well, did you look -- you already told me you looked at the Schaller, Ford and Kyriakoudes depositions in order to help you
prepare for the testimony today, correct? Remember we talked about that?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. In order to prepare for the testimony today, but also for my general preparation which is ongoing for
other cases that, that may require my deposition or testimony.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, you don't have any other depositions set, correct?
A Set in terms of dates, no.
Q So when you were looking at the Schaller deposition, why were you doing that?
A Well, as I believe I said earlier, this is my first deposition. It's a genre that I'm not familiar with and I wanted to have a good
sense of what to expect in terms of the format, in terms of the types of questions, that sort of thing.
Q Okay. The same with the Ford depo and the Kyriakoudes depo, correct?
A Yes; but not exclusively for this case.
Q I understand. But, in part, you were reviewing those testimonies to help you prepare for the testimony you were giving in
connection to this case, correct?
A That is true.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Did you bring your expert report with you today?
A Expert report for?
Q Did you type up a report about your opinions in this case?
A No. I don't have that with me.
Q Okay. Where is it?
A I, I have a copy at home.
Q Okay. How long is the report?
A If I recall correctly, about maybe six pages. I'm just -- it's an approximation.
Q Okay. And did you submit that to the lawyers?
A Yes; they have it.
Q And when did you give that to them?
A This -- I'm not exactly sure about the date, but it must have been, say, August, September of this past year.
Q And is there a reason -- you received a copy of this deposition notice before you came today, correct?
A The notice for this deposition? Yes, I did.
Q And did you see where it asked you to bring a copy of all drafts of your reports that you submitted on this case? It's number
eight.
A Yes. I remember reading that document.
Q Is there a reason why you neglected to bring this report?
A I'm not sure, other than I knew that there is a copy of that report here at the law office.
Q At the office where you're at today?
A That's correct.
MR. PAIGE: Christine, can we have a copy of that marked as the next exhibit?
MS. LAWSON: We can mark that. You already have it. It's the disclosure provided in this case for him.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) The, the report -- okay. Maybe I do have it. The report that you wrote, did you, did you, did you type it
or you handwrote it?
A No. This was something that -- I had a meeting here, and it's something that I was sort of dictating and telling the lawyers what
-- I was being asked in terms of my opinions and the things that I had done, and out of that conversation came out the document.
Q Okay. And you dictated -- was it a six-page report?
A Well, if I recall correctly, it was six pages. But I don't have it in front of me.
Q And what type of information was in the report, to the best of your recollection? Tell me what you recall about your report.
A Well, there were things about my professional training and experience as a historian. There was information on the universe
of materials that I had looked at for this research. There may have been some information on hours spent, that sort of thing.
And the --
Q Did it have information about this case?
A Yes. And, also --
MS. LAWSON: If you would, let him finish his answer, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Go ahead. I'm sorry.
A And, also, information on the kinds of conclusions that had come out of the research.
Q And, and your opinions were about six pages, more or less?
A That's an estimate. If I had the document in front of me, I would be able to tell you.
Q Did you sign it?
A Yes, I did.
Q Was it notarized?
A I don't remember whether that was the case or not.
Q And did you, you -- who typed it up? Did the law office type it up or did you type it up and provide it to them?
A The document as being typed up was taking shape at the moment of the conversation in which I was exchanging with Christine
Lawson what I thought should be there based on what -- the things that I had done, based on the information about my training
and background, based on the materials that I had seen. So that's how it took shape.
Q And -- but I'm saying: Did you -- did they type it up and provide it to you to sign, or did you type it up at your office and
provide them a signed copy?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: The actual typing of the document happened here at the law offices.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you -- was it, was it e-mailed to you?
A I don't recall whether it was e-mailed. I believe I may have taken a copy of it with me, but I'm not sure. I know that I do
have it in my -- at home.
Q Other than the -- your approximate -- I'm not holding you to it -- approximately six pages -- could be a little more, could
be a little less -- document with your opinions and your signature on it, was there anything else on that document that you
took home with you?
A Other than the document or the document itself?
Q Anything other than your opinions. Was there anything else other than your opinions on that document?
A It was all my opinions. It was all my, my testimony about my, my schooling and my professional trajectory. It was all my
description of the sources that I had seen. So all of that information I provided.
Q And they gave you a copy that day before you left the office?
A I can't tell you a hundred percent for sure, but I know that eventually, if it was not that day, eventually I received a copy of
that document. And I have it stored in my home.
Q What -- okay.
MR. PAIGE: Well, Christine, we would like that document attached as the next exhibit, if you would do that. And that's Exhibit
5, I believe.
Is that correct, Court Reporter?
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 5 for identification.)
THE REPORTER: Yes.
MS. LAWSON: Well, I can print out a copy of the expert disclosures. I think it was done in the form of a witness list in this
case. I don't remember, but I have to -- I can print it off at a break.
MR. PAIGE: I just want a copy of what he described. And whatever you attach, you know, we can take it up with the court
later, but that's fine.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you bring your invoices with you?
A I gave my invoices to the law firm before this meeting.
Q Okay. Today?
A Not today.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Christine, do you have those?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Gary, if I can short circuit. They're in the box, if that helps you.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Can you remove the invoices from the box, Professor, and give them to the court reporter?
A It may take a while to find them here.
Q Okay. We have plenty of time.
A Yes. I found them here. They're here. can see one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine -- and there is another set here,
which I'm not sure whether they're repeats -- but ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen,
nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five. I believe that some of these are repeats,
because in some case it's the actual invoice that I sent, but in other cases it has a stamp from, from the law firm marking it that
it's, that it's accepted. So I think they're -- some of these are repeated more than once.
Q That's fine. I'd rather be safe than sorry, so why don't we attach all the invoices and we'll mark that as Composite 6.
How many hours, more or less, do you think you've spent on this case so far as reflected in the invoices?
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 6 for identification.)
A This particular case?
Q Yeah.
A My estimate would be perhaps 70 hours. And, again, it's an estimate.
Q And what you -- the tasks that you performed, are they specified on the invoices?
A They're specified in terms of hours and they're described as consulting work. That includes a variety of different things:
reading materials, notetaking, travel to places where I may find the sources, that kind of work.
Q But, for example, if you read the deposition of Robin Cohen, does the invoice say, you know, two hours for review of
deposition of Robin Cohen, or does it just say two hours?
A Just two hours. I'm not that specific with the, with the invoices.
Q Okay. The -- how many meetings have you had with the lawyers about the testimony that you're giving in this case?
A The Cohen case, I would, I would say three or four, maybe closer to three.
Q Well, there is nothing -- I don't think there is a number closer to three than four, unless we would include two.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Would it be three or four?
A It's three or four, yes. But my inclination is to say three rather than four.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay.
A That's what I meant.
Q And would that include today's meeting or would that be separate from today?
A That includes today's meeting, yes.
Q Okay. So you had one meeting today, you had the one meeting where you, where you drafted your report, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And was that sole meeting for the report or was there another reason for that other meeting?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall. I think we may have looked at some materials and talked about other things.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And did they -- was that in Atlanta, that meeting?
A That meeting was in Atlanta; yes.
Q Okay. And then you had one other meeting. What was that about?
A That meeting was last week here in Atlanta.
Q And what was that about?
A Well, we looked at the documents that were included here and we talked about the kind of format for the, for the deposition.
Q How many lawyers met with you last week?
A Just one.
Q Okay. And who was that?
A Paul Cothey.
Q And how many lawyers met with you today?
A Christine Lawson.
Q And the other meeting that you -- where you went to the office and did the report, how many lawyers were at that meeting?
A I believe, I believe that both Paul Cothey and Christine Lawson were there.
Q Okay. And so the other lawyers that you've met in connection with this case would be Paul and Christine, correct?
A Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q You have not met Eric Lundt; is that correct?
A I have not met him; no.
Q Nor Stephanie Parker, correct?
A No.
Q The -- did you -- when the lawyers would send you materials to review, depositions or other things, did they send them by,
by letter, by mail or by internet?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I usually get them via the mail. I think it's UPS, if I'm not mistaken.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And when you get the materials, it usually is accompanied by -- with a cover letter?
A Some of the time; yes.
Q Okay. And in what occasions would you receive materials with no cover letter?
A Well, they always come with a business card attached, and some materials that are self-explanatory, for example, that may
not require cover letter.
Q Okay. So sometimes you get a cover letter, sometimes you don't?
A That's my recollection; yes.
Q And then what about e-mail? Do you receive e-mail sometimes with attached materials?
A Not, not often. I may have, but I don't recall in the recent past receiving.
Q Any e-mails in connection with this case?
A E-mails? I can recall at least one that I received last week with the list of depositions related to the Cohen case so that I would
make sure that I had that whole list. That's one that I recall, but not more than that.
Q Okay. Did you bring the letters that you received with you today?
A Letters that I received from?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) The law firm relating to the Cohen case. Did you bring those with you today?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: These were materials that, when I was requested to produce those materials by your office, I brought those
materials here. Not today necessarily.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you bring with you today any letters that you received from the lawyers representing R.J. Reynolds?
A No, I did not.
Q Okay. Is there a reason why you left those at home?
A Well, as you can imagine, after all these years of research, I have quite a bit of materials. And it would have not been practical,
especially given my back condition, to bring them today.
Q Well, you brought the box with you today, correct?
A This box?
Q Yeah.
A No, I did not bring this box today with me.
Q When did you bring that box?
A Those are materials that I sent over time, and some of them a lot of that was actually sent in the form of CDs, which are,
of course, much lighter.
Q Listen, I'm not blaming you. I'm just asking if you brought the letters with you. If not, that's fine, we'll get them later. But
the letters that you --
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. The letters that you received from the lawyers that you described a couple minutes ago, I understand
you did not bring them with you today, correct?
A Well, when I was answering the question about letters, I'm not sure -- and I think there may be none pertaining to the Cohen
case. I know that over the past eight years, I have received letters from the law firm. But as far as I can tell, I don't have in my
possession nor have I received particular letters pertaining to the Cohen case.
Q So the only communication you have in writing that you've ever received from the Jones Day law firm is the e-mail that
you got last week?
A No. That's not true. That's one example.
Q Okay. Related to the Cohen case, the only written communication that you've received is the e-mail you got last week. Is
that your testimony?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: When you mean written communication, would you include things like depositions, for example, or actual
letters?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Letters or e-mails. The only letter or e-mail that you received was the e-mail that you got last week on the
Cohen case. Is that your testimony?
A Yes; that's the only one that I recall.
Q But there may be others, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Probably. I don't recall if that's the case.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Did you -- considering that there probably were other written communications, did you look for them
before you came to your deposition in light of the fact that we asked you to or not?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I did look for communications and I didn't find them. At the time that I sent -- I produced these materials,
giving them to the lawyers at Jones Day.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. The e-mail that you got last week, did you delete it?
A No.
Q Okay. Can you provide that to your lawyer so we can get a copy of it?
A Certainly.
Q Okay. And if you find any other written correspondence, either letters or e-mails, from the lawyers, will you provide that
to them as well?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection.
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to that. And we need to see if it's responsive to your duces tecur. If he has things from us
that are not responsive, then you don't get it.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. If you have any other correspondence or e-mails related to the Cohen case, can you provide those
to your lawyer?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Sure. There may be, for example, travel arrangement documents
Q (By Mr. Paige) Right.
A -- anything of that sort.
Q There might be a letter that says, enclosed, please find A, B and C. Call me. Something simple like that, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't tell you that those -- that kind of wording was used. I don't recall that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. In any event, the e-mail that you have and any of the letters that you have from the lawyers related to
the Cohen case, can you provide them to Christine in the next week?
A Yes, I can.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. And I would like those to be attached to the deposition as the -- as the next exhibit, if that's okay.
Christine, is that okay?
MS. LAWSON: Well, I will look at what he provides to me and see if they're responsive to your duces tecum. And if there
is some reason that they're not appropriate to be provided, they will not be provided; if they are appropriate to be provided,
then we'll provide them.
MR. PAIGE: That's fine. But, in any event, if the next exhibit can either be a blank piece of paper or whatever you think is
responsive to our request that was not brought with him today, I would appreciate it.
(Whereupon, the court reporter marked Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 7 for identification.)
MS. LAWSON: That's fine.
MR. PAIGE: We're going to take a quick break and then we'll come back. Five minutes?
MS. LAWSON: That's fine.
(Whereupon, a brief recess was taken from 11:06 to 11:18 a.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) How many other Engle cases are you presently retained on?
A I can't give you an exact number, but it's in the ballpark of maybe eight cases.
Q And have you conducted research on each of those cases so far?
A Well, what I have done is I've read materials pertaining to those cases specifically, such as depositions, and as part of my
ongoing research -- which is basically for all cases -- having to do with information and awareness about smoking and the
possible effects of that. So in some cases I can divide it, but a lot of the research I do is not case specific.
Q How much were you paid last year by Jones Day or R.J. Reynolds?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Last year? I don't have that information with me. I could give you ballpark figure, maybe $40,000.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And what about the year before?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A The year before I believe was less; maybe -- and, again, these are ballpark figures that I would have to double-check; maybe
19,000.
Q In the past eight years in terms of your tobacco-related work, what is the range of income that you have made per year on
the low end and the high end?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say the average is about 30- to $35,000.
Q (By Mr. Paige) All right. And is that, is that number increasing now that you're retained on eight cases?
A It has varied. There have been some times that I've been busier with the research. I would say that there may be a slight
increase over the past 12 months.
Q What, what percentage of your, what percentage of your time do you spend working for the tobacco companies or the law
firms?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: When you say “time,” could you be a little bit more specific as to whether it has to do with 24 hours or my
working time?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Interesting. Yeah. Compared to your working time.
A Working time, probably between 10 and 15 percent.
Q Okay. So 90 -- 85 to 90 percent of the time, you're working as a professor and publisher, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Professor, publisher. Well, a lot of it includes meetings that have to do with my profession, activities with
organizations, such as the college board. So that would be the balance, yes. The 10 to 15 percent would be for Jones Day cases
and activities. The balance would be roughly 95 to 80 percent in other professional activities that could include writing or being
interviewed for TV programs, things of that sort.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What -- on an hourly basis you get paid, you get paid more for the work you do for the tobacco industry
than you do at the university, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I have not done that calculation. And, of course, that would entail looking at the whole compensation package,
not just salary. But I haven't done that, that comparison.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What, what have you published in the area of public awareness of health hazards or addictive nature of
cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: That's not an area in which I have published.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What courses do you teach in the area of public awareness of the health hazards of smoking or the addictive
nature of nicotine?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Specifically on that subject that you have described, I don't teach courses pertaining to that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you generally teach a course pertaining to that?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I don't.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In your reliance materials that you, you put together for this case, do you know -- did you read all the reliance
materials?
A I have read, I have read them either fully or partially, but I am very familiar with all of these materials.
Q And they're all very important in your opinions?
A Some materials are more important than others, as happens with any type of historical research.
Q Well, are you relying upon anything that you think is not important to the case?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You can't really tell when you start the research whether that particular material is going to be relevant or not.
So my tendency is -- as with all other research that I carry out, is to keep the materials just in case their relevance resurfaces later.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know how many pages of reliance materials you've accumulated for this case?
A When, when you ask that question, do you mean the list of materials or the materials themselves?
Q No, not the list. The materials themselves.
A They're certainly in the thousands and includes photocopies, includes, in some cases, an actual publication.
Q Have you heard of the --
MS. LAWSON: If you would let him finish his answer before you ask another question, if you would.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Professor, it will go a lot quicker -- if you don't know the answer, tell me you don't know. I just want
to know: Do you know how many pages of reliance materials you have?
A I could not give you an exact number nor an approximation really.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Have you heard that the number of reliance -- pages of reliance materials that you have accumulated in this case exceed a
hundred thousand pages?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I have not heard that, if that's the question.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And it's your testimony, though, you've read them all, correct?
A I said that I've read some of them in their entirety. I said that I have read some of them partially. And I also said that I'm
familiar with the collection.
Q You personally compiled the materials?
A I'm sorry, which materials are you referring to?
Q Your reliance materials.
A I have, I have compiled them. In some instances I have received access to collections of other people who have been involved
in cases.
Q Okay.
A But the compilation itself is mine. And I did -- I have received some, some collections from, from Jones Day.
Q Okay. What, what access to collections did Jones Day provide to you?
A Well, it was mainly on the basis of historians who have been working for the firm who over the years have amassed collections
of, say, newspapers or they've gone to archives and produced a collection out of those archives. So what I have done is -- having
access to them, I have evaluated those collections myself and selected what I think is important and relevant.
Q So some of the materials that you may have been given from Lacy Ford you thought were not important and discarded them?
A I wouldn't say --
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: -- that; no. It has to do with the methodology of my research. I try to be as rigorous as possible, as with my
other work. And, for example, if there is a collection of a magazine and there are just a few number -- a few issues, I -- that
may be important within a bigger picture for somebody else, but not necessarily for my own research.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Of your reliance materials, how many do you -- what percentage of your reliance materials did you collect
and what percentage were provided to you from Jones Day?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, first of all, I've been doing this for eight years and I've scoured several archives and depositories and --
so there is a huge chunk that is mine. Now, there is some overlap between my own materials that I have identified and those that
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
have been provided. And when they've been provided, the pattern is that I have established communications with the historians
and acquired those through them.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So what is the answer?
A Could you repeat the question, please?
Q Do you know what question you were answering?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Argumentative.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know what question you were just answering?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I know you were asking the question pertaining to percentages or amounts of the ones, but I thought it was
important for me to explain and expand on that, given that they're not just two sources. And, if I recall correctly, your question
had to do with my own and then those provided by Jones Day. And the answer that that question called for also required an
explanation on third parties that provided documents.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So what percentage are yours and what percentage were provided from the third party, whether it be Jones
Day or someone else?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't give you an answer in terms of percentage.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So there is a bulk of the reliance materials that you found on your own, correct?
A That's correct.
Q There is a bulk that were provided by the lawyers who hired you, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, if we use the word “bulk” as meaning the majority, then I, I wouldn't be comfortable accepting what
you're telling me because by “bulk,” I mean -- I understand the majority.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. I didn't understand -- I didn't know that was what bulk meant. The -- there were materials that you
found on your own, correct?
A That's correct.
Q There were materials that were provided by the lawyers who hired you, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. I believe that misstates his prior testimony.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: That's correct.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And there were materials that were provided by other historians that were, likewise, hired by Jones Day,
correct?
A That's correct.
Q And the percentage of how that's broken down, you're unable to give me a percentage or an approximation of a percentage?
A No, I wouldn't be able to do that. What I can tell you is that there is a major overlap between the lists.
Q Now, in your, in your reliance materials, you included The New York Times, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Why was that an important publication to include?
A Well, that's a very important publication for a variety of reasons. Going back to what I was studying for cases in Puerto
Rico, some of the plaintiffs --
Q Let me interrupt you. I want to know if it's important for this case.
MS. LAWSON: If you would, let him answer his question -- let him answer the question you asked.
MR. PAIGE: That's fine. Christine, I'm paying his time. Unless you want to pay his time -- and I have other things to do today.
I don't really care about the Puerto Rico case for the purposes of this question.
MS. LAWSON: Well, I understand you're now limiting it, but you asked him a question. You need to let him answer the
question you asked.
MR. PAIGE: From now on, all my questions, unless I say otherwise, are pertaining to the case that we're all here for today.
I apologize if it was confusing to you.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So I want to know --
MR. SUAREZ: But you asked him why was the paper important. He can answer --
MS. LAWSON: And he can answer that however he wants to answer it. You cannot dictate how he answers the question.
MR. PAIGE: Listen, I'm not going to waste my time. Obviously I can't call the judge because it's Martin Luther King Day
today. Obviously, there are issues I'm going to bring to the judge's attention so far as this deposition has been going.
Q (By Mr. Paige) But my question to you is: In the Robin Cohen case -- you can answer it yes or no. Let me know if you can't;
I'll rephrase it -- was The New York Times an important publication?
MS. LAWSON: And he gets to answer it however he chooses to answer it, not how you dictate.
MR. PAIGE: I disagree with that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Can you answer that question yes or no or can you not?
A It's an important publication indeed. Not for that case alone, but for the others that I'm doing research for. For one thing,
it is the publication of record.
Q Sir, you answered my question.
MS. LAWSON: But you need to let him explain the answer to his question.
MR. PAIGE: Christine.
MS. LAWSON: No, no, no. Listen.
MR. PAIGE: You can stop the depo. Why don't you stop the depo and we'll go before the judge, because, I'm telling you, I
don't need -- I don't have the time -- I'm not getting paid $500 an hour like you are, Christine. I have things I'd like to do today.
MS. LAWSON: Now, listen, everything you're saying right now is not pertinent to what's going on here. You're asking him
questions. He's trying to answer your questions.
MR. PAIGE: It is pertinent.
MS. LAWSON: You need to let him answer the question you're asking. If you don't like the answers you're getting, that's too
bad. But he's trying to answer your question. And you can't dictate to him how he answers your questions.
MR. PAIGE: Well, I disagree with you.
MS. LAWSON: I don't know what rule you're working under that you think you can do that.
MR. PAIGE: Well, I don't know what rule you're working under that you think he can answer a question however he wants.
That's not the rule.
MS. LAWSON: He can answer a question that's -- he answers the question. He's trying to respond to the question you asked.
If you don't like the answer, try a different question.
MR. PAIGE: Well, that's what I'm doing.
MS. LAWSON: That's fine. Go ahead.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Can you tell me why The New York Times is an important publication relevant to the Robin Cohen case?
Can you answer that or not?
A Yes, I can answer that.
Q Thank you. Thank you.
A It is important for various reasons. Number one, it is this country's, and perhaps the world's, most prestigious publication.
Secondly, it is the publication of record in this country. Thirdly, it is a publication that has an impact on other newspapers and
other news media. Fourthly, I would say that it goes beyond the geographical limits of New York because it's a newspaper that
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
is sold widely and people subscribe to it throughout the country. And it is very rich in all sorts of information. And, lastly, it
is a newspaper that has a very good index, and that is helpful for historians.
Q Okay. Now, what do you mean by it's a publication of record? I think you said that was one of the reasons it was important.
A Yes; that's true. Well, I'm not a hundred percent sure of the definition of that, but I've always heard that. And that is that if --
it's like -- I would compare it to an Encyclopedia Britannica, for example. If there is a question about the veracity or the validity
of a source or a piece of information, that would be a very trusted source to go to rather than go to, say, a local newspaper.
Q And what impact -- you also said it had an impact on other media. What did you mean by that?
A Yes. Stories broken or published by The New York Times are usually, in many cases, repeated in other newspapers. Those
stories are reprinted locally throughout the nation. They're commented upon by media, such as news programs. So if a story
-- they're often alluded to in programs, news programs and the like. So it is a trustworthy -- it is deemed as the publication of
record. And I would say that that's my answer to your question.
Q When you, when you -- you just described what you meant by it having an impact on other media. Did you find that to be
so in the Robin Cohen case?
A I haven't made that connection specifically for the case. But what, what I can tell you is that, when looking at publications
in Miami -- for example, The Miami Herald and looking at other publications and even having watched some of the national
news that were broadcast in the Miami area, that The New York Times is often alluded to. So in that regard, my answer to
your question would be yes.
Q But did you find that a lot of The Miami Herald articles, for example, that you cited in your reliance materials for this case
were identically covered in The New York Times?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Identically? I wouldn't say that. I would say that some of the newswire stories could be very similar to the
original story, although my sense is that those are edited for length and other purpose -- purposes locally. Yes, that's my answer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What -- I also noticed that you included advertisements from the tobacco companies in your reliance materials,
correct?
A Yes, I did.
Q Would you agree that -- well, in your reliance materials you have -- in your reliance materials for the Robin Cohen case, you
have advertisements for a variety of brands; brands that he didn't even smoke, correct?
A I believe that's the case; yes.
Q And why did you include advertisements like that in your reliance materials for the Robin Cohen case if he didn't even smoke
them, if he didn't smoke those brands?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, the way I am carrying out the research is not with one particular case in mind. I know that there are
other cases that I've been working on and there may be other cases in the future. So it's not a wise approach to focus the list
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
of materials and the materials themselves to one particular individual, although I do happen to think that information on a
particular individual is also useful at the time when I gather and evaluate these materials.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In the other historian depositions that you read of Dr. Schaller and Dr. Ford, did you see where it was discussed
by them that they believed that the advertisements in the media helped to shape public opinion?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that particular wording. No, I don't recall that particular wording.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Well, for what purpose were you relying upon the advertisements, then, in the Robin Cohen case?
A In the Robin Cohen case and various other cases, right?
Q No. The Robin Cohen case.
A Well, I've been spending a lot of time looking at newspapers, for example. And these are part of the story, I think, the ads that
appear. And I thought that it was important, in order to give a full picture of the types of materials that people were exposed to,
not to leave those out. They're certainly part of the picture. Now, you asked me something in terms of shaping public opinion,
I believe. I, I can tell you what the ads were like. I can't really go deeply into the type of effect that they had on the readers, not
being an expert or being strongly familiar with the area of advertising. But I -- as a responsible historian, I felt that if it dealt
with tobacco and I'm looking generally at materials with tobacco, I should include those.
Q Well, what do you mean by it was part of the story, though?
A Well, part of the story, meaning part of that universe of messages that the public was receiving over the decades that pertained
to smoking. I would include so many sources that are, are important, beginning with the kinds of things that you learn at home as
a child; the kinds of things that are taught to children in schools pertaining to this particular subject; things that young children
learn in Sunday school, for example; oral information; curricular materials; textbooks; information produced by the government
in various ways, whether they're posters or they are government pamphlets; TV programs. So there is a huge universe of images
pertaining to the story of, of tobacco and the consumption of tobacco. And that's why I, I thought it would be fair to include
information on advertising, the same way I thought it's important to also include information on how children in schools, as
part of their learning experience, were taught how to read advertising, were taught how to evaluate them so that they would
make their own decisions.
Q Fair to who?
A Well, as a historian, one of the principles that I'm guided by is that when you're engaging in research, you can't really set
materials out; you need to look at the universe and consider that. It is, it is part of what we do. And I also believe that it is a
factor in public awareness. It is, however, a factor that those who view the advertising know that it's a piece of advertising,
which does not carry the same weight in terms of forming public opinion as a widely distributed report by the Surgeon General,
for example. So my practice as a historian is gather these materials and, as you're evaluating them, make decisions that -- in
terms of how strong they are, how credible they are and how important they are.
Q The -- you said it was important to, to have all types of -- strike that.
I think you said it was important not to set materials out is what you said. Do you remember saying that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I -- when I said that,
I was referring to categories of materials.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You agree that there are a lot of --
MS. LAWSON: If you would let him finish his answer, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. My question is: Do you remember that you said that you do not want to set materials out? Do you
recall that you said that or not?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I recall saying that in terms of categories of materials. We historians, we really depend on exhaustive and
extensive research. And as part of that research, we come across all sorts of information. I think it's wiser to keep the information
rather than set it aside because it may become an important part of the story or the narrative that the historian's producing.
Now, having said that, within these categories of materials, there are some that are more credible. And that's what we do:
Historians look at the materials, we contextualize them, we see who is producing the source, for what audience, is this intended
to be a promotional piece of information or is this intended to be an informative piece of information.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You know, I'm going to stop you right now.
MR. PAIGE: I'm not -- I'm telling you, Christine. He is not answering my questions.
MS. LAWSON: He is answering your questions.
MR. PAIGE: Let me just finish because I'm going to stop the depo in a minute. I'm not going to sit here with these rambling
answers anymore. Okay? I have a very simple question with a very simple follow-up. I'm not sitting here all day with him with
these rambling answers. So if you want to instruct him to answer my questions more direct, I'll try again. If not, I'll take this
before the judge because I'm not continuing like this. So if you'll talk to him, fine; if you refuse to, then I'm going to move to
strike the witness and we'll take it up with the judge.
MS. LAWSON: Well, listen, we've already told you, you can ask whatever question you want to ask. He's entitled to answer
your question how he wants to answer it. I can't tell him how to answer, you can't; we're not historians. That's his expertise and
he needs to be allowed to explain an answer. If you want to discontinue the deposition, that's up to you if you want to, but this
is your opportunity to depose him. So if you want to depose him, I suggest you go forward.
MR. PAIGE: That's fine. But I disagree with you, and I'm certain the court is going to disagree with you that he can answer
the questions how he wants to. This is not a, a --
MR. SUAREZ: If you're going to give a speaking --
MR. PAIGE: I am, I am.
MR. SUAREZ: That's fine. Let's just excuse the witness, then you and Christine can --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MR. PAIGE: No, no, no. We don't have to excuse -- I'm going to tell you. I'm going to do one of two -- I'm going to proceed
one way or I'm not going to proceed at all. If he starts rambling non-responsively to my question, I'm going to interrupt him. If
that's going to be a problem for you, Christine, and you're going to assert that he can answer how he wants to, then I'm going
to move to strike the witness and we'll go before the judge.
MS. LAWSON: Well, I'm telling you, you can ask whatever question you want of him. He can answer the question how he
believes to be appropriate. It is completely inappropriate for you to say you can dictate how he does or does not answer your
question. And, again, I've told you, if you wish to go forward with the deposition, that is your prerogative, you may do so. If
you wish to stop, you may do so also.
MR. PAIGE: No. I'll try one more time, but I'm telling you, I'm going to interrupt him. If he's nonresponsive, I'm going to
interrupt him. And if that becomes a problem for you, that I'm interrupting him when he's not responsive to my question, then
we'll -- I will stop.
MS. LAWSON: Well, first, let me say, one, I object to your speaking objections; and, two, I don't believe he's being
nonresoonsive. I believe he's explaining his answer and he's completely entitled to do that. In fact, I haven't heard you say once
that you were moving to strike his answer as nonresponsive, so your claims now that they're nonresponsive are just absurd.
MR. PAIGE: Well, I mean, I can do that after every question, quite frankly. But I'm not going to strike every single answer that
he gives and then I'm not going to have a transcript. So that's, you know, ridiculous. Anyway, let me just proceed with what
I was trying to ask you before you started rambling.
MS. LAWSON: And I'm objecting to your characterization of his testimony.
MR. PAIGE: That's fine. You can object.
MS. LAWSON: As I've told you, he's entitled to explain his answer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. My question to you is: When you reviewed The New York Post, did you set out and not include articles
that were pro-tobacco?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Meaning that it was okay to smoke or not harmful to smoke?
MS. LAWSON: Same.
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you understand the question or not? If not, I'll rephrase it.
A Yes. You mentioned The New York Post.
Q New York Times. New York Times.
A Oh, The New York Times.
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Yeah, same objection.
THE WITNESS: What I did, my research entailed using the indexes or reading through portions of the newspaper, and I picked
on stories that pertained to smoking and health as sources that would reach the public. If your question is whether I discarded
information on one side or the other, I did not. That's not how historians are supposed to operate.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you exclude certain articles from your reliance materials from The New York Times that recommended
or that stated it had not yet been proven that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I did not eliminate or set aside articles as you have described them.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So the articles in your reliance material include the articles from the fifties, sixties and seventies in
The New York Times that included headlines like, for example, It Has Not Been Proven That Smoking Causes Lung Cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall a particular headline like that. But if I came across such article, that article would have been
made part of the historical record; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Are you aware of articles in the public domain that were pro-tobacco in the fifties?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Form. Same.
THE WITNESS: Could you characterize what you mean by “pro-tobacco”?
Q (By Mr. Paige) In the fifties, as you know, there was -- it came into the public domain more so that smoking cigarettes caused
lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: There were -- that there was an increasing number of stories on that? Yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yes. And in response to those stories, there were other stories by The Tobacco Institute and other sources
saying that it, for one, had not yet been proven that smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I have a problem with the characterization as -- because the tobacco -- I mean, these are newspapers,
and tobacco companies were not writing the articles. So I would have a problem with that characterization.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, what is the problem that you have with it again? I'm sorry?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A We're talking about stories in The New York Times. And you said --
Q Right.
A -- stories, if I recall correctly, by the tobacco industry. And I don't recall coming across stories by the tobacco industry in
The New York Times.
Q Do you recall stories in The New York Times where they were quoting tobacco representatives as part of the headline, saying
that it had not yet been proven that cigarettes caused lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I remember lots of articles that dealt with the subject in which tobacco executives and scientists related to
the tobacco industry were being quoted; yes. As far as the headline, I don't have that specific information on my -- on the --
off the top of my head right now.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. But as an expert historian, do you recall a headline such as Mayo Clinic Doubts Cancer Link to Tobacco
Use; Filter Cigarettes Are Safe: The Risk of Cancer Reduced by New Filtered Cigarettes, Dr. Little States Not Proven? Do
you remember headlines like those?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I do remember headlines similar to those within a broad context of hundreds of stories, most of them having
to do with the negative effects associated with smoking. So, yes, it's true, I remember -- although I don't recall the exact titles,
but there were stories and headlines that included similar wording.
Q (By Mr. Paige) That it had not yet been proven that smoking causes lung cancer?
A Well, I -- I'd like to see or have the full titles so I can make a judgment on that.
Q Do you remember headlines, Tobacco Industry Plans Cancer Probe, articles like that?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you repeat the title, please?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Tobacco Industry Plans Cancer Probe.
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the exact title, but it sounds as something that would have appeared; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you include all the articles from The New York Times in your reliance materials where the headlines
doubted the link between smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Or did you set those materials out?
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I did not set those materials out. They are part of the same collection. I took notes on them. Again, as a historian,
it's important to maintain all of these voices within the, within the research process. What you do with those voices later in
terms of interpretation has to do with contextualizing them, of course, and figuring out who is saying what for what audience.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Would you agree in the 1950s and '60s that, in the reliance materials that you reviewed, there were hundreds,
if not thousands of articles, that were pro-tobacco-related headlines?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: You're using the word “pro-tobacco” and it's a category that I wouldn't use. For example, if there is a story in
which several scientists are being interviewed about the health consequences of smoking, let's say six or seven of them say yes
and they give examples, and then there is one piece or a couple of statements, usually towards the end of that story, that say,
well, more studies are necessary, I wouldn't call that pro-tobacco. Even if the article --
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm talking about the headlines. I'm not -- I know the articles that you're talking about. I'm not talking about
those type of articles. I'm talking about where the headlines are such as that.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, it would depend on the headline, of course. But, for the most part, questions were raised by, by the
tobacco industry as to whether enough research had been done. And usually the position was, well, you know, we haven't
quite established a causal relation, for example, at some point. More research is needed. I wouldn't necessarily call that a pro-
tobacco perspective.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What would you call it? Just so we can talk the same language. How would you categorize those?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: Well, I just wouldn't use that term. I just would refer to an article like that as an article in which the one
particular voice -- the voice of the tobacco industry -- is being relayed to the public. And that's their position; the position is
-- and, actually, they would be prefaced by statements from the journalist that would say, well, there is this growing body of
research and then there would be a -- what I would refer to as a slight disagreement as to whether the research was conclusive
or not.
Now, I should also add something, and that is that it becomes a moving target because science develops over time. And as
scientific knowledge and equipment becomes more modern and developed, then there are new questions that can be asked about
the relationship between smoking and various illnesses.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) What was the slight disagreement that you were referring to?
A Well, for example, scientists could be quoted as saying the evidence is conclusive and then a representative of the tobacco
industry may say, well, we don't agree that it's conclusive. And I'm just making -- these are not verbatim words. So that's a
disagreement. That is certainly a disagreement if one voice says it's conclusive, the other voice says, well, we're not there yet.
I would characterize that as a disagreement of opinion.
Q So you think it was a slight disagreement between what the tobacco industry was saying and what other prominent scientists
were saying?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I'm not saying that. What I just said was based on a particular example that I was creating. And in that
story, I would characterize that as disagreement, whether it's slight or not so slight, but certainly there is a disagreement.
Q (By Mr. Paige) But the, the -- so one side of the agreement said that there was a relationship between smoking and tobacco
and the, the other side disagreed with it, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Not necessarily, because I've come across some statements by the tobacco industry saying there is. It's -- there
is a, a relationship that has been established, and they're not questioning that. What they're questioning is whether the type of
relationship that has been established is enough to conclude that there is a causal relationship.
Q (By Mr. Paige) When do you think the cigarette companies first admitted there was a causal relationship between smoking
and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't give you a date on that. I recall statements to that effect, but I wouldn't be able to tell you without
consulting my, my notes and the materials whether it was in one year or one decade or another.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So as an expert, you don't know if that was in the '80s, the '90s or the 2000s?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, as an expert, I can tell you what we historians do. We're very careful with what we say. And before we
say something that could be quoted or misquoted that is not accurate, the proper thing to do is to look at those, at those notes
again to give you an accurate answer. I'm able to do that in some cases, but not in this particular question that you're posing.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, are you going to, are you going to have an opinion at trial as to when these cigarette companies first
admitted publicly there was a causal relationship between smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure whether that is going to be part of the testimony or the final report. I, I do -- now that you ask the
question again, I believe that that was a far more recent development. And that happened, I believe, in the 1990s.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So in the eighties -- I'm sorry, in the fifties, sixties, seventies and eighties, there was a disagreement
by the tobacco industry that smoking was causally related to lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: In some of the materials that I have used for the research, there are statements to that effect; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And my question to you is: Did you include all the articles where there were headlines in The New York
Times where the tobacco industry took the position that it had not -- that it is not -- that smoking cigarettes was not causally
related to lung cancer during the fifties, sixties, seventies and eighties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I had access to those materials and I've looked at them and they're part of the body of evidence that I, that
I will be using. And I'm --
Q (By Mr. Paige) Are they in your reliance materials?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Based on the method that I used of making notes of articles dealing with that subject, they should be there.
Now, I must say that they would be significantly a minority within the body of articles out of The New York Times and other
publications, which generally the headlines were more along the lines of new link found or new study sheds further light, that
sort of article.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. But there were headlines contradict contrary to those headlines, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: In order for me to respond to that question properly, I'd, I'd like to know which article -- which types of
headlines are being compared. I guess you used the word “contrary,” if I recall correctly.
Q (By Mr. Paige) We'll do it -- there were articles in the fifties that said smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer, correct?
A That's correct.
Q And there were articles in the fifties that say -- that were headlined -- that said the doubt of the causal relationship between
smoking cigarettes and lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I do recall headlines along those lines; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And my understanding is that you did not set out or exclude that second category of headlines from your
reliance materials, correct?
A That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q And -- but you said that the first category, the one that related cigarettes to lung cancer, outnumbered the second category,
correct?
A Yes. That was very obvious as I was looking at The New York Times.
Q But the first category, the one that related cigarettes to lung cancer, usually had somewhere within the body of that article
a statement from the tobacco industry disputing it, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: I would not use the word “usually.” I would say, not having done a quantitative content analysis of those
articles, I would say that in some instances that that other voice was included by the journalist. And I would say that even those
were a minority. And I would also say that, in a way, that's part of the pattern used by journalists when they try to -- in many
cases, if there is a story from one particular angle -- to give the opportunity to another voice. So, so, yes. I wouldn't use the
word “usually.” I would say that it was a minority of the cases.
And then it's also important to keep in mind that these were usually longer stories in which the emphasis was on the findings
about illnesses related to smoking. And usually, towards the end -- this is the pattern that I recall -- you would have one or
two dissenting opinions quoted.
Q (By Mr. Paige) But not usually?
A I wouldn't use the word “usually”; no. I would say it would be the minority of the cases.
Q Okay. So your testimony, testimony under oath, just so I can understand, is that the minority of the articles in the fifties where
they linked -- it was only in a minority of the articles in the fifties where they linked smoking to lung cancer that there was
a competing voice somewhere in the article?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Are you referring to The New York Times?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yeah.
A I would say that they are -- I'm sorry. Could you repeat the question? It had two parts.
Q In the fifties, there were two types of articles that we were talking about: one which linked cigarettes to, to lung cancer and
another that, that disputed that causal link. In the one that links cigarettes to lung cancer, you're saying in a minority of those
articles that you found there was a competing, competing voice or a competing perspective within that article?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I agree with that; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And would you be surprised to find out in your own reliance materials that the number was, like,
80 percent?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Does that sound like a minority to you?
A 80 percent what? I'm sorry.
Q 80 percent of the articles that you have in your reliance materials from the 1950s where they say cigarettes caused lung
cancer, that there is another version within that same article?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I thought that all along we were not talking specifically about lung cancer. The previous questions were
broader than that. So I guess this is a different set of questions.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yeah. I guess we'll have to do them again. In the 1950s, you're familiar with article -- well, in the fifties,
sixties and the seventies -- I'll do it at one time -- there were articles in the newspapers, in The New York Times and The Miami
Herald, both, that linked cigarette smoking to lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And then your -- and you have those articles, some of -- a lot of those articles on your reliance materials,
correct?
A That's correct.
Q And what percentage of those articles on your reliance materials that, that made the link also included a perspective that
disputed or doubted that link?
A I -- based on my recollection, not having done the quantitative analysis, I still believe that they would have been the minority.
And, certainly, the other facet of being the minority is that within the stories, usually there was a much larger number of quotes
from those who were establishing the links than those who were not. So it's not just a matter --
Q I'm not -- I'm asking you about the number of articles, not the number of quotes in the articles, so maybe my question wasn't
clear. But before we get into a whole thing about comparing the number of quotes in an article, which I don't want to waste my
time with, I want to know: In your reliance materials, what percentage of the articles do you think which contend that cigarettes
caused lung cancer contained a competing view?
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Already answered.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What is the number?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A I wouldn't be able to tell you a percentage because that wouldn't be very precise. I hold on to the previous statement that there
would be -- based on my recollection of the materials, that there would be a minority.
Now, I think I must clarify something. And, that is, sometimes it's hard to judge just from the headline or the title whether they're
in one category or the other. Some of these stories had a question mark, for example. Does Smoking Cause Lung Cancer? So
it's, it's really hard for me to give you a precise answer because the headlines don't always, don't always place an article -- to
use your previous terms -- as either pro-tobacco or anti-tobacco.
Q So we'll I'll have to rephrase it again, then, for you. Regardless of the headline, you understand there were some articles that
were -- that the story was that smoking caused lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's true.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And there was another version of stories that doubted that or disputed the causal link between smoking and
lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say yes, but then I would say that there are other articles that don't fit either category.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What were those articles?
A Well, an article that mostly focused on a discussion or focused on a particular research that was made public, so I wouldn't
just break them down in those two categories that you described.
Q Did you include advertisements that implied health benefits from smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Did I use them?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yes.
A I, I included advertising because these were materials that were becoming evident to me as I was looking at, say, TIME
Magazine and the like. In terms of health claims included as part of the advertisement, I don't recall that; no.
Q You don't recall seeing advertisements that indicate more doctors smoke a particular brand?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I vaguely remember seeing something along those lines; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you, did you set them out from your reliance materials or include those advertisements in your reliance
materials?
A It depends on what time frame. There was a point when I was not including those ads or any ads at all, and then there was
a point when I started including ads. So perhaps I saw -- at an earlier stage of the research, I saw ads of that sort and did not
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
include them because I was not focusing on ads. Later on, when I started looking at, say -- TIME Magazine and Newsweek
are good examples of reading through them. And whatever ad appeared with whatever angle as far as advertising, I did include
those without picking or choosing whether they had to do with health or some other advertising perspective.
Q Did you include any ads in your reliance materials that implied health benefits from smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Health benefits? I don't recall that in particular.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you see ads with athletes indicating, quote, they don't get your wind, end quote?
A I do recall having seen athletes. I don't recall that particular wording. I do recall seeing ads by athletes presenting the other
side. And that is making claims for why smoking was something that people, particularly young people, shouldn't do. So I did
see -- I see -- I saw both.
Q Well, what time period did you see advertisements from athletes saying not to smoke?
A I couldn't pinpoint that immediately.
Q Well, would you say the majority of the ads you saw in the forties and fifties from athletes were actually promoting smoking
and not discouraging it?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I, I would have to look at the selection of ads that I have and try to figure that out. But I couldn't give you
an answer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You don't have expertise in that, as you sit here today?
A Well, certainly, advertising is not an area of expertise. As a historian, I do consider ads to be sources, certainly. But in terms of,
of the meanings behind those ads and certainly the impact that they had on consumers, that's an area that is beyond my expertise.
Q Did you see advertisements from R.J. Reynolds saying that the smoking would help your disposition?
A I don't recall that wording; no.
Q Did you see R.J. Reynolds' ads from -- with nurses recommending smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Recommending smoking? No, I don't recall that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Recommending smoking their brand.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that; no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you see advertisements from R.J. Reynolds where they promote that more than 20,000 physicians say
that their brand is less irritating?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I do recall references to physicians, but not that in particular.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And you excluded all those types of ads from your reliance materials, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, I did not exclude them. As I was explaining earlier, there was a period of my research -- actually, the
longest period -- in which I was not including advertising at all. And then later I saw that there were these two different sources,
and some sources were combating tobacco in forms of ads and posters and special TV spots. And I thought that since, since these
have become evident, it would be a good idea to also have a sense -- a general sense of the advertising by tobacco companies.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Right. But the anti-tobacco ads, that started in 1969, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. Actually, that's not correct. We see some of those dating back to the 1800s and ads for cessation of
smoking that listed a whole range of diseases. So I would say that, you know, we have many that are quite old, that I have
actually seen publications that, that carry those ads.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, how about the you were able to talk about which was the minority in terms of articles. In terms of
advertisements, what was the minority: the anti-tobacco ads or the pro-tobacco ads in the -- 1964 and prior?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say that, yes, the advertising by tobacco companies appeared in much larger numbers than advertising
against tobacco or advertising for cessation products. That is, that is a certainty.
Again, I'm not an expert in the field of advertising, but some of those secondary materials that I have seen conclude that the
effect is different. In other words, one -- and I'm just making up these numbers for, for the sake of the explanation. Let's say
that one anti-tobacco ad carries more power and neutralizes maybe five or six ads for the consumption of tobacco. Again, I say
this not being an expert on the field, but I do say that having read some of that secondary literature.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What secondary literature did you read that you're referring to?
A There is -- one of the main experts on that field, his last name is Hamilton. I don't have the quotations with me. I don't have
the citations.
Q Okay. And did you also review TV commercials from tobacco companies in formulating your opinions?
A Yes, I did.
Q And did you produce copies of the ads, the TV ads, in your reliance materials that you reviewed?
A In some cases I did. Many of these I found on the internet, and it was -- I was not able to download those. But others I did; yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Did you see the ads from R.J. Reynolds on TV where they promoted more doctors recommend smoking certain brands of
theirs --
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) -- on TV?
A I don't recall that one in particular. I know that there were ads for different brands, and I know that there were many different
types of, of ads that used actors representing all walks of life.
Q Did you see advertisements in the forties, fifties and sixties with celebrities like John Wayne?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I did see ads with celebrities. I don't recall --
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm going to ask you particular celebrities. I want to know if you remember them or not.
A Okay.
Q Did you see advertisements with John Wayne?
A I'm not a hundred percent sure.
Q What about with Joe DiMaggio?
A I'm not a hundred percent sure.
Q What about Mickey Mantle?
A Probably yes.
Q What about Lucille Ball?
A I don't recall that particular actress.
Q What about Ronald Reagan?
A Yes.
Q And what about Santa Claus?
A Santa Claus? I do recall seeing ads for cigarettes in which Santa Claus was part of the, part of the equation. Whether Santa
Claus was promoting them directly, I don't recall that.
Q What about Fred Flintstone?
A Probably. I don't recall that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Probably you do not recall that or -- I don't understand where probably comes in there. Probably you saw it or probably not?
A Probably. I do recall having seen the Flintstones in some setting; that I do know. But whether it had to do with an ad or
not, I saw it as part of my research.
Q Now, for Mickey Mantle, he was a very prominent athlete in his day?
A Yes, sir.
Q He would be comparable to, say, Shaquille O'Neal today?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say that -- I mean, they're both famous and well-regarded athletes.
I would say that as far as an icon, maybe Mickey Mantle was more of a sports icon in his times than Shaquille O'Neal is today.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And, certainly, the, the advertisements of celebrities and athletes would not be acceptable today in
society as it was back in the forties, fifties and sixties. Would you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: In terms of acceptable, I do recall that there was a process and, if I recall correctly, at one point that that may
have even become law. I'm not sure. But as far as seeing celebrities and athletes in ads, that's something that certainly is not
as prevalent after the sixties as it was before.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, in the forties it was not frowned upon, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not sure how to answer that question. Probably there were some people that disliked the use of athletes in
this. Socially speaking, we should remember that smoking was far more acceptable back then in the forties than it is today. But
it happened and, and it was one of the patterns of advertising that I saw as I was looking at the various ads.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And in 1950, I think 67 percent of men smoked; is that correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm sorry, what year?
Q (By Mr. Paige) 1950.
A That sounds a little bit high. What I would estimate based on my recollections is that maybe it was in the lower 60s.
Q Okay. And with women and men combined in 1950, more than 50 percent of the adult population smoked, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: My recollection is that it was close to 50 percent.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And, nowadays, it's less than, less than one out of five adults actually smoke today, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't know the exact percentage, but I -- it wouldn't surprise me if that was, if that was the right percentage
today.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In the, in the sixties, it was still around 50 percent of adults smoked, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: In the sixties?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yes.
A 50 percent? Well, it depends, because when we look at some of the poll materials, there was a considerable drop in the rate
of smoking at certain junctures when -- certainly when the Surgeon General report was made public. But I would say that my
recollection -- and, again, I've looked at thousands of documents, so it's hard for me to be very specific. My recollection is that
there was a gradual process beginning in the fifties when the rate of smoking became lower, particularly for men.
Q Well, when the Surgeon General report came out in '64, there was, I think, 35 million smokers, and I think 1 million quit
in response to that report; is that correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the exact numbers. But from the news stories that came out in the weeks following the report,
I think it was higher than that. I do recall seeing stories about concerns, for example, among local governments or state
governments whereby the tax revenues from the sale of cigarettes had dropped. So my hunch, based on what I, what I have
seen, is that the drop would have been higher than what you described.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you have -- do you recall any reliance materials of yours that discuss those numbers?
A I do recall materials that discuss those numbers, yes, for various periods.
Q Did you research the public media to see if there were quotes of statements from tobacco representatives on TV or the
newspapers denying the causal link between smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I recall seeing those materials and I do recall some to that effect; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And what time period do you recall those statements being made? If you can give me the decades.
A The fifties and probably the first half of the sixties.
Q You don't recall any public statements by tobacco representatives in the latter half of the sixties, seventies and even the
eighties where they made statements like that in the newspapers and on TV?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Not off the top of my head. I know that this was something that was continuously discussed in the media, and
I have seen particular TV programs, for example, where, where tobacco company representatives were in disagreement as to
the extent of how conclusive the research to date was.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What time period were those public statements on TV that you're referring to?
A I recall at least one from the seventies. I'd have to look at the materials to, to give you a more specific answer.
Q Did you see in Mrs. Cohen's deposition where she indicated that her husband was aware of public statements being made by
the tobacco representatives and certain doctors denying or disputing the causal link between smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't recall whether those spoke specifically to lung cancer, but I do recall having read in that deposition
that the couple discussed those materials.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know what effect those statements had on Mr. Cohen?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't really tell you on the basis of what I know. What I can tell you is that in the same publications that
what you just described appeared, there were hundreds of stories presenting --
Q (By Mr. Paige) I didn't even ask you about a publication. What publication did you want to talk about?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You were telling me they were on TV.
A Well, we've been talking about TV. I brought the example of TV.
Q Do you know what effect they had on Mr. Cohen?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What effect they had?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yeah.
A I can't tell that for sure. I don't have enough evidence for that.
Q Did you look at any of the internal tobacco documents to determine the extent of their knowledge?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: When you mean “knowledge,” do you mean the Cohens?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Let me ask you this: Do you have an opinion as to whether or not Mr. Cohen thought that cigarettes caused
lung cancer in the 1950s?
A I -- what I can tell you is that he -- as any common consumer in the time and place in which he lived, there was plenty
of information representing that, that link. I can tell you that the textbooks, for example, used in the school system where he
attended --
Q Okay. Let me restate my question. I want to know: Do you know, do you have an -- well, in the 1950s, do you have an
opinion as to whether the tobacco companies -- R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris in particular -- whether or not they believed
that cigarettes caused cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't have any basis to, to make that a certain.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, from what you read, it appears from the -- you have not looked at their internal documents, correct?
A I have come across some internal documents. As I was doing research on the internet, sometimes these documents -- that
I recall seeing just a few of them -- appeared. So as part of my research methodology, if I came across them, I took note of
what they had to say.
Q Okay. But their public statement that they made in the fifties was that they disputed the causal link between smoking and
lung cancer, correct?
A I have seen statements to that effect; yes.
Q Okay. And if you take them at their word, it would appear that the cigarette companies in the 1950s, '60s and '70s disputed
the causal link between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer, correct? From what you saw in the public media.
A From what I saw, there were instances in which that was the case; yes.
Q And you would agree that the, the cigarette companies would have a lot more knowledge about the relationship between
smoking and lung cancer than Nathan Cohen, would you not?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I really don't have a basis to judge that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay.
A Not --
Q Did you see anywhere where Nathan Cohen knew anything about cigarettes through personal experience, other than what
he was reading?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Well, I looked at the depositions very carefully and there were several instances of that; some which are quite direct and
some which I may want to refer to as indirect.
Q (By Mr. Paige) He wasn't a doctor --
MR. SUAREZ: Let him finish his answer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) He wasn't a doctor, correct? He's not a scientist or a doctor?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. He's not a scientist; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, they have scientists and doctors working for them, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: My understanding is that that's the case; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And in the fifties, sixties and seventies, their public statements were that they disputed or denied the link
between cigarettes and lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. THE WITNESS: Well, I would put it in these terms. For the most part, they were calling for
further research. It's not necessarily disputing the connection; it's asking, perhaps, for a higher level of connection that further
research would shed light on. That's how I would characterize it.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you know that they were found liable -- do you know what the Engle findings were as they pertain in
this case?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the specifics. I don't.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So it's your impression that for 30 or 40 years the tobacco companies were merely just asking for more
research to be done, but they were not denying or disputing the link between smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say that in, in many instances they were calling for further research. I can't recall. If I had something
in front of me which had those words, I could tell you for sure. I know that there were refutations; that is clear from the record.
But what particular language were they using? Were they referring to a particular type of disease, such as cancer, or were they
speaking generally about health? That I can't tell you without consulting the materials.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You don't recall them making any public statements that there is no proof that smoking cigarettes is one of
the causes of lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: Are those their words? Is that a quotation?
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm asking you if you remember a quotation -- any quotations from the cigarette companies where they made
such a statement.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Not in particular; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In general, do you remember anything like that?
A In general, I remember some refutations; yes.
Q Some what?
A Refutations.
Q So do you remember them assuring the public that they were researching the issue of smoking and lung cancer and if they
found that there was any dangerous cancer-producing ingredient in their tobacco, they would remove it?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I -- my recollection of that statement is that I read it in -- recently in one of the depositions. I have not, as
far as I remember, come across that myself.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you remember any public statements where they said none of the ingredients used in the manufacture
of cigarettes is harmful as used?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that quotation.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you remember -- do you recall a similar quotation, based upon your expertise as a historian, that occurred
as late as the 1980s?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, the 1980s has not really been the focus of my research.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I just want to know if you are familiar with it or not.
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Not with the particular wording or specific message. As I said, there were refutations that were made public.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you have an opinion as to whether or not Nathan Cohen knew or should have known that cigarettes caused
lung cancer in the 1950s?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A There is some material in the depositions that, that points in that direction. One thing that caught my attention was that -- and
this is -- I wouldn't use the word “speculation,” but this is something that I'm inferring, as historians do.
His mother, if I recall correctly, died of lung cancer, and she was a smoker. So I would reasonably infer that that may have been
a topic of conversation or at least knowledge for him. I know that this kind of information on the links between smoking and
lung cancer were readily available at his own home based on testimony that states that they, for example, that they subscribe
to newspapers. There is the testimony, I believe, from one of his daughters that he read the paper from cover to cover. There
is another testimony that states that he watched the, the national news on a daily basis. And based on my knowledge of
those sources, it is reasonable to infer that -- not just based on these media outlets, but other sources of information that I
mentioned before, such as textbooks or massive campaigns by the American Heart Association -- that that information was
certainly accessible to him. And, also, based on the testimony that he was aware of stories that included the voice of the tobacco
companies, I think it's perfectly reasonable for me as a historian to say, well, there were other stories. And, as I said earlier,
they were the majority of the stories.
So I can reasonably infer that these materials were in his living room. He had subscriptions to them. And there is testimony that
-- not only that he had them, but that he was somebody who kept abreast with current events and was very well-informed and,
judging from the testimony, that he was a savvy businessman and that he was well informed.
Q So what's the answer?
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Asked and answered.
Q (By Mr. Paige) See, you're, like, rambling. You don't even know what my question is. I'm asking you: Do you have an
opinion in the 1950s whether or not you believe Nathan Cohen knew cigarettes caused lung cancer? It really calls for a yes-or-
no answer. So if you can answer yes or no, I would appreciate it.
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: If we go --
Q (By Mr. Paige) I might ask you to explain why you come to the conclusion. I might ask you that as a follow up, if you would
let me. But my question to you is -- and, really, you're wasting my time, so I'm not even really --
MS. LAWSON: Listen, I'm going to start objecting to these speaking objections. You can ask the question if you want and
then he can answer it.
Q (By Mr. Paige) All right. Do you have an opinion whether or not R.J. Reynolds believed that cigarettes caused lung cancer
in the 1950s?
A Well, that was not the question that you asked previously.
Q I'm going to ask you three questions. I want to know: Do you know whether R.J. Reynolds believed it, do you know whether
Philip Morris believed it and do you know whether Nathan Cohen believed it?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: But let me just clarify one thing because the last question that you asked was different. You asked about
belief and knowledge.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I know what I asked you. I asked you: Do you have an opinion whether Nathan Cohen believed that cigarettes
caused lung cancer in the 1950s?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. Asked and answered.
THE WITNESS: Well, that's not my recollection of the way you worded the question before. It had to do more --
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, however I worded it, I assure you I did not call for that type of response.
MS. LAWSON: I'm going to object to these speaking objections. If you want to ask him a question, ask him a question.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. My question to you is: Do you have an opinion whether or not Nathan Cohen believed that cigarettes
caused lung cancer in the 1950s?
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Whether he believed that?
Based on the information that I have, I don't, because the realm of belief really forces me to know what is in his mind, what's
in his mind at the time.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So the answer is no. Do you have an opinion as to whether or not Nathan Cohen believed cigarettes caused
lung cancer in the 1960s?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Again, the answer would be the same. No.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And what about the seventies?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would -- the answer would be the same. It's very hard to, to make an assessment in terms of somebody's
beliefs if there is no record of those beliefs.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you have an opinion as to whether the -- Philip Morris as a corporation knew that cigarettes caused lung
cancer in the 1950s?
A I have no basis to answer either yes or no. I don't know.
Q Do you have an opinion as to whether Philip Morris believed that smoking caused lung cancer in the 1960s or 1970s?
A Again, I have no way of knowing that. I have not looked at their records, so no.
Q And from the public domain, are you able to give an opinion as to whether R.J. Reynolds knew or believed that cigarettes
caused lung cancer in the fifties, sixties or seventies?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Again, my response would be the same. I don't have a basis for that, for answering that question.
Q You -- as a historian, in order to give your opinions, you want to look at and evaluate all information in the public domain,
correct?
A We are selective because if the universe of materials is huge, then it's not manageable. But if the --
Q But you want all different categories? You didn't want to set out any type of category, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, yes. As I began the research, the first question that I posed myself is what are the ways in which people
receive information.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Tell me the ways.
A And I'm not sure I'll be able to tell all of them, but it's a pretty long list.
Q Let me rephrase it, then. Let me rephrase it.
MR. SUAREZ: Do not interrupt the witness.
MR. PAIGE: I'm interrupting. I don't know where he's going, so I'm going to rephrase my question.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Are you familiar with the -- with one method of the public receiving information in -- by newspaper?
A Yes; that's one way.
Q Okay. And another way would be television?
A That's another way; yes.
Q Okay. Would you agree that another method would be information disseminated to shareholders?
A Shareholders?
Q The shareholder reports, did you look at those?
A I did not look at shareholder reports. I don't think that they are part of the mass media --
Q That's fine.
A -- category of information.
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his answer, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) My question was: Did you okay. So you have not looked at any of the shareholder reports?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A For these cases, no.
Q Okay. Have you for any cases?
A Not for cases. Sometimes for my own information.
Q Okay. You've looked at the R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris shareholder reports?
A No, I have not.
Q Okay. Which shareholder reports have you looked at?
A Some have to do with, you know, retirement accounts, for example, that I may have, that sort of --
Q Your own accounts, you mean?
A Yes; that's right.
Q Okay. So when you get your shareholder reports, you read them?
A Honestly, I look at them, but they're very confusing so I don't pay too much attention to them.
Q Did you, did you consider what information Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds was disseminating to their shareholders in the
fifties, sixties and seventies about the health hazards of smoking?
A Well, I would say this: As I was answering a little bit earlier, I sat down and I looked at the universe of vehicles through
which information is transmitted to the masses, and I did not consider that to be one of them.
Q Okay. That's fine. Did you look at any letters that R.J. Reynolds had written to their consumers?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Letters, no. Not that I recall; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did the attorneys share any of those with you?
A No.
Q Do you know if R.J. Reynolds was taking the position in 1963 that medical science has been unable to establish that smoking
has a direct link with any human disease?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I have not read those letters, so I'm not familiar with that statement; no. And if I may add something. In order
for me to really be able to contextualize this, one
thing is, you know, who wrote the letter for whom and what date, for what purposes, so I can't really make much of a comment.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you ever read any letters that R.J. Reynolds was writing to elementary school classrooms in the sixties
and seventies advising little children and their teachers that medical science has not found any conclusive evidence that an
element in tobacco causes any human disease?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That type of letter, no. But I would be interested, for example, in terms of the context of those letters being
sent to, to the children. Probably -- and this is my inclination based on everything that I've looked at -- that this was a time when
teachers were spending more time teaching children about the health hazards of smoking and there would have been a host
of materials from the government, from health organizations. And I can infer, based on the type of very aggressive teaching
about the health consequences of smoking, that maybe -- and, again, this is something that I'm inferring; I should look at those
letters, if they were sent. And I don't know whether they were sent to Florida students. But if they were, I would want to see
them in the context of these broader discussions.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You would want to see all -- not just one or two of the letters, but all of the letters?
A I'm not referring to that. If I were to look at the letters, I would like to know in what context they were being used. And if I
may give you an example. During this period, companies were producing many sorts of equipment; some were dummies, some
were machines that, that demonstrated the negative consequences of smoking on the lungs, for example. So I don't know, but
my hunch is that those letters may have been part of that broader discussion.
Q Okay. Which letters would you be interested in seeing?
A Really, I'm not interested in seeing them because -- well, if, if I had them, I would look at them and pay serious attention to
them, but it's not something that I considered essential at this stage of my research.
Q Well, do you know they sent out tens of thousands of letters to schoolchildren and widows?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I'm not aware of that. But, again, it's important to know the context because it -- if those letters are arriving
at a school and the students make that part of a discussion and, as part of that discussion, a local physician shows up and gives
testimony in terms of what he knows about the disease -- I think it's important to know in what context these letters were being
distributed and mailed.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Are you going to ask the lawyer who represents R.J. Reynolds to give you all the letters so you can
look at them?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I wasn't particularly planning on that; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You wouldn't be interested in looking at all the letters that they wrote to schoolchildren so you can know the
context that they were written and include those in your opinions?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Or would you like to exclude them from your opinions?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I'm not in the habit of asking the law firm for materials, so -- it hasn't been my practice. And based on
that method, I wouldn't. Whether they're interesting, whether they could be -- whether they could shed some interesting light
as far as what was happening in the classrooms, they might be interesting documents.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm letting you know that there are numerous R.J. Reynolds letters that we've listed as exhibits, to the
schoolchildren and to widows where R.J. Reynolds -- the company that hired you -- talks about the adverse health effects
of smoking and what their beliefs are and the opinions that they're disseminating to this public or that public. Would that
information -- is it my understanding that you are not going to ask the lawyers to give you all the letters that they have?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Or you are going to ask for that?
A Well, first of all, you mentioned that I was hired by Reynolds. And I haven't had any contact, direct or indirect, with Reynolds.
Q Okay.
A My work has been --
Q The lawyers who you know represent Reynolds, correct?
A That's correct.
Q Okay.
A Well, in answer to your question, it hasn't been my methodology to ask the law firm for particular documents. I've tried to
avoid those -- you know, that kind of, of provision of information.
Q Are you going to do a search, then, on the internet to try to look at these letters and put them into proper prospective?
A I probably will. I just learned about these letters a couple of days ago when I was reading depositions, so I was not aware of
them. I think it's part of the universe of materials that, that will be worthwhile looking at; yes.
Q Okay. After you -- do you plan on looking at -- we're not set for trial for several months. Do you plan on looking at them
before trial or after?
A Probably before trial; yes.
Q After you look at them, will you let us know if your opinions change at all; or let the lawyer know?
A I can do that through, through the Jones Day lawyers, of course; yes.
Q And I take it when you do your search, you're going to try to get to look at all the letters that were published or were sent
out by R.J. Reynolds to the public, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Well, I'm always careful with the word “all.” I don't know that all of them are available. I guess perhaps a sampling of
those letters would be enough. I don't know how many of them there are. But I would be interested in looking, certainly, at, at
something that is reflective of the nature of the letters as you have described them to me.
Q As you have read in the other deposition, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall as much discussion in terms of the content of the letters as I have learned from you in the past
few minutes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Let me -- I'm going to put one of these on the, on the screen and let you read it and see if you can tell me
basically what, what you decipher from it. Okay? What your opinions are about this one. I know there is many more than just
this one I'm going to show you.
A I'll be glad to do that.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Let me get somebody to help me with this.
(Whereupon, a brief recess was taken from 12:59 to 1:05 p.m.)
MR. PAIGE: All right. I'm going to move on because we're having a problem getting the Elmo hooked up.
MS. LAWSON: Okay.
MR. PAIGE: Not a big deal.
Q (By Mr. Paige) When did the public really start hearing about smoking and lung cancer?
A Smoking and lung cancer? It was a gradual process whereby information was beginning to come out of the scientific
community beginning in the 1930s. In terms of lung cancer, I would say that the studies that began to come out in the year
1950 in the United States and England, those received widespread attention in the media. And that information, interestingly
enough, soon began to filter into the textbooks quite early. I would say within a few years. Of course, the public was informed
of a variety of lung diseases associated with smoking, but pertaining to cancer specifically, I would have to say 1950.
Q So the answer to my question is 1950?
A I would, I would do that. Although, as I said earlier, there is some scientific evidence coming out of Germany, for example,
or Argentina, and it's, it's likely that some of that scientific information filtered down to the population through their doctors,
through the media and so on. But 1950 would be my answer.
Q So let me ask the question again and maybe you can just give me your answer without the, the other stuff you thought was
necessary to include.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) When did the public generally first start hearing about smoking and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Asked and answered.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: My response would be the same. Well, it depends. When we talk about the public, do we mean some of the
public or do we mean a substantial part of that population? I would say that some of the public was aware of those connections
before 1950. But in terms of mass knowledge, that happened -- that began to happen with the studies that came out as early as
1950 and then, of course, the numerous other studies that were produced during the balance of the decade.
Q (By Mr. Paige) What was the first major publication to link cigarettes to lung cancer?
A When you say “major publication,” are you referring to a particular type? Because scientific journals -- and this is quite
interesting because, you know, Germany was --
Q Let me answer your question because you don't -- I'm not talking about scientific journals.
A So you're referring to what, what sorts of publications?
Q Well, the sorts like you have on your reliance materials.
A Well, I have scientific publications on my reliance materials. And I firmly believe that even if it had -- if it was a study carried
out in Germany in 1938, when you look at the Journal of the American Medical Association -- which is one of the sources that
I looked at carefully -- those reports and abstracts appear there. So that is information that is reaching the, the United States'
doctors. And, as we all know, doctors are conveyors of information for the patients.
Q Do you know what percentage of doctors were smoking in 1950?
A I think I have some general knowledge that it was, if not at the same level of the male populations -- most doctors were male
-- perhaps slightly higher. That is the impression that I have.
Q So what percentage of doctors do you think 130 were smoking in 1950?
A Maybe in the early -- low 60 -- low 60s as far as percent.
Q Let me rephrase. I'm not talking about medical publications. But do you know when the first major publication, excluding
medical publications, published an article linking cigarettes to lung cancer?
A I recall seeing some of that in The New York Times perhaps dating to the thirties and forties; that's my recollection. I would
have to, to look again at those materials, but there are some stories to that effect.
Q So the first major published report to the public, not doctors, linking cigarettes to lung cancer was in the thirties or in the
forties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't tell you that for certain. My recollection is that I did come across some articles linking smoking with
lung cancer. Actually, there were some studies made by prominent U.S. physicians that date back to the 1700s, so there is some
of that information out there.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In the 1700s they're linking smoking to lung cancer?
A To tumors.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Lung tumors?
A I can't recall specifically, but some of them may have to do with cancer of the mouth, the respiratory system.
Q I'm asking about lung cancer. You know I'm asking about lung cancer. Do you know how prevalent lung cancer was in
the 1700s?
A Well, of course, the terminology used by physicians has changed.
Q I just want to know: Do you know how prevalent it was in the 1700s?
A How prevalent was what? I'm sorry.
Q What I just asked you.
A I know for a fact that there was some studies -- and Benjamin Rush is an example of that -- that linked smoking to tumors.
Whether he called them lung cancer or not, I don't think that was the case.
Q Did your research determine the tobacco companies engaged in an effort to create doubt in the public's mind about the health
risks of smoking cigarettes in the fifties, sixties and seventies?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No, my research did not reflect that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Were you aware of any internal documents where the tobacco companies indicated that their strategy had
been to create doubt about the health charge without actually denying it?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I came across that information very recently when I read some of the depositions by historians.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And what did you, what did you make of it?
A Again, not having looked at internal documents of the tobacco companies, just seeing a citation of one particular document
in which somebody appears to be quoted as having said that, as a historian, I could not make a major conclusion out of that
because there is a universe of materials from those companies that is -- I suspect is huge that would allow me to get closer to
an answer to that question. But just based on one quotation --
Q What documents are you talking about that are huge?
A Internal documents from the company.
Q Well, how come you haven't looked at them yet?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: How come I haven't looked at them yet?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yeah.
A Well, as I said earlier, the focus of my research has to do with the information that was made available to the public through a
variety of means. I don't see how documents that by nature are internal and don't make it to the general public have a relevance
in terms of my research.
Q Okay. Well, did you -- did your research indicate in the fifties and the sixties the tobacco companies took a position in the
public media to create doubt about the health charges associated with smoking without actually denying it?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I wouldn't, I wouldn't use the word “doubt.”
Q (By Mr. Paige) You wouldn't use the word what?
A Doubt.
Q Okay. Would you -- did you see after the Surgeon General report in 1964 that the tobacco companies in the public domain
started giving smokers a psychological crutch to continue smoking with the statements they were making in the public domain?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Recently when I read the depositions by the historians, I came across that quote. I can't contextualize it. I
don't recall who made that statement. And, certainly, I can't place it within a broader set of documents, which I assume is a
huge collection.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Would you agree with the statement that -- in 1978 that say very few consumers are aware of the effects of
nicotine, its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Was that consistent with your research?
A That's not consistent with my research; no.
Q So if that was an internal memo from the tobacco, the tobacco companies, you would disagree with their findings in that
regard?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say that given all of my years of research and the type of information that has been out there -- actually
going back to textbooks from the 1910s -- that that information --
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you agree with it or disagree with the statement?
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his answer, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you agree or disagree with their statement?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A I would say that it does not square with everything else that I have seen.
Q Okay. The -- in your research, have you found that most of those who have smoked for a significant time would like to stop
and that many, but not most of those who would like to stop smoking -- well, strike that.
Have you found that most of those who smoked would like to stop, in your historical research?
A Based on my recollection, I wouldn't feel comfortable saying “most.” I would say that there was a significant percentage of
the population that had smoked that did desire to quit smoking. And I've seen that in depositions. I've seen that reflected in the
sales of smoking cessation gum and patches and clinics.
Q Well, as of the eighties, would you agree, through your research, that most of the people who would like to stop were unable
to do so?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't answer one way or the other based on my recollection.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know when the cigarette companies first admitted that nicotine was addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I recall an instance when that was said. Whether that was the first time or not, I couldn't say. But, if I recall
correctly, these kinds of statements were made during the early 1990s or mid-1990s.
(Whereupon, a discussion was held off the record from 1:18 to 1:19 p.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you see stories in the fifties and sixties that casted doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and
smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: “Casted doubt.” I wouldn't use that term. What I would say is that there were different voices speaking to this,
to this topic. So the word “doubt” is something that I have not seen, for example, reflected in information about the public and
how they felt about these issues. The word “doubt” really does not appear, as far as I can tell.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You don't think the public doubted the causal relationship between smoking and lung cancer in the fifties and
sixties and seventies; that there was a percentage of the public who doubted it?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I wouldn't use the word “doubt.” And that word is not one that I recall seeing in any of the polls. I do recall,
of course, that there was a difference of opinion and that some percentage of the population was not ready to answer yes or no.
But whether that reflects doubt, I couldn't make that connection.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know how much money the tobacco companies were spending on advertising in the fifties?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A I don't recall the exact amount. I do know that cigarette companies were among the highest spenders in the area of advertising.
But in terms of -- I'm sorry?
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his answer, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I got your answer. You can go on if you want to. You don't know the amount, correct?
A No, I don't. I know it was a high amount, and I know it was in the millions, but I couldn't tell you anything more specific
than that.
Q Okay. Cigarettes were either the most highly advertised or one of the most highly advertised products in the fifties, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. I would say so. Based on my viewing of newspapers and magazines, tobacco ads have a strong presence
-- have had at certain junctures. So that's how I'm coming up to that conclusion.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And the same would be true in the sixties as well?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: That, that they were spending large amounts of money in advertising, the tobacco companies?
Q (By Mr. Paige) That they were either the highest or one of the high -- most highly advertised products in the public domain.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I agree with that statement; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And in the fifties -- well, strike that.
In the forties, fifties and sixties, what was the message being portrayed about cigarettes in the public media through
advertisements?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What was the message? Was that your question?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yes.
A Well, I recall seeing a variety of ads and they were different types. As we talked about earlier, some of them included
celebrities endorsing these products, some of them were humorous; I recall seeing some of them of that nature; some of them
showed people in every, everyday life situations; people from different walks of life.
Q Okay. Maybe I'm not -- my question wasn't clear. Were cigarettes portrayed as being glamorous in the forties, fifties and
sixties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
THE WITNESS: Well, glamorous, of course, means different things to different people. I would characterize some of the
Hollywood stars, for example, as generally glamorous, so I would, I would agree that that's part of the ad. Having said that, as
I was looking at these materials, I was looking at other types of advertising. And for a variety of products, the use of glamour,
for example, is not something that was out of the norm, certainly, when you look at advertising in general, based on my limited
knowledge of advertising, which comes out of having seen these newspapers and magazines.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So were they or not?
A I would agree that some of them would be characterized as glamour situations and some of them included people that, that
appeared to be glamorous; yes.
Q Okay. Were they portrayed as being healthy?
A It's hard to tell. Most of them were models, I assume. They were attractive people. And, again, this is a pattern that I saw in
advertising in general where it had to do with selling a car or a particular brand of perfume.
Q Okay. You know we're not here about cars or perfume, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm asking you what the message was being -- what message was being portrayed about smoking, not about
buying a car. So have you seen ads in your materials with Mickey Mantle, Joe DiMaggio and the amount of movie stars and
athletes advertising any other product other than cigarettes in the forties and fifties? And, if so, what product are you referring to?
A I didn't do a quantitative analysis. I know that celebrities sold other products that is --
Q To the same extent that they were selling cigarettes?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't tell you that because I haven't done a quantitative study of that. And my, my interest in other types of
advertising was to have a general idea of whether these fit the patterns or not, whether it was an anomaly.
MS. LAWSON: If you would let him finish his question (sic).
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm not talking about that. I just want to know: Do you know how cigarettes were being portrayed in
advertisements in the fifties and sixties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Yes. Earlier I started to say that there were different types of ads: Some of them were humorous; some of
them used celebrities; some of them used, you know, regular-looking people, perhaps, you know, somebody -- a postman or
something along those lines. So there was a variety of approaches as far as the themes in advertising.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you, did you include the -- I think you did include the 1957 Gallup Poll in your reliance materials, correct?
A I included a number of them. That one rings a bell as one of them that I used; yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay. Would you agree that 62 percent of smokers in 1957 did not believe that cigarettes caused cancer or were undecided
about it?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, really, I looked at many polls. And they had different results, of course, over time. In order for me to
answer that question, I would rather have the actual questions and get a chance to see those and then to look at the different
options that those who were being polled had.
And one more thing that I would like to add, and that is that my interest, really, is not -- based on my research is not on smokers
particularly, which is, I think, the group that you refer to, but these polls included nonsmokers as well. So in order for me to
comment on that, I'd like to have an opportunity to see that poll briefly at least.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Well, do you have it there with you on one of your discs?
A It, it must be within my notes, and most likely that the actual, the actual poll is something that I have. I don't know whether
I have it as something that was --
Q Well, I have it.
A Okay.
Q You saw that we discussed it at the other depositions with Dr. Ford and Dr. Schaller, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Objection.
THE WITNESS: I recall discussions of polls; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So what is it that you need to see? Tell me what you need to see. You need the entire poll?
A Well, for example, when you were telling me the answers, I don't recall that those were the options of those who were being
polled.
Q I'll read you the options.
A Okay.
Q The question is: What is your opinion? Do you think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of cancer of the lung? Cigarette
smokers only. 38 percent said yes, 36 percent said no and 26 percent were undecided. Okay. That's in your that's in the --
A What about the population in general? Do you have that?
Q But that's not my question.
MS. LAWSON: Well, you asked him what he needed to see. He's telling you what he needed to see.
MR. PAIGE: Well, I don't -- that's my next question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) So my question to you is: Would you agree, based upon reading the Gallup Poll, what I just read to you
-- seeing how Dr. Ford and Dr. Schaller were able to answer that question -- would you agree that in 1957, according to the
Gallup Poll, there was 62 percent of smokers, smokers, who did -- who either did not believe cigarettes caused lung cancer
yet or were undecided at that point in time?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Let's see. Let me the first thing that I would say -- and, excuse me, because these things need to be put into
context. Because as a historian, I would not look just at one poll for one particular year. So that's the first thing that I would
like to say.
Now, based on the one that you have described to me, I would say that -- this is another way of reading it, that only 38 percent of
smokers made that connection. And 36 percent, which is about the -- roughly the same percentage said no. That is a significant
way of looking at it. About the other 26 percent, it's hard for me to tell based on what you've told me whether they were --
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, the poll says --
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his response, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) The poll says “undecided.” Do you know what that means?
A Yes, I know what “undecided” means. But it could be read “indifferent.” 146
Q What do you think “undecided” means?
A In this case, it can mean a lot of things. I mean, they're just giving three options. It could mean I really have no opinion, I
haven't thought about this, I don't care about it. So undecided does not necessarily relate to the actual knowledge. Now, my
question -- my -- to me the most important question has to do with the population in general, and let me tell you why. You
are selecting a subgroup.
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his response, please.
Q (By Mr. Paige) You're not asking the questions. Okay? I'm asking the questions. So if you want to ask me a question at the end
of the deposition, that's fine. But my question -- I represent somebody who was smoking, and that's my question to you. Okay?
MS. LAWSON: And he's trying to answer your question. Let him finish his response.
MR. PAIGE: No, no, no. He just told me the most important question to him was about the general population.
MS. LAWSON: He is trying to respond to your question.
MR. PAIGE: I'm not interested in the general population.
THE WITNESS: Well, that's what historians do, with all due respect.
Q (By Mr. Paige) With all due respect, I asked Dr. Schaller the same question and Dr. Ford the same question, and they had
no problem answering it.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) You now have a problem answering it after you've read their depositions.
MS. LAWSON: Listen, your speaking objection is completely inappropriate. If you want to ask him a question, ask him a
question and let him answer it.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you agree that, according to the 1957 Gallup Poll in your reliance materials, that 62 percent of people
who smoked cigarettes at that time either indicated they did not believe cigarettes caused lung cancer or they were undecided
on that question?
A As reflected by, by this particular poll, yes.
Q And, now, how many millions of Americans did that 62 percent represent?
A Well, now we're talking about Americans, not smokers, right?
Q How many millions of Americans did that 62 percent of smokers represent?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I have to -- I would have to do a little bit of math. Let's say that roughly 50 percent of Americans
smoked. And we may be talking about a population at that time of about 200 million, but we're talking exclusively about adults,
so I would need more information really.
Q (By Mr. Paige) In any event, there is somewhere that it's 20 or 30 million American smokers in 1957 that either did not
believe smoking caused lung cancer or stated they were undecided, according to that poll, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Based on the poll, correct.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And if Nathan Cohen was one of those -- well, if Nathan Cohen did not believe in 1957 or was undecided
in 1957 that cigarettes caused lung cancer, he would be his opinions or his beliefs would be consistent with millions of other
American smokers in that time period?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: So it's a rhetorical question if he believed or are we taking that as --
Q (By Mr. Paige) The deposition testimony of his wife was that he did not believe at that point in time that cigarettes caused
lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think I recall that; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And all I'm saying is that if that were true, if he did not believe it, that would not be, that would not be out
of the -- that would not be unreasonable in that time period?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would say that, as a historian, I need to look at the two levels. We're talking about the general population,
about which I have quite a bit of experience, having done research, and I have some knowledge about Mr. Cohen in particular.
Now, I'm not ready to say that he is reflective or typical of that larger population that we're talking about. And, if I may, I would
like to say why. I think that he was very well informed. I think that there is testimony to the effect that he knew about the risk
of smoking. In some of the depositions, there is statements to the effect that for 40 years his wife was telling him about this, his
daughters for a shorter amount of time. So I would have a difficult time placing him as a typical member of that population.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. You would agree that hearing something and believing something are two different things?
A I do.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And in the 20 or 30 millions of Americans in 1957 who either did not believe it or were undecided,
you're not saying that those -- that number of people were uninformed, are you?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Are you saying there was 20 or 30 million uninformed Americans at that time?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I'm not saying that at all; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So there very likely were millions of Americans who were well informed in 1957 that smoking could cause
lung cancer. And because of contrary or conflicting information, they either did not believe it or they were undecided, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I wouldn't make the judgment that their decision is based on conflicting information. I can't make that
judgment. What I can tell you is that, yes, in fact, some people -- maybe even a large number of people -- were aware of these
links, but chose not to act accordingly to that information.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Right. There were some people that -- there was 38 percent of the public who did believe smoking -- of the
smokers who did believe it, correct?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: As specified in that particular poll that we were talking about; yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) What did -- would you agree now -- I think Dr. Ford or Dr. Schaller, they said nowadays, in nineteen -- in
2008, I believe, that virtually everybody knows and believes that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. Do you agree with that?
MS. LAWSON: Object. Form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I've seen a lot of polls, and it's very hard to come to a 99 percent or a hundred percent answer to any
given question. That is the nature of polls, as I, as I have come to learn by looking at them. There may be people out there who
live isolated lives and don't really care about the kind of information that is made available to the public. There may be some
people who don't have the mental capacities to, to absorb that information.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, I agree with that. So other than people who are isolated or have something, something abnormal with
their mental capacity, you would agree that virtually everybody today knows and believes that smoking causes lung cancer,
excluding, you know, some rare exceptions?
A I would say that it's almost --
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: -- universal as far as that knowledge. But, again, I would add a third category to that, and that is people are
not always truthful when it comes to answering questions in polls. We know that from, from the recent experience in politics
and how they range depending on the particular time. 153
Q (By Mr. Paige) That can go with any answer. That can go either way on the polls, correct?
A That's true.
Q So the poll -- what we have now are various polls, and I'm going to talk to you about a lot of them. So that's information
we have in terms of what people believe, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I think it's a good approximation. I think it's as good as it gets in order to gauge what people knew and what
people believed. But historians look at polls as part of a larger range of sources and we, of course, look at them critically.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did your research show that the tobacco companies or anybody affiliated with them was responsible for
killing anti-tobacco stories in the fifties and sixties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I was not aware of that. I believe I read a mention of that in one of the depositions by the historians that I
read recently. Other than that, I don't recall having read that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) When you reviewed the are you going to review the tobacco documents or not before your trial testimony?
A Do you mean internal tobacco companies?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Yes.
A No, I don't intend to do that.
Q Were you familiar with or did anybody tell you that there was a memo in 1961 that said they were responsible for having
killed many anti-tobacco stories?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I recall the subject in general, but I don't recall that specific mention of it.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you remember looking at a -- or including the March 1964 Intrinsic Public Attitudes on the Possibility
of a Health Hazard in Cigarette Smoking poll in your reliance materials?
A I don't recall specifically by that title. I do recall some polls from the 1960s. 1964, actually, as well. But I can't -- just by
hearing you say the title of the poll, I'm not a hundred percent sure.
Q In February of 1964, do you agree or disagree that your historical research has showed that smokers -- people who smoked
28 cigarettes a day or more, that only half of them indicated that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the numbers. It strikes me as something very possible.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And in the same poll, do you recall that 47 percent of cigarette smokers indicated that they thought that
smoking a filtered cigarette was either moderately safe or very safe?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the percentages; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Does that seem more or less correct to you?
A You're reading from the polls, and the polls are generally produced by, by a series of corporations or organizations. I would
tend to, to take that information. However, I would also want to look at the available universe of polls because they do vary.
Q Well, did you include all the polls that you are going to rely upon in your reliance materials, or are there others that you
were talking about?
A If I came across them, if I have them, I included them; yes.
Q Okay. The Gallup Polls and Roper Polls are reliable polling organizations?
A Yes, they are.
Q Did you review any of the Surgeon General reports in coming to your opinions or conclusions?
A I did.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Which ones did you review?
A I started with the 1964 report and then over the years I looked at -- I have them at home, all of them, and I did read through
them. I can't tell you that I looked at everything in them, but I'm familiar with those reports having to do with smoking.
Q Did you review -- is it '79, a '79 report?
A I can't recall the dates, but that sounds familiar.
Q And then 1988, did you review that report?
A Is that one having to do with women and smoking or secondhand smoking?
Q I know there was one, I believe, in '88. Have you reviewed all the Surgeon General reports?
A Yes, I have. The ones that pertain to smoking, yes.
Q Okay. And did you do that in part -- well, did you do that as a historian on these topics, reviewed them for these reasons?
A For these -- for the cases, yes. It's been, it's been a few years since I looked at them.
Q The 1964 Surgeon General report, do you recall there being an indication -- well, strike that.
Do you recall prior -- strike that.
According to your research and review of the polls, do you agree that in 1964, again there was 20 to 30 million American
smokers who did not yet believe that smoking caused lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: If that's what that particular says, I have no issue with that. But what I would tell you is that, for example,
two years later there is another poll by a government agency, and I think the percentages are about 70 percent. So when I look
at the polls, I look at the range.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So in 1964, there was about 50 percent of smokers who did not believe smoking caused lung cancer,
and a couple years later it was only 30 percent, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: If I recollect correctly, that would be the case.
Q (By Mr. Paige) But so that means in 1964 there were 20 to 30 million American smokers who did not yet believe smoking
caused lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: If that's what the poll states, I, I accept that as being an approximation; yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) And the poll that you're talking about two years later, that would still mean that there was still about 15 to 20
million American smokers who did not believe smoking caused lung cancer in 1966 or 1967.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Correct?
A I would have to go back to the poll and see the specific questions that it poses.
Q Well, can you tell me now, as we sit here today, what your opinion on that poll is or not? If you have one, I'd like to know
it now.
A On the one from 1966?
Q Yeah.
A Well, I recall the percentage being 70 percent of an awareness of -- but I can't recall the exact question, whether it had to
do with cancer, for example, or lung cancer. The questions change over time. But I know that it's considerably higher as far
as awareness than the one that you mentioned before.
Q I have a poll -- looking at a 1969 Gallup Poll from your reliance materials -- that shows that there was about 30 percent of
males in 1969 that either did not believe smoking caused lung cancer at that time or were unsure. Is that what you're referring
to? Is that the poll you're referring to?
A I was talking about 1966.
Q Okay. Do you have the 1969 Gallup Poll in your reliance materials as well?
A I can't tell you for sure. If it's, if it's enumerated here, it is. And if I had access to it, it's certainly there.
Q In the -- I have here a 1982 poll from The Tobacco Institute -- or prepared for The Tobacco Institute. It's a Study of Public
Attitudes Toward Cigarette Smoking in 1982 by the Roper organization. Did you review that one?
A It sounds familiar, so probably I did.
Q It lists pretty much how many people were smoking in a year. It looks like in 1968 there were 54 million smokers and that
it went up. In 1974 it was almost 60 million smokers, and then it went back down in 1982, down to about 54 million smokers.
Do you recall that?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall the specific percentages for each year. I do recall that there has been change over time, and I can
also say that the change over time reflects different things, for example, the economic situation in the country or the number of
-- the percentage of people in one particular age bracket. These are things that change. So in analyzing those changes, it would
be important to keep an eye on these variables as well.
Q (By Mr. Paige) But in any event, it indicates in nineteen -- there is a question about smokers and it asks how many believed
that smoking is probably hazardous. And in 1974, 30 percent say smoking is probably hazardous and 64 percent say probably
doesn't have any real effect.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Does that refresh your recollection as to that poll?
A I'm sorry.
MR. SUAREZ: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What year was that?
Q (By Mr. Paige) That was a 1982 poll, but they go through the years, '74 through '82. It's like a little graph. Do you remember
that?
A Vaguely; yes.
MR. PAIGE: Hold on. I have to get the guy to turn that on so you can see it.
(Whereupon, a discussion was held off the record from 2:32 to 2:35 p.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Do you see -- can you see that, Professor?
A It's a little blurry. If I move closer to the TV, I may be able to see it better.
Q Let me make it bigger for you. I can read it to you if you want. Anyway, it's a nineteen -- I was going to show you the, the
cover. It's a 1982 Study of Public Attitudes Toward Cigarette Smoking in the Tobacco Industry. Can you see that?
A Yes, I can.
Q Okay. And then on page 9 -- it's from Roper organization. And then on page 9 -- this is in your reliance materials, I believe --
but it goes through the percentages of people that think -- smokers who believe smoking is hazardous or doesn't have any real
effect, and these are the beliefs back in the seventies and early eighties, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: It, from what I see here, begins with '74 through '82.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Right. In '74 it says 30 percent indicate smoking is probably hazardous and 64 percent indicate probably
doesn't have any real effect, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: I see that. However, I don't know what the question is. And, more importantly, I don't know if the question
changed over time.
Now, having said that, that '74 number, that number for 1974 strikes me as being very low compared to all of the other polls
that I have seen. So I'm not sure whether it was the same question over time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. And then I'm going to show you another poll. This is the Federal Trade Commission Poll, public
version, and this was 1981. Okay?
A Okay.
Q And in this poll it indicates -- the question is smoking causes cancer, smoking causes lung cancer. And it indicates -- I'm
trying to keep it big so you can see it. They talk about the number of smokers unaware on the far right and the number of adults
unaware next to it. And the numbers that they give are -- there is approximately 15 to 20 million American smokers who, who
are unaware that smoking causes lung cancer as late as 1981; is that correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can give you an -- I appreciate what you're doing in terms of showing me the materials, but it's not a complete
picture, really. But it does say 15 million among smokers, right.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, let me ask you this: You would agree in the 1960s there was somewhere in the range -- I'm not even
trying to pin you down to it -- but there were millions of smokers in the sixties and seventies who did not yet believe smoking
cigarettes caused lung cancer.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you agree with that?
A I would agree with the fact that the polls reflect that; yes.
Q Do you dispute the polls that indicate that there were millions of American smokers in the 1960s who did not yet believe
smoking caused lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I do not dispute. But in order for me to make that judgment, I would have to look at the whole series. But,
generally speaking, I agree, we can talk about a population in the millions. Yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So that's all I was saying. In the sixties and the seventies, likewise, there were millions of American
smokers who -- we don't have to say the reason, whether it was because of conflicting reports or why. But it was a different
time period, a different era, and there were millions of adults smoking at that time who did not yet believe or were undecided
in their belief as to whether or not smoking tobacco caused lung cancer, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Based on the document that you're showing me, yes, I agree with that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you have other documents that dispute that for the sixties and the seventies that you're going to rely
upon at trial?
MR. SUAREZ: Form.
THE WITNESS: Well, there is a host of other polls, and the numbers vary. But in terms of being in the millions, I would say
that all of them would reflect that. It's a huge -- it's a large country with a large population.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Right. But that's what I was getting at. Whatever poll you want to use -- I'm only using the polls that I found
on your reliance materials, certain Gallup Polls, Roper Polls, and if there is other polls, that's fine. But the polls on your reliance
materials indicate that in 1960s and 1970s there was a percentage of the American population who smoked in the millions who
did not believe smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: According to these polls, I would make that assumption; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And do you dispute those polls or not? That's what I want to know.
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't dispute the fact that the numbers are in the millions. What I'm aware of is the fact that there is change
over time. And even within a short period of time, there is some discrepancies as far as the percentages in the millions, which
in many cases has to do with how the question is presented and what options are given to those who were answering the polls.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Would you agree that in the number of nonsmokers -- I'm not talking about smokers -- but there was also
millions of Americans who were not smoking who did not believe cigarettes caused lung cancer during those time periods,
correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Not having seen those materials recently or not having them in front of me, the best answer I can give you
is that, yes, there were perhaps in the millions individuals who did not smoke who, according to their answers, did not believe
that smoking caused lung cancer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And do you dispute those answers?
A No.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't dispute them. But, again, as I said earlier, it would be important for me to look at the -- at all of the
information, the date -- specific date, the questions as they're presented, the options. Sometimes they have breakdowns by, by
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
regions and things of that -- but my answer is that, yes, I agree with the fact that, based on my recollection of these polls, that
there were Americans in the millions who did not smoke and believed -- and did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know why -- strike that.
The -- do you know if part of the reason that there was this uncertainty about smoking causing lung cancer in the sixties and
seventies was because of the doubt or the conflicting reports in the news media about the causal relationship between smoking
and lung cancer?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, it depends on, on how we use the word -- I think you used the word “uncertainty” -- whether we're
talking about the population in general or individuals, because if somebody answers in a poll, I can't make a decision as to
whether this is the case; that may reflect different degrees of a threshold of information that individuals would need to have or
believe that they need to have in order to answer that. So I don't see that directly reflected from the poll, from poll materials.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you review the 1971 Face The Nation broadcast on CBS television where -- with Joseph Coleman from
Philip Morris?
A No. This, again, is -- this is a material that I have just recently become aware of after reading the depositions by my fellow
historians.
Q Do you know what Face the Nation -- do you know if that was a popular news program in the seventies?
A Yes, it was.
Q And do you know if that was part of the public infor -- public information that people would receive at that time?
A Yes. That would be true; yes.
Q And do you know there were statements by Philip Morris at that time disputing the causal relationship between smoking
and lung cancer?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: Not having seen that program, I couldn't answer that question. But, again, I would like -- I would have to
see the program in its entirety in order to --
Q (By Mr. Paige) When were you made aware of the program for the first time?
A If I recall correctly, it was from the depositions by my --
Q Did you search out that program and take a look at it or try to take a look at it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A No. Frankly, I recently -- I haven't had these for a long time, so I have not had the opportunity to investigate all the materials
that are mentioned here.
Q And what about the Mike Wallace interview on 60 Minutes? Did you see the interview with James Bohen?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: The answer would be the same. This is something that I have not looked at and I have just recently become
aware of the existence of that particular program.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Are you going to review those programs before your testimony in this important case at trial?
A It's very likely that I will; yes.
Q And why would you review it?
A Because they seem relevant. And I have seen other programs, videotaped programs, and -- that fit within that same category.
And the fact that now I'm aware of the existence, I will make an effort to get ahold of those materials; yes.
Q What other, what other materials have you seen that fit that category?
A From the depositions? Earlier we talked about the letters by the tobacco companies, some of the TV programs.
Q Well, have you seen any of the TV programs -- other TV programs where tobacco representatives made statements or
representations to the public about their product?
A Yes.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Which ones did you see? That's what I want to know.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I recall some programs that were broadcast nationally. One of them, I think, was a test. I think the title included
the test of how, how much Americans knew. I have seen footage of news programs actually coming out of Miami in which
representatives of the tobacco industry participated along with health care experts such as Dr. Tate, which was a leading figure
in, in his field and also a strong advocate for, for people to stop smoking.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you see statements by The Tobacco Institute representatives in the public airways that you reviewed?
A Yes. The one that I just mentioned is an example of that. This was a TV program, I believe, out of Channel 4 in Miami.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q What was -- who was the lady from The Tobacco Institute that was on that program?
A I don't recall the name. It's an African-American woman.
Q And was it important for you to review that program?
A Yes, it was.
Q And what about the, the test that you're referring to? Do you know the name of it?
A I'm trying to remember the exact name, but I know for a fact that -- well, actually, there were several. There was one program
that aired on the Saturday, I believe, before the 1964 Surgeon General's report was made public, and that had a huge viewing.
And then there were others. I want to say -- I can't recall the names -- the exact names of the programs, but I do, I do have
that in my reliance list.
Q Did you, did you research filtered cigarettes?
A I'm sorry. I did not hear the question.
Q Did you research filtered cigarettes in your reliance materials?
A Filtered. They were part of the stories, particularly during the 1950s.
Q Right. In the fifties, how were they being marketed?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Let's see. They were -- I recall, I recall competition among companies. I also recall information by the federal
government in terms of, of percentages or contents of various chemicals and tar. I recall that they surpassed at one point non-
filtered cigarettes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you recall they were marketed as a clean, safe cigarette in the fifties?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that exact wording. I know that it became apparent and, actually, the agencies of the U.S.
government concurred based on the knowledge at the time about how to assess nicotine and, and tar and other components
that even the government -- some agencies, at least -- believed that it was better to have lower-tar cigarettes and that filters
played a role in that.
Q (By Mr. Paige) That was in the fifties and the sixties, correct?
A I recall --
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: -- that mostly for the fifties.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) In the 1964 Gallup Poll that you have in your reliance material, do you recall that 50 percent of smokers
thought that by smoking -- that filtered cigarettes were safe?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that, that percentage.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know the 1970 Roper Poll in your materials indicates that almost 60 percent thought that filters
reduced the health -- harmful health effects of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: That's probably the case. I don't know the percentages, but it really squares even with the scientific knowledge
at the time and some government announcements.
Q (By Mr. Paige) That's not -- I'm not blaming anybody. I'm just asking you if you would agree that there were close to 60 percent
of smokers in 1970 that thought that by smoking filters, they were reducing any harmful or adverse health effects of smoking.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
THE WITNESS: Again, I don't recall those percentages. It wouldn't be -- doesn't surprise me to hear those numbers.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Do you know if the same time -- do you know what the, do you know what the knowledge of the tobacco
companies were in the 1960s and 1970s about the true effects of filters and the adverse health effects of smoking?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I don't have that information.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you review an internal memo from Philip Morris where they indicated that the -- it was the illusion of
filtration that was the important factor, not the actual filter itself?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I did not see such document; no.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you see where Mr. Cohen was smoking filtered cigarettes because he thought that by smoking filters
he was removing the harmful ingredients?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't recall that specifically, but it sounds familiar that he did switch. Now --
Q (By Mr. Paige) And that would be consistent --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A -- as to the reason why he switched, I don't have that information.
Q Okay. But there were millions of Americans in the fifties and sixties who switched to filters because they thought it was a
way of removing any harmful ingredients?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: The first part, yes; millions moved from non-filtered to filtered. In terms of the -- why they made the decisions,
I suspect health had something to do with it, but I can't pin that down.
Q (By Mr. Paige) The -- I think you had in part of your disclosure that there was a longstanding awareness that smoking was
addictive, correct?
A Yes. I recall that. We need to take into consideration that the word “addictive” or “addictiveness” has different meanings
and different context.
Q I want to know what your meaning is, how you're using it.
A I'm using it -- I'd have to read the context of the segment that you read to know what, what else I was saying there, but --
Q Well, let me -- if you can't -- let me rephrase it so I can get an answer. It doesn't do me any good to have you answer something
if you don't know what context it was in. So do you agree with the statement that there has been a longstanding awareness by
the public that smoking cigarettes is addictive?
A My answer -- the short answer is yes, but I would have to explain that the meaning of addictive for the general public --
Q Well, so the record is clear, I just want to be able to ask you the next question. So what is your definition or your understanding
of the meaning of “addictive” or “addictiveness” to cigarettes?
A Well, I --
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I don't have a particular one other than to say that, as a historian, I am aware that if I read the word “addiction”
in a scientific journal, that has a particular meaning, which is scientific. I'm also aware of the fact that if I read the words in
a textbook smoking cigarettes have nicotine and nicotine is addictive, that that would be a different definition because it's,
it's geared towards a school audience and, in some instances, decades ago. So the definition has evolved over time and the
knowledge of what, what makes addiction has changed in the past 30, 40 years.
Q (By Mr. Paige) From a historian perspective, do you believe that there has been a longstanding awareness by the general
public in the 1940s and before that that smoking cigarettes was addictive?
A Using the layman's term -- definition of addiction, yes.
Q Okay. Can you now please just tell me what the layman's definition of addictive addiction is that you're using to answer
that question yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
A Well, again, it varies over time, but it has to do with the notion that something is --
Q Why don't we do it over time, then. Why don't we start in different eras so you can tell me each time. So what was the
definition -- the layperson definition in the forties?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: In the 1940s, I would say that a substance or a practice that is hard to quit, that has some sort of a hold over
an individual, whether it's smoking or some other habit. It's closer to habit, really, in the context that you're asking me.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And what about in the fifties? What was the lay definition of addiction in the fifties?
MR. SUAREZ: Same objection. Form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I would say that roughly the same. It's been until, you know, recent decades that we have seen the word
“addiction” gain other meanings. For example, we now talk about people being addicted to gambling. We now talk about
workaholics, for example. So I would say that in the past couple of decades, the definition for the layman has become perhaps
a little bit more sophisticated, and part of that has to do with information that has been made to the public.
Q (By Mr. Paige) So the 1940s to the '80s, the lay definition of “addiction” is something that is difficult to quit. Is that what
you're saying?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: I would agree with that characterization; yes.
Q (By Mr. Paige) And in the 1990s and 2000s, the new definition is what?
A I think it has been expanded. I think there is broader knowledge.
Q I want to know what, what is your definition now.
MS. LAWSON: Let him finish his response, please.
THE WITNESS: Yes. It has expanded. It has become broader. For example, we see programs on TV that tell the public about
chemical reactions that happen, or we see TV programs where scans are shown of people with some habit or withdrawals. The
information has grown. And that also holds true, of course, for the scientific community. They know much more about the
brain than they did back in the fifties and sixties.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. Do you know when Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds first knew how addictive nicotine was and the
effects it had on the brain?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I have no way of knowing that based on what I've looked at.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, just so I understand you: In the forties, fifties, sixties and seventies, your definition that you're using
that cigarette smoking was addictive is because it was difficult to quit, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I added something to that definition. I said it's either a habit or a substance that has a particular hold
over the individual.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. So it's something that was difficult to quit and had a habit or a hold over an individual, correct?
A Yes. I agree with that.
Q And then I just want to know if you can tell me -- without a description if you can tell me how the definition was altered
in the '90s and 2000, if you can.
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Asked and answered.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I'm asking about cigarettes, not about gambling.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Because I assure you we have experts who are going to talk about it, their expertise on that. But I want to
know how the definition of addiction to cigarettes or nicotine changed.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: The question is in layman's terms?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Yeah. What is the new definition the different definition that you're now using?
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: I would say that it's -- in essence, it's the same definition.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay.
A But the people's knowledge about some of the chemical processes that happen in the brain -- there have been discussions
about different types of addictions, some of which might be chemical, some of which may be emotional. These are discussions
in the media over the past three decades that I did not find earlier; forties, fifties and sixties.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay. So there is more discussion about the physiological effects of nicotine as an addictive substance in the '80s, '90s and
2000 --
A That's correct.
Q -- following the Surgeon General report, correct?
A Yes; that's correct.
Q But the -- in the -- did you find in your review of the materials and reviewing the depositions of Mrs. Cohen and the children
and the friends that it appeared that Nathan Cohen found it difficult to quit smoking and that it was -- it appeared that cigarette
smoking was a habit or had a hold on him?
A Based on the information from the Cohen case depositions, I agree with that.
Q Now, the -- so, from a historical perspective, he met the lay definition of somebody who was addicted to nicotine?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I don't know his own definition.
Q (By Mr. Paige) No. I'm saying your definition.
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: Okay. I thought the question was about Mr. Cohen's definition.
Q (By Mr. Paige) No, no. I said Mr. Cohen, from a historical perspective, met your definition of the layperson being addicted
to nicotine.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same objection.
THE WITNESS: Well, I can't answer that question directly.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay.
A I, I --
Q Okay. That's fine. Did you review any documents from the tobacco company where they indicated in the sixties, seventies
and eighties things such as Happily, for the Tobacco Industry, Nicotine is Habituating and has Physiological Effects?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: No. I don't recall having read anything along those lines.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q (By Mr. Paige) Did you review a document that says Very Few Consumers are Aware of the Effects of Nicotine and its
Addictive Nature?
A Again, I have not seen statements along those lines.
Q And how about Most People Would Like To Smoke, but are Unable to Stop?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Could you repeat that? If that's a quote, could you repeat that?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Have you seen any internal documents that say anything similar to that?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Same.
THE WITNESS: Again, my question was about the quote.
Q (By Mr. Paige) I can give you the quote. I have the document here. But let me ask you this: Have you reviewed any PM ads
in 1986 telling the public that cigarettes are not addictive?
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: By PM, you mean?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Philip Morris; that were in the public domain.
A No, I don't recall that.
Q Okay. I know I have it. I'm going to show it to you because I'm going to ask you some questions about it. Have you seen
this ad from 1984? It's an R.J. Reynolds ad.
MS. LAWSON: Objection. Please put it up. But I can probably withdraw my objection as soon as you get it up.
MR. PAIGE: What was that?
MS. LAWSON: I said -- when you made that -- when you had that question, you didn't have anything up on the screen, so there
was no ad for him to look at. But I said I can probably withdraw the objection if you got the ad up there.
THE WITNESS: What date did you say this came out?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, do you know, looking at it, what date it was, or no?
A The wording strikes me as familiar. Whether I saw that as an ad or something else -- I don't recall having seen this in particular.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Okay. It says 1984 in the top right hand corner. And do you see where it says, “Studies which conclude that smoking causes
disease have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary. These scientific findings come from research completely
independent of the tobacco industry”? Are you familiar with that ad?
A No.
Q You've never seen that ad?
A It --
Q In the magazines that you've looked at, the newspapers that you've looked at, you've not come across that ad?
A It's a little -- it's somewhat familiar to me, but I can't recall the specific ad or -- no. And, as I said earlier, the bulk of my
research had to do with the forties, fifties, sixties and seventies, and I did look at some materials from the eighties, but I can't
give you assurance that I, I saw this. I can tell you that it appears familiar to me.
Q Okay. And what do you make of the statement in the 1980s that they're telling the public that there has been -- that this is an
open controversy and they hope the debate about smoking and disease will continue?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: What do I think of that?
That is the opinion, as I -- as much as I can tell, of the company producing the ad.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, that's their belief, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I can't always make a connection between the opinion and the belief; no. I wouldn't be able to judge the belief
of the company at that time.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Okay. But if Mr. Cohen believed or he was of the opinion at that same time that it had not yet been proven
that cigarettes caused disease, that would be consistent with the public statements of R.J. Reynolds at that time, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: Well, I would have to refer to the depositions. And there is some conflicting information there as to --
Q (By Mr. Paige) I think the eighties he started quitting he started trying to quit in 1982.
MS. LAWSON: Is that a question?
Q (By Mr. Paige) Is that right? Is that about the time?
A I remember mention of the eighties. I'm not sure whether it was that early in the eighties.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
Q Do you have any reason to believe that Mr. Cohen had greater knowledge than the executives of R.J. Reynolds?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form. THE WITNESS: I have no basis to make that comparison because I -- I do know a little bit,
based on the testimonies, about Mr. Cohen, but not in terms of what the company -- the views and knowledge of the companies.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Well, the views of the company you're aware of from the public statements that you've read in the media,
correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: The media did cover as part of the journalistic pieces statements by the companies.
Q (By Mr. Paige) All right. So they either did not believe it had been proven that cigarettes caused lung cancer in the fifties,
sixties, seventies and eighties, or they were lying the entire time, correct?
MS. LAWSON: Object to form.
THE WITNESS: I would not make that judgment about that being a lie because I'm not aware of the -- for example, the threshold
as far as when we can make a statement that they were basing their statements on. And we know that those thresholds changed
over time. So even today, studies continue to be made about smoking and health consequences of smoking.
MR. PAIGE: I want to find this one. Let's go off the record for a second. We can take a break.
(Whereupon, a brief recess was taken from 2:37 to 2:44 p.m.)
Q (By Mr. Paige) Have you come across this Philip Morris -- how do you zoom that in, the second to bottom? -- Facts You
Should Know, advertising by Philip Morris? Have you seen that in any of your research, Professor?
A It does not seem familiar, no.
Q Did you see where Philip Morris was indicating that it did not believe smoking is addictive?
A I can only see a portion of that. If you could bring it a little bit down.
Q As I understand it, it's your testimony that the public knew that smoking cigarettes was addictive, you know, way back in
the 1940s and far before that, correct?
A Yes.
Q And that would include Nathan Cohen. You believe that he knew or should have known that smoking was addictive back in
the forties and fifties when he was starting as a young man, correct?
A I would say that he was very likely, based on everything I know about him, exposed to that kind of information through
textbooks and other, other vehicles.
Q Can you then explain how Philip Morris is taking the position in the 1990s that they do not believe that smoking cigarettes
is addictive?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES TOBACCO LITIGATION...., 2009 WL 5133569...
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I couldn't comment on why, why they made those statements. I have no basis of knowledge.
Q (By Mr. Paige) Does that seem like it -- would that be a credible position for somebody to take in the 1990s?
MR. SUAREZ: Objection to form.
MS. LAWSON: Objection to form.
THE WITNESS: I don't think I'm qualified to make a judgment of that sort. What I can tell you is that, for one thing, I'm not
sure what definition of “addictive” they're using here. I can tell you that there was plenty of information available to the public
stating the contrary; that it was addictive, as I just stated.
Q (By Mr. Paige) When did it appear to you from review of the information that Nathan Cohen first started trying to quit
smoking?
A Based on the depositions, the testimony by his wife appears -- points in the direction of the 1980s.
Q And when did it appear to you that Nathan Cohen first believed that smoking cigarettes was causally related to lung cancer?
A I don't have enough information to, to make a -- reach a conclusion as to the moment of, of that belief and if, if he believed
that at all.
MR. PAIGE: All right. I don't have any further questions. Thank you very much. Just I would ask that the information that
you -- that I asked that you provide through your attorney, that you do so so that we can get it to the court reporter in plenty
of time before trial. And, also, if you do review any additional information or have any further reliance materials, that I be
notified of same.
THE WITNESS: Certainly.
MS. LAWSON: And, just for the record, we're going to read and sign.
(Deposition concluded at 2:47 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87
