In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES., 2012 WL 5882553 (2012)
Original Image of 2012 WL 5882553 (PDF)
2012 WL 5882553 (M.D.Fla.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
United States District Court, M.D. Florida,
Jacksonville Division.
In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES.
No. 3:09-cv-10000-TJC-JBT.
August 8, 2012.
Oral Deposition of Dr. Jim Martin
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Warranty/Breach of Warranty
Jurisdiction: M.D.Fla.
Name of Expert: James Kirby Martin, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Defendant
ORAL DEPOSITION OF DR. JIM MARTIN, produced as a witness at the instance of PLAINTIFFS, and duly sworn, was
taken in the above-styled and numbered cause on Wednesday, AUGUST 8, 2012, from 8:59 a.m. to 2:07 p.m., before Kathleen
Rossi Tyler, CSR in and for the State of Texas, recorded by machine shorthand, at the offices of JONES DAY, 717 Texas,
Suite 3300, Houston, Texas, pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the provisions stated on the record or attached
hereto; that the deposition shall be read and signed before any notary public.
A. That was his -- probably his premier book, if I could use that term. I have not --
Q. Simple Justice?
A. Simple Justice. I have not read that book in any detail. I'm aware of the book, but it's --
Q. Okay. But you certainly read Ashes to Ashes?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And one of the things that a historian has to do before one comes up with conclusions is one has to look at the relevant
published secondary sources, correct?
MR. COTTON: Objection; form.
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1In re: ENGLE PROGENY CASES., 2012 WL 5882553 (2012)
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. So -- so one has to consider the alternative secondary sources, and that is to see if there are
alternative hypotheses one has not considered, right?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection; form.
A. Well, certainly that's part of any valid historical process, as I teach both my graduates and my undergraduate students, yes.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Yeah. Is consulting and reviewing secondary sources in the subject area, right?
A. Yes. And I've -- yes, I've read a number of secondary sources in this area.
Q. Okay. And not only do you have to consult and review secondary sources, but to the extent that they -- in footnotes or in the
end notes or -- or in the actual body they discuss particular sources of information which are relevant, one then is supposed to
go and either look at the primary sources, if they appear to be relevant, and -- and review that material as well, right?
MS. McFADDEN: Objection, form.
A. Yes. If they appear to be relevant.
Q. (BY MR. NEALEY) Okay. So -- so -- and one checks secondary sources to see if there are materials that one has missed,
right?
A. To?
Q. See if there are materials that one has missed.
A. Well, that's certainly part of the process, yes.
Q. Okay. And also to see if there are alternative explanations or theories that one has not considered, right?
A. Well, I think we've pretty much agreed to that about two minutes ago.
Q. Okay. Okay. So similarly to the peer-review process, which considers these things, one internally does that by -- before
one publishes something by ??
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2
