Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Original Image of 2004 WL 5580439 (PDF)
2004 WL 5580439 (E.D.Mo.) (Expert Deposition)
United States District Court, E.D. Missouri,
Eastern Division.
Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs,
v.
BROWN & WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORPORATION, Defendant.
No. 4:03CV0485TCM.
February 9, 2004.
Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: E.D.Mo.
Name of Expert: Louis Michael Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Appearances.
Laura Lumaghi, Esquire
Dowd & Dowd, PC
100 N. Broadway, Suite 2175
St. Louis, Missouri 63102
Attorney for Plaintiffs.
Frederick M. Erny, Esquire
Dinsmore & Shohl, LLP
1900 Chemed Center
255 E. Fifth Street
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Attorney for Defendant.
REPORTED BY:
MONICA SCHROEDER, RPR, CRR, CSR #1285
Taken at the Casino Magic Hotel, 711 Casino Magic Drive, Salon C, Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, on Monday, February 9, 2004,
beginning at 9:10 a.m.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Examination by: Page
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Mr. Erny ... 7
Exhibits:
Exhibit 1, Amended Notice of Deposition ... 58
Exhibit 2, Letter to Dr. Kyriakoudes, from D. Grimes and J. Hudson, dated 4/24/03 ... 59
Exhibit 3, Curriculum Vitae ... 59
Exhibit 4, Documents provided by Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 59
Exhibit 5, Documents provided by Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 59
Exhibit 6, Documents provided by Dr. Kyriakoude ... 59
Exhibit 7, Documents provided by Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 59
Exhibit 8, Newspaper and Magazine Articles provided by Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 59
Exhibit 9, Excerpt from “Tobacco Experimental and Clinical Studies” ... 59
Exhibit 10, Newspaper and Magazine Articles provided by Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 59
Exhibit 11, Advertising Age articles ... 59
Exhibit 12, Excerpt from “The Voice of Business” ... 5
Exhibit 13, Pamphlet titled, “The Fight on Cancer” ... 59
Exhibit 14, Newsweek Article, “Shots for Cancer?”; Saturday Evening Post Covers, dated 1/18/64 and 1/4 - 1/11/64 ... 59
Exhibit 15, Carolina Population Center Postdoctoral Fellowship Application ... 59
Exhibit 16, Power Point presentation, Lessons from History: “Common Knowledge” of the Risks of Cigarette Smoking ... 59
Exhibit 17, Ebony Magazine Excerpts ... 59
Exhibit 18, Invoice and W-9 ... 59
Exhibit 19, E-mail from Dr. Kyriakoudes to P. Lubotina; E-mail from P. Lubotina to Dr. Kyriakoudes ... 101
Exhibit 20, CD containing research materials ... 106
Exhibit 21, CD containing research materials ... 105
Exhibit 22, Report of L.M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D. ... 107
Exhibit 23, Affidavit from Tobacco Products Liability Project Conference ... 137
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Exhibit 24, St. Louis Post Article, dated 1/11/64 ... 168
Exhibit 25, Cartoon titled, “Guilty as Charged,” 1/15/64 ... 174
Exhibit 26, St. Louis Dispatch Article, dated 1/26/64 ... 175
Exhibit 27, Ploch v. City of St. Louis Opinion ... 250
Exhibit 28, St. Louis Post Dispatch Article, dated 12/14/56 ... 257
Exhibit 29, Gallup Poll ... 270
Exhibit 30, Excerpt from “Use of Tobacco” ... 273
Exhibit 31, excerpt from “Teenage Smoking” ... 276
Exhibit 32, Gallup Poll ... 277
Exhibit 33, Gallup Poll ... 291
STIPULATION
It is hereby stipulated and agreed by and between the parties hereto, through their respective attorneys of record, that this
deposition may be taken at the time and place hereinbefore set forth, by Monica Schroeder, Court Reporter and Notary Public,
pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended;
That the formality of READING AND SIGNING is specifically NOT WAIVED;
That all objections, except as to the form of the questions and the responsiveness of the answers, are reserved until such time
as this deposition, or any part thereof, may be used or is sought to be used in evidence.
LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D. having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. ERNY:
Q. Can you state your name for the record?
A. My name is Louis Michael Kyriakoudes.
Q. How old are you?
A. I'm [DELETED] .
Q. What is your date of birth?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. [DELETED].
Q. And what is your current home address?
A. My home address is [DELETED].
Q. And for how long have you lived at the [DELETED]?
A. I moved there in the spring of 1999.
Q. And what is your current work address, sir?
A. My current work address is the Department of History, Box 5043 -- 5047, pardon me, University of Southern Mississippi,
Hattiesburg, Mississippi, 39406.
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, we met before going on the record. My name is Fred Erny and I represent Brown & Williamson Tobacco
Corporation in this case. I know you've been deposed before, but I just kind of want to explain my ground rules to make sure
we're on the same page. Okay?
Even though we're here in a conference room in a casino, you've been placed under oath. You have the same obligation to tell
the truth as if you were before Judge Mummert in St. Louis. Do you understand that?
A. I understand that.
Q. I'm going to be spending the day asking questions of you. It's very important that you and I understand each other. If you
don't understand my question, just let me know and I'll rephrase it so that we have an understanding of the question. Do you
understand that?
A. I understand that.
Q. If you answer a question, I will assume you understood it. Is that fair?
A. Fair, yes.
Q. Now, Monica, here, the court reporter, is going to be typing down everything we say. As you know, she creates a booklet
or a transcript of our discussion. To make things easier for her, it's important that you and I give verbal answers. Uh-huhs and
uh-uhs are left up to her interpretation and it kind of puts her in an unfair position. Do you understand that?
A. Yes. I understand that.
Q. Similarly, if we both talk at the same time, as often occurs in normal conversation, we're going to make it difficult for her
to understand us. So what I will do is I will try to give you the opportunity to finish your answer and I would ask that you give
me the opportunity to finish my question. Is that acceptable?
A. Yes. That's fine.
Q. Finally, this is not an endurance test. If you need a break, let us know. We'll take care of it, see you get a break. Okay?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Do you have any questions about these ground rules?
A. No.
Q. What is your current position at the University of Southern Mississippi?
A. I'm an associate professor of history.
Q. And for how long have you held that position?
A. Well, I started at the University of Southern Mississippi in the fall semester of 1997 as an assistant professor. I was promoted
to associate in 2002 and I currently hold that position.
Q. Have you ever been a full professor?
A. Not yet. That will be the next rank.
Q. And when do you expect that to happen?
A. I will go up for promotion to full professor in 2007.
Q. At the university, is there a timetable that governs when you are considered for these various positions?
A. Yes.
Q. So, for example, it would be five years as an assistant professor before you are considered for associate professor?
A. Yes. You go up for promotion in your fifth year.
Q. And then, similarly, after you've been an associate professor for five years, you are up for a promotion to full professor?
A. That's right. That's the earliest that you can apply for the promotion to full professor.
Q. So it's an application process that's really in the hands of the -- I'll say teacher, because it would cover assistant professor
and associate professor. In other words, he or she has to wait five years and apply; is that right?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Are you required to apply in five years?
A. No. Not -- for full professor, no. And some people who -- some people at -- now, every school has different timetables. This
is how it is at mine. But it's the case that at some universities, people are associate professors for the length of their career, and
in some cases, you know, not. So I would apply for full professor in that fifth year.
Q. Now, when you applied as an assistant professor to become an associate professor, is there a document that is required to
be completed by you and forwarded onto the appropriate person or how does that work?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Sure. Let me explain the process and that will probably answer your questions. In the fall of 2001, I was required to put
together an extended dossier of what I had done over the course of my time at the University of Southern Mississippi, a list
of publications, my teaching evaluations, conference papers, any awards or prizes I won, copies of my publications. Or if the
publication had not yet appeared, letters indicating that it had been accepted or was in the process or under review. Basically,
my work.
I'm evaluated under three categories: Teaching, because that's what we're there to do; service to the university, and that -- what
that means is committee work, you know, the work to make the university function; and then research.
Q. And in the application, is it true that you provide information either in the application or in the attachments to the application
reflecting on these three categories?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. How long is the application, itself?
A. Well, it's not really an application, as you might imagine when you go to apply for a job, you fill out a form. It's a letter saying,
attached are my tenure materials. And what it is, is the materials. And I put them in binders, so it's two -- two substantial binders.
Q. Is the letter that you send, which we'll call the application, is it simply a matter of, attached is my work, I'm applying for
tenure, or what exactly is in the letter?
A. Pretty much, yes. That's what I recall. I believe I listed my major publications in the letter.
Q. In the letter, did you also set forth your research activities?
A. I put down -- I've not looked at this since 2001 but, you know, basically, the letter is a letter of transmittal saying, here's
my -- you know, my tenure notebooks. That includes my CV and things like that. I put down my publications. I really stressed
the publications.
Q. Okay. Do you have a copy of this letter of transmittal? And I don't mean here today.
A. I may. It's -- it's something I haven't -- I'd have to go and get from the university office, but I'll look. I'll happily look.
Q. The only reason I'm asking is -- and we'll get into this a little bit later. We had a subpoena requesting documents, one of
which is the tenure file, and I'm not sure that that letter is actually in the tenure file.
So let me say this: Would you be able to go back and look and provide me a copy of that letter?
A. I'll go look. I don't -- I don't think I -- I think all those materials are in the university's file that they keep on me, which when
I interpret tenure files, they're my letters that I kept, that were sent to me saying that I had gotten tenure.
Q. And just by saying that, I don't mean to suggest that you weren't responsive to the subpoena. In fact, we haven't gone through
that material yet. I just want to make sure that I'm aware of what there is, and if necessary, I can get what I need. That's all.
A. I'll look. And I'll make a vigorous effort to look and find it.
Q. Okay. And so I'm correct, it would be the letter of transmittal and the two binders, what you refer to as your tenure notebooks?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yes. They're the -- you know, they comprise of, you know, the -- you know, I give a conference paper. I photocopy the page
from the conference program, you know, kind of like the evidence, if you will, just of what I had done.
Q. Did you retain a copy of the tenure notebooks?
A. Yes. I have a copy of those notebooks.
Q. Now, when you were promoted to associate professor, did that position include an award of tenure?
A. Well, in my university, you get -- they're separate. You get promoted, and then the next year, you get awarded tenure.
Q. Okay.
A. And every school is different. At mine, the real decision is the promotion. That's where people, you know, kind of critically
evaluate your work and decide whether this person has a problem, this one is worthy of continuing, you know, a permanent
position in the university. The tenured decision is a kind of ProForma decision. I mean, there's a process and you -- you know,
you run all the paperwork through again, but it's -- in terms of the actual practice.
Q. Okay. And because your answer indicates that promotion from assistant to associate professor and tenure are two separate
things, I want to make sure I understand.
Let's go back to the process that happened when you applied to be promoted from an assistant professor to an associate professor.
Was that what we talked about before?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Even though you called them tenure notebooks, they were part and parcel of the application to become promoted?
A. I misspoke. If I called them tenure notebooks, I apologize. I misspoke. They are promotion notebooks.
Q. Promotion notebooks?
A. Yes. Thank you for catching that. That was an error on my part.
Q. So is it accurate to say, then, that in the fall of 2001, you completed a letter of transmittal and included promotional notebooks
which the committee utilized to determine whether you would be promoted from an assistant professor to an associate professor?
A. Yes.
Q. I think you indicated before that you were promoted to associate professor in 2002.
A. Yes.
Q. When in 2002 did that happen?
A. Well, the letters to -- it goes through various levels. There's a department vote, a college vote that is signed off by the
provost, and then the university president submits it to the Higher Education Board of Mississippi. And about all that would
have happened between the period of -- beginning in October or so, more or less, and concluding itself in the spring, sometime
in May. I don't know the exact dates.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. In May of 2002?
A. Yes. Beginning in the fall of October of 2001 and concluding itself in the spring of 2002. I was in -- I was on a grant at
the University of North Carolina while all this was happening, and I presented a very strong case for promotion, so it wasn't
something I worried about or followed too closely.
Q. Did you have what could be described as an advisor or a mentor or somebody else in the department that either assisted
you in this process or gave you guidance about it?
A. No.
Q. And you indicated that there was a department vote and a college vote, and it was signed off by the provost, and even though
you were at North Carolina on a grant, did you follow along in that process?
A. Somewhat. I would get telephone calls, you know, e-mails saying, you know, your tenure letter is in your box here in
Hattiesburg, you know, congratulations -- I mean, your promotion letter is here, congratulations, things like that.
Q. From whom would you get the telephone calls and/or e-mails about the process?
A. My chairman, whose name is Charles Bolton.
Q. Was he the person that you would look to for information about this promotion process?
A. Well, I would call Chuck -- he goes by Chuck, and, you know, he would tell me, well, you've got to have your -- this is the
deadline to have your materials submitted, so make sure you get them here, you know, the procedural elements, which were
not particularly complicated. That's his job.
Q. He's the chairman of the history department?
A. That's right.
Q. Other than telling you about the deadline to get them in, did you have any questions about what to include in your application
for promotion and your promotion notebooks, anything like that that you discussed with him?
A. No substantial questions. I included what I thought were, you know, the research activities that the university was interested
in me presenting for my promotion, and, you know, my teaching materials and my service materials.
Q. Okay. Did you keep any of the e-mails that went back and forth between you and --
A. Chuck Bolton.
Q. Chuck Bolton?
A. No. I don't have anything like that. I've changed computers twice since then, and that's -- I don't keep e-mails much, anyway.
Q. Would that be -- and I don't know if you can answer this question, but would that be the standard practice of other professors
in your department, in terms of saving e-mails and things like that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I don't know what other people might normally do. All the e-mails from the -- my time at Chapel Hill were left on that
machine. I used a desktop machine there. I just didn't bring them with me. Most of it is chatter, not worth saving.
Q. Okay. So is it accurate to say that your policy, if, in fact, you had one, was that you don't save every piece of paper from
this procedure or other things?
A. No. I don't -- I save what's most important. I mean, you can get overwhelmed, both with paper and with, you know, computer
-- computer files. It's very difficult to keep it all organized, so I've learned to be pretty mercenary and decided what I need to
keep and what I need to give up.
I've moved my office, how many times since I've been at the University of Southern Mississippi, twice, not including having
to move it within the university twice, and then I've moved it to North Carolina, back to Mississippi, and then while I was at
North Carolina, I had to move it from one room to another and you get tired of carrying that stuff around.
Q. And I understand. I've been through that process, myself.
A. You begin to wonder, do I really need this box of files from graduate school? And it's amazing how you can just take a whole
box, a whole banker's box and just put it in the trash. And I've not looked at this stuff. I don't need it.
Q. What at one time you thought was important, turns out it wasn't, and it's okay to get rid of it?
A. Yes. Things --
Q. You would agree, then, that certainly moving offices or changing positions or changing employers is an opportunity to go
through files and personally decide what you believe is important and to discard other things?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. And there's certainly nothing wrong with that, is there?
A. No.
Q. Now, after you were promoted, I believe you said about a year later, you received tenure; is that right?
A. Yes. In fact -- yes, a year later.
Q. Okay. So when was it that you received tenure?
A. Well, again, just like with the promotion process, it went through various -- essentially a mirror image of the process. The
department voted on it. Then it goes to the college, and then it goes to the provost, who signed off on it. Those are the chief
academic officers.
I got the acknowledgment from the provost in April of 2003 saying that I got tenure and congratulations. Technically, it's tenure
to take effect with the new fiscal year. So I guess there's some ambiguity there. They've made the decision but it doesn't take
effect until the new fiscal year which is, I guess, July 1.
Q. Of 2003?
A. That would have been July 1 of -- yes, 2003.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Okay. Now, in terms of tenure, was there another, if you will, application process?
A. I don't think so. I think, again, the real decision is the promotion to associate professor, and the materials, the same materials
are basically recycled through.
Those set of documents that I sent in the fall of 2001 to initiate the associate professor process, I didn't get those documents
back until I moved back to Mississippi this past summer. The chairman handled that process for me.
So that was something that proceeded on autopilot, I didn't follow very closely.
Q. Were you required to give an indication or express an interest or ask to be considered for tenure to start that process rolling?
A. You know, I can't remember. I believe I just handled it over the phone and Chuck automatically resubmitted the same
documents.
Q. Like the process of the promotion from assistant to associate professor, did -- is it Dr. Bolton?
A. Yes.
Q. Did Dr. Bolton keep you apprised of the tenure process, the department vote, the college vote, the provost action?
A. Yes. Although less so because it was virtually an automatic process.
Q. Okay. Were you required or did you, in fact, provide any update with regard to your activities in North Carolina to be
included in the deliberations on tenure?
A. You know, I just don't remember. You know, I -- and I -- you know, I was at UNC, very busy with my research there, and the
tenure decision was not something that occupied much of my time or interest, again, because it was largely a ProForma process.
Every school is different, but at mine, the decision where people really consider the quality of the person, and the work and
whether they want to keep them or send that person packing is the promotion to associate.
Q. Does USM have a -- I'll call it an up or out policy? In other words, if you are considered for tenure and don't make it, are
you asked to move on?
A. Right. Yes. If you are not promoted and if you don't earn tenure, you -- yes. You are out. That's not the case with promotion
to full professor.
Q. In other words, you can ask to be -- after five years, you can ask to be promoted to full professor, and if it's ultimately decided
no, for whatever reason, you can still stay at USM and pursue your activities?
A. Reapply the next year, if you think --
Q. Have you ever been demoted in academic rank?
A. No.
Q. I want to kind of shift gears on you. How did you become involved in this particular case, the Mash case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I got a telephone call from Ms. Lumaghi. This would have been in early December.
Q. When you say early December, you mean early December 2003?
A. Yes.
Q. And what happened after you were contacted?
A. Well --
Q. And I'm sorry to interrupt. Tell me about the call, first, and then we'll go forth with what happened from there.
A. Yes, I will. We spoke on the phone. She explained to me what the case was, briefly, and asked if I would be interested in
working on the case. And it seemed like an interesting case to me, and so I said yes.
Q. What did she explain, in terms of what the case was about?
A. She explained that the -- Ms. Stella Hale was a smoker, African-American woman from St. Louis who began smoking around
1964, and had been a smoker of Kool. And my understanding is -- I haven't seen her -- any of the deposition material, but that
she was a loyal Kool smoker.
Q. What else, if anything, did she tell you about?
A. That's pretty much it.
Q. What happened after that?
A. Well, I said that I was interested in the case. I explained to her that I would need to have some research done, do some
newspaper research of St. Louis newspapers. And I proposed that, to accomplish this, that I hire a research assistant in St. Louis
who would have access to the local newspapers at the local libraries, rather than having to wait for me to order them in our
library. It also would be much cheaper for Ms. Lumaghi to do it that way.
So I identified a person, Mr. Paul Lubitino, and then I contacted Mr. Lubitino by telephone and explained to him what I wanted
him to do. And by now, it's after Christmas. In fact, it's after the new year. And I brought the products of that work with me today.
Q. Do you know how it was that Ms. Lumaghi came to contact you?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Did you ask her how she found your name or anything like that?
A. No, I didn't. I've testified in some other cases. I assumed, maybe, she had read testimony.
Q. You indicated that you proposed to her to hire a research assistant in St. Louis, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you indicated that you hired Paul Lubitino.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. That's correct.
Q. How did you find Mr. Lubitino?
A. I called the St. Louis University, department of history, and spoke with a professor there, and asked for a recommendation.
And what I wanted was a Ph.D. candidate, someone skilled in doing this kind of research who would be interested in doing
this. And I was given Mr. Lubitino's name, and called him over the phone and handled it over the phone. And explained to him
the project, what I needed done, and he was interested and he did it.
Q. How did you go about deciding to call the St. Louis University department of history?
A. I know people that's in the university -- it's in St. Louis. I have a person that I know on faculty.
Q. Who is it that you know on faculty?
A. Professor Elizabeth Perry.
Q. Is this the professor that you spoke to?
A. Yes.
Q. How do you know -- is it Dr. Perry?
A. Yes.
Q. How do you know Dr. Perry?
A. Well, she's a leading scholar in the gilded age and progressive area. This is a field of history. She was a professor briefly at
Vanderbilt while I was a graduate student there. She went on to teach at some other schools. I think she taught at Sara Lawrence
before she moved to this school. She's someone whose work I hold in high esteem, in whom I trust, and who I knew had graduate
students working in the field of modern American history.
Q. When you were at Vanderbilt, did you take any courses taught by Professor Perry?
A. No.
Q. You were just generally aware of her because you and she were both at Vanderbilt?
A. Yes. And my profession is a small profession and people know people pretty quickly. And Professor Perry so happened
to have been a college classmate of another professor who I was close to, you know, when I was in high school, at the local
college, UNC Wilmington. Professor Perry is a generation -- you know, she's older than me. So I've always known her, really,
on that basis. We share common friends.
Q. When was it that you made the call to Professor Perry at St. Louis University?
A. It was after the new year, although Ms. Lumaghi had contacted me the first week of December, around that time. I -- it
was just very busy at that time. It was the end of the semester, with grades, preparing final grades and all that. And then we
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
were gone over Christmas, visiting family, so I wasn't able to put my attention to this until after I got back, after the new year.
But then that's a good time.
Well, let me point out that it's impossible to contact a historian between December 15th and January 6th or 7th. Everyone leaves
campus for Christmas break, and then the main historical association meeting, which is the American Historical Association,
meets the first week of January, and, you know, although I didn't go to it this year, that's -- a large number of historians go to
that, so people are pretty much incommunicado.
So it was after the American Historical Association meeting I called Professor Perry. And I simply explained to her that I was
looking for someone to do some research on modern St. Louis history. I told her that it involved the history of cigarettes, what
people knew about the risks of smoking, and did she have a graduate student who she had a high level of confidence in that was
responsible and skillful, who could accomplish this, you know, on short order, who was not, for example, preparing to take his
comprehensive exams or otherwise involved in some onerous task that would interfere. Someone who had a little bit of time.
Q. Did she give you a slate of candidates or did she just give you --
A. She recommended Mr. Lubitino and then said, if he can't do it, if he's too busy, call -- I have some other students. But Mr.
Lubitino was the fellow I recommend first. And I phoned him and he was able to do it.
Q. So you telephoned him sometime after the first week of January?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. Did Professor Perry provide you any other information other than what you told me about? For example, did she give you
a CV or a resume or did she give you anything like that?
A. No, nothing. I -- you know, I didn't need a CV. She simply said, he's in the process of writing his dissertation, which means
he's a Ph candidate. He's in the final phase of the graduate school experience. She told me that he was working on a study of
immigration to a small town in the Midwest. I forget the name of the town. But I didn't -- nor did I get anything from him like
that. I didn't ask for a CV from him. But I spoke to him and was able to get a quick read over the phone on his skill, and he
seemed skillful and intelligent, and that was enough for me.
Q. Is his dissertation about the study of immigration to this small Midwestern town -- is that what his dissertation was based on?
A. As I recall. He told me about it. I remember it being interesting. That's what I recall him saying. I haven't seen anything on it.
Q. You indicated that you spoke to him and was able to get a quick read over the phone. Tell me how you went about doing
that. Tell me about the conversation.
A. Well, I called him up. I explained to him the project. I told him I was interested in looking at, you know, information in the
newspapers around 1964, interested in the impact of the Surgeon General's Report.
I told him I was interested in the African-American press, and he was familiar with that. I had already done some work in that
and he had indicated that St. Louis had a pretty vibrant African-American press at the time, and he was familiar with these
newspapers already, and that was a real plus. I thought, okay, this guy knows, you know, where to go. And I explained to him
what I wanted him to do.
Q. You said you had already done some work in the area of African-American press. What had you done?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Oh, I had ascertained as to whether or not St. Louis had copies in the libraries of African-American newspapers.
Q. Did you do that on line or by telephone? How did you go about doing that?
A. Well, I called the State Historical Society of Missouri, whatever the state history library is, and spoke with the archivist
over the phone, asking two questions, really, what were the leading black papers in the 1960s and have they been preserved
on microfilm, and they had.
And then I asked, you know, what were they. It just so happened that the main St. Louis paper had run a story, something like
the 5th or 6th of January, on St. Louis's black press, which was kind of a fortuitous coincidence.
Q. It's not often that happens.
A. It's not often that happens. I've done -- my own published work has drawn upon African-American press, and one of the
problems -- it's very frustrating, as a historian, to go and you'll know about an important African-American newspaper, say, for
example, The Nashville Globe, and then you will go to the state archives, and for various reasons, their microfilm copies or
their paper copies are woefully incomplete. And that's a frustrating and tragic situation because when those materials disappear,
for whatever reason, they're gone, and that was a major source of evidence.
So it was actually quite exciting to learn that St. Louis's very vibrant black press, that those papers have been preserved, and
many of them are still in publication, which is The Argus and The American, in particular.
Q. The Argus and The American?
A. Yes.
Q. You were talking with Mr. Lubitino and you explained to him the project. Other than telling him that you were interested
in looking at information in the newspapers in 1964 regarding the impact of the Surgeon General's Report, what else did you
tell him?
A. This is what I told him. I said that my research question is, what is the information in the papers. I wanted any story, any
reference, in a legitimate news story, towards cigarettes, smoking, health.
I also wanted a sense of the advertisements that appeared in the paper.
And as a third point, and I told him not to -- you know, I was kind of filling up his plate with work, anything that indicated the
social practice of smoking at the time, pictures of people smoking. It doesn't necessarily have to be an advertisement, but that
show the candid way that cigarettes were used in everyday life.
I asked him to look at The Argus and then the main St. Louis paper.
Q. What paper is that?
A. The St. Louis Post Courier.
Q. Did you ask him to look at The American?
A. He went through The Argus. He had trouble locating The American, and we were running out of time, and I told him, well,
The Argus, since that was the leading paper, that's good enough.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. When you called the archivist in, I'll call it the Missouri Historical Society, did he tell you that they had The Argus and
The American there?
A. They said, from my recollection, that The Argus was the best documented paper that they had a most complete run. That
seemed to be the main paper.
Q. Did they also tell you that they had copies of The American?
A. They had -- they had some copies, yes. The archivist was less certain about how complete the run was.
Q. Did Mr. Lubitino review any of the back copies of The American?
A. I don't think so. I told him to stick to The Argus.
MS. LUMAGHI:
But it is possible that there may be something from The American in there?
THE WITNESS:
It's possible. He showed a lot of initiative.
MR. ERNY:
Q. Did you tell him why you were giving him this research project?
A. I told him that this was for a court case. I told him that this was a case in which the issue was what is the information -- or
part of the issue was, what is the common knowledge of the risks of smoking. And I told him that I worked for the plaintiffs'
side of it, but I told him, also, that it was very important that he be as complete and thorough in his research. I didn't tell him
to look for only certain categories or certain types of stories. I wanted him to be comprehensive.
Q. Was there any discussion between you and him regarding the term “common knowledge”?
A. I explained to him that -- not really. Not that I recall. I told him that I wanted him to go through the papers and pull any
mention of cigarettes that he could find in the newspaper stories. It didn't matter what the story said.
Q. And so you had him review The St. Louis Post Courier and The Argus?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Do you mean The Post Dispatch?
THE WITNESS:
The Post Dispatch. Sorry. So many newspapers I deal with. Let me get the copies out. I've brought them here.
(Off the record.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, you've had a chance to look through some of the documents that you've brought this morning.
A. Yes.
Q. What documents from the St. Louis papers did Mr. Lubitino look through and/or supply you with?
A. Well, I'm going through here, and I've got two sets of newspaper clippings from 1964, The St. Louis Post Dispatch and
The St. Louis Argus.
Q. Okay. How long after you talked with Mr. Lubitino did he supply you with his work product?
A. He took a couple of weeks or so to get the material to me. I think he spent about 30 hours on it. He submitted to me an
invoice, which I forwarded to the firm of Dowd & Dowd, and they actually took care of the paying of him.
Q. And we'll go through that. I understand that's in your materials.
A. I brought that with me.
Q. During the time period that he was doing his research, did you have contact with him, either by phone or e-mail or fax or
anything like that?
A. No, not really. Once I told him what I wanted, the next contact was, I finished it, where do I send it. I asked him to send it
to me here in Mississippi and to also include an invoice. And that's pretty much it.
Q. Okay. Have you -- since that time, have you had any conversation with Mr. Lubitino?
A. I haven't.
Q. Did you review the materials that he provided to you?
A. I did.
Q. What kind of job did he do?
A. He did a good job.
Q. Okay. Have you, yourself, gone back and looked at any St. Louis Post Dispatch or Argus publications?
A. No. No, I haven't.
Q. How, then, can you say that he did a good job if you don't know what was in those papers to begin with?
A. I base this on his -- my own sense of his level of personal responsibility, from talking with him, the recommendation that
was given to me by his dissertation director, and the fact that he is a trained historian who is on the verge of completing his
dissertation and getting a Ph.D. from a respected institution.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Okay. Now, when you had your initial discussion with Ms. Lumaghi, were you provided an assignment in this case or did
you tell her what it was that you have done in the past and what you can do or was it something else?
A. Well, let me explain and maybe that will answer your question. She asked me about my testimony on these issues. She seemed
pretty familiar with what I had said in the past. I didn't ask her, but I assumed that she probably had read some earlier testimony.
I explained to her that I thought it was important to -- while my position, generally, is that this is a national question of the
national media, particularly by the 1940s -- after the 1940s are particularly powerful and pervasive in shaping the public's
perception of issues like smoking and health and, in fact, all other issues, or other similar issues, I should say.
That because Ms. Hale is an African-American in St. Louis, that I knew there was an African-American press in that city, and
that it would be important to do -- to look at what the African-American press was saying. It was also important to look at
what national African-American media was saying at the time. And that it would be, you know, interesting to look at what
the -- since she began smoking in 1964, what kind of information, at that time, what was available. So I chose that year. That
happened, of course, to be the year, also, of the Surgeon General's Report, which is the year that smoking and health issues
are of national concern.
And so I told her that I could probably find somebody who was a trained historian to do this kind of work or that I would make
an effort to do so, and that I would do so after the new year.
Q. Now, why is it important to see what the local African-American media was saying?
A. Well, I don't know if -- I don't know what kind of publications this particular individual has testified or whether -- what
her friends have testified that she read or didn't read, but that's part of the media stream. The African-American press is an
important part, often an unappreciated part of America's publishing and press history. From my own work, in the history of
African-Americans, I have found this to be a particularly rich source, so it was natural to include that, look at the main paper,
but also look at what the African-American press is saying.
Q. Is it possible that the level of public perception in the African-American community is different from that on a national basis?
A. Certainly, it is. Yes. You have to think about concerns, you know, what are people concerned about. What do the editors of
press organs think that their readers are concerned about and deem newsworthy.
Of course, you have the mainstream press that's doing that. That's important to consider. But in the case of, you know, African-
Americans, particularly in a time in the 1960s when the best -- when the segregationist practices of Jim Crow, especially in
the south, but even in non-southern states, are still -- you know, they're being assaulted and dismantled but they're still very
much a part of day-to-day life.
And so that's one way of looking at information stream. That's also one way of judging of what people thought was important.
Q. Is it possible that the public perception of an issue is different in a specific community versus nationwide?
A. Possible, yes; likely -- well, when you say “community,” I need to know what you mean by that. A large city, like St. Louis
or any other major metropolis, their views are -- the information that people are getting and the public perception, it's not going
to be -- I don't think it's going to vary that much, within a reasonable degree of historical certainty.
We have -- we live in an age of mass media. Even when you look at the local newspapers, you think, oh, our local newspaper
is putting forth some kind of unique information, and so many of the stories are AP, UPI, Reuters, New York Times News
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Service, wires. Especially by the 1950s, this is the case. So the variation of local communities, or major metropolitan areas,
especially, where people that are relying on information from major metropolitan areas is not going to be that great.
Q. Did you look to see if the public perception of the St. Louis community differed in any way from that on a national basis?
A. Well, the way I relied -- you know, my St. Louis-based research would be in the newspaper work that I had done under my
direction. You know, a lot of the information that we have is national information, polls, for example.
Q. And I understand that. But my question is, did you look to, in fact, determine whether the public perception evidenced in
the St. Louis community differed from that on a national basis?
A. I'm not sure how one would do that, but, no, I have -- I have looked at the St. Louis papers, as I described earlier, and that's
my basis for the things unique to St. Louis. Again, it's national -- we have a national mass media at this time.
Q. When we were talking about the perception in the community or -- versus national, you indicated that you didn't believe
that the perception was going to vary much, based upon a reasonable degree of historical certainty. And then I asked you if,
in fact, you had made that decision with regard to the St. Louis community, and you indicated that you are not sure how one
would do that. So I'm confused.
A. No. I'm -- what I'm saying, I've looked at other -- I've looked at other communities, I've read other newspapers from
communities and places as disparate as Arkansas, Iowa, New York, and the variation is very limited. They pretty much -- the
major papers all say pretty much the same thing.
There's some differences. You know, if you -- if you just look at the news coverage, it's -- The St. Louis Post Dispatch covered
compared to how -- the play they gave on the new Surgeon General's Report compared to a paper, say, like The New York
Times or The New York Daily News, or even the paper in Arkansas, the Little Rock paper, is a little bit different. They reprint
the text of the report. St. Louis gave it relatively less of a headline than other papers. They gave it just a one column story on
the front page. Some papers gave it three columns. Some newspapers give it the whole mast, you know, the whole -- all eight
columns of the paper. But, you know, that's -- those are differences. But, in general, I have -- I have yet to find any significant
variation in any of the places I've looked.
Q. Okay. Part of your answer suggests to me that you have not made the determination as to whether the public perception
in the St. Louis community differed, and part of your answer suggested to me that you have. Have you or have you not made
that determination?
A. Well, I'm looking at -- you know, my view is that it's a national, that it's a national issue, that national evidence is national
mass media evidence, in terms of understanding the kinds of information that are going to people are appropriate as a research
strategy for this, and my reading of the St. Louis papers indicates, in terms of the main line St. Louis post paper, that there's
not much difference.
My reading of the African-American paper indicates that there is a difference, in terms of the information going to African-
American readers through the African-American press.
You know, I'm not sure what you are asking, if that's --
Q. Well, let me see if I can make it more clear. When we started down this line of questioning, I asked you whether it was
possible for the public perception on an issue, such as smoking and health, would differ from the national media, and you said,
yes, it is possible.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, you know, you said in communities, and I can see maybe I interpreted the term “community” more broadly. I think
in major metropolitan areas, there's not going to be much difference. It's possible in, say, for example, religious communities,
certain, you know, sub-communities like that. Say, for example, among 7th Day Adventists.
Q. Have you, in fact, made the determination that the public perception about the smoking and health issue differed in any way
in the St. Louis community versus the national community, if you will?
A. Yes. I see what you are asking and I apologize for not completely understanding where you were going.
No. I see no significant difference between St. Louis and any of the other cities I've looked at. National media is reaching St.
Louis, and the people in St. Louis are pretty much getting the same story as other people who have access to -- you know,
who are in major metropolitan areas.
Q. Now, do you hold that opinion to a reasonable degree of historical certainty?
A. Yes, I do.
Now, I also said that it is important to keep in mind that when you look at the African-American press, there is a different -- the
coverage there is different, and so when you say “communities,” you know, St. Louis is -- or the African-American readership
in St. Louis, if they are looking at, you know, a paper like The Argus, they're getting a different set of information.
Q. Okay. Well, let me follow up on that. You would agree that the African community, African-American community of St.
Louis, if you will, could have a different perception on smoking and health issues?
A. Well, they have -- you know, they have other media, in this case, black newspapers that they would also consult, in addition
to main line media, as well, which, you know, I mean, it's certainly -- there's certainly some whites that were reading The Argus
in the 1960s, but by and large, you know, it's directing itself to the African-American community of that city. So that's a source
to consider and to look at for understanding, you know, the kinds of information that were out there and trying to use a historical
judgment as to how people understood it.
Q. Would it be proper, in your opinion, to look at the public perception of the African-American community on smoking and
health issues as opposed to looking at it on a national basis?
A. Well, you know, African-American readers, consumers, people in St. Louis are -- they're part of -- you know, they're
getting national media. The African-American papers don't supplant other media. They're just an additional source that African-
American readers are consulting as part of their knowledge base or the information coming to them, if you will, through the
press that would not apply generally to white readers.
So it's not something -- it's not an either/or. It's an additional. It's an additional factor or source.
Q. And the coverage in the St. Louis African-American press would be an additional source for African-Americans in St. Louis
but wouldn't be an additional source for the nationwide issue of public perception; is that correct?
A. Yes. I would agree with that, and I'll explain why. It's pretty clear that the set of issues that the African-American press is
concerned about revolve around issues relating to the African-American community. And in 1964, a lot of that deals with civil
rights, understandably. Their stories are drawn from a mix of kind of national correspondence and local stories, as well.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
So, you know, in that regard, the papers, they don't differ that much from -- St. Louis, the main paper, The Post Dispatch, there
does seem to be more kind of local news in The Argus. The Argus was a weekly, and they do report on lots of items of particular
local concern, but none of those relate to smoking and health. You know, prominent leaders in the community, things like that.
Q. Okay. Did you read the petition or complaint in this case?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you read any of the interrogatory answers?
A. No. I've never read any deposition material or any of the materials related to this case.
Q. Okay. Is there any reason why you don't? Is there any reason why you didn't?
A. Yes. My position in this is that I'm not the historian of Ms. Stella Hale. I am a historian of the cigarette industry and the
issues relating to smoking and health over time, and when I'm asked to talk about that research and that knowledge in these
environments and situations, I'm here to talk about what, you know, could the average or typical person had access to. But any
particular individual, I'm not an expert in Ms. Hale's life.
Q. When you look at what the average or typical person had access to, are you referring to on a national level?
A. Well, in this case, you know, I'm dealing with people in St. Louis, who have access to national and local media, so I guess
it would be average or typical person, African-American or white in St. Louis, in the middle west, you know, at this time.
Q. Okay. Have you talked with any of Stella Hale's family members or friends about information -- well, about anything?
A. I have not communicated with any family and friends.
Q. Do you believe it's important to learn or understand what Stella Hale, herself, knew in her lifetime?
A. Again, my testimony is what -- you know, what the public, the typical public understood at varying levels. I'm not an expert
in Ms. Hale's particular history. I did ask, over the phone, you know, when I first talked about this case, if there was any
particular information sources that were important to her, and I don't recall Ms. Lumaghi saying anything, one way or the other,
that there was anything.
Hypothetically, for example, if it had been reported to me that Ms. Hale or any other person was absolutely, you know, never
missed a particular newspaper or was a devoted reader of this one magazine, that that was the most important thing, that would
have been unusual in more than what the typical average person, that might be interesting to know. Although, you know,
information comes through the press and media and it -- you might not read about it, but people talk about it, you know. And
that's -- so things permeate, and that's why you have to understand the whole context of the information.
Q. And, in particular, you actually looked at what the average or typical person in St. Louis had access to, correct?
A. About the time that Ms. Hale was beginning to smoke, as it was reported to me over the phone by Ms. Lumaghi.
(Exhibit 1 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Doctor, I'm giving you what's been marked as Exhibit Number 1, which is the Amended Notice of Deposition. And we
talked a little bit about this before we started the deposition.
First of all, did you -- have you seen this Amended Notice of Deposition?
A. Yes. This was sent to me in the mail and I think also faxed to me.
Q. And you have brought materials responsive to the subpoena?
A. I have.
Q. What I would like to do is go through what you've brought. And I understand that you have color dividers between each set
of documents, and what we'll do is, we'll go through, starting with what you have in the beginning, we'll mark each individual
thing, and we'll then -- then we'll talk about those. Okay?
A. Yes. That's correct.
MR. ERNY:
Let's go off the record.
(Off the record.)
(Exhibits 2 through 18 were marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Now, doctor, at the break, you were kind enough to go through the documents that you've brought responsive to the subpoena,
and we've gone through and marked those. And so what I would like to do is just, if I could, go through each of the things that
we've marked and you can then tell me what the exhibits represent.
A. Okay.
(Off the record.)
A. I've got Exhibit 2, here, and these are two letters and then a fax memo that was included in the file. The letters are from the
provosts, which are the chief academic officers, indicating that I've -- recommending that I be granted tenure. Another letter
from the president saying, congratulations on meeting the requirements for tenure, and then a memo that I include, which kind
of explains the letter. The memo was written to a Mr. Chad Harz, at a law firm in Iowa. But that explains how the letters work.
MR. ERNY:
Q. Now, doctor, these documents that are contained in Exhibit Number 2 are responsive to Number 12 in the subpoena.
A. Yes.
Q. Which is --
A. I brought those to Number 12.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Which are things contained in your tenure file. And we've discussed earlier today the application for promotion which was
relied upon by the tenure committee, as you said, as a ProForma matter, and you've agreed to look back to see if you have
that application, as well, correct?
A. I will. And I will forward that to Ms. Lumaghi so that she can get it to you.
Q. Okay. What do we have as Exhibit 3?
A. Okay. Exhibit 3 is my most current curriculum vitae.
Q. Now, does that CV differ from that which was attached to the report that was provided in this case?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Do you have a copy for the record? Are we going to mark it as an exhibit?
MR. ERNY:
I'm not going to mark it as an exhibit. If it's outdated, I'm going to use the current one.
A. In a couple of things, and I'll explain those. I added just a line saying exactly when I was promoted in this one, which was
not -- it was not clear from the other one, so that just adds clarity.
Q. And on what page of the CV does that appear?
A. I added this line here on Page 1, promoted to associate professor 2002, awarded tenure 2003. It didn't indicate that, actually,
on the previous one. I didn't think it was that important, but I had been asked about it, so I thought that would add greater clarity
and helpful to someone reading it.
I've done some research consulting since that one for a National Cancer Institute project. These are the TobbacoDocuments.Org
people. I supplied some indexing terms to the public awareness team or helped them develop -- I should say helped them develop
some indexing terms to this public awareness research team at the data research project, which is a National Cancer Institute
funded research project headed by Ron Davis at the Henry Ford Medical Center. He's the principal investigator.
Q. And that's reflected on Page 4 of Exhibit 3, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, when did you get asked to consult on this public awareness team for the NCI?
A. They had called me about it and talked about it in the fall, and I didn't get around to really doing the activity, what they
wanted me to do until back in January.
Q. Of 2004?
A. Of this year, yes, of 2004.
Q. Who called you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Ron Davis.
Q. Okay. Do you know how it was that he came to call you?
A. He had heard, somehow -- I'm not exactly sure -- that I had been working on issues relating to the public's knowledge of
the risks of cancer from smoking, and they -- their project is looking at all the information that is being churned up through
the litigation, on all sides, and I -- he said that he had understood that I was working on this and asked if I would help them
develop kind of an index coding scheme.
Q. And pardon my ignorance, but I don't understand what you mean by an index coding scheme. Can you explain that to me?
A. Yes. I'll do my best because I'm not exactly sure what they meant either. What they are doing is there is this gateway web
site, I guess you would call it, called TobbacoDocuments.Org, and it's a very convenient web site. I've used it in the past because
it's an easy way to search the on-line archives that the various tobacco manufacturers or cigarette manufacturers maintain, as
well as the TI or The Tobacco Institute and the Center For Tobacco Research, which although they're no longer in existence,
still maintain this internet archive.
And it's a kind of clearinghouse gateway site for information. And they -- as they incorporate the documents that are disclosed,
they index them, simple indexing, just like in the back of any book, and I -- presumably, this aids in searching.
And so they've got an index team that's doing addiction. They have an index team that's doing -- I don't have them all memorized,
but things like addiction, things like cancer-causing relationships, what have you. And they decided that they wanted to add
public understanding, public awareness, actually is what they call it, and they have a team of indexers that, as they get new
documents, and new information and, in this case, it's depositions and trial testimony, they index it. And so they needed a set
of key words and concepts, and I helped them develop that.
Q. How much of your time was spent in providing assistance to them to develop their key wording concepts?
A. Not much. I got it done in a day, in which I also had to teach two classes. Then I sent them a draft. They said, well, this is not
exactly what we wanted. So I spent another portion of a day addressing their comments. I didn't completely understand, I think,
what they -- how the process worked, and then they sent back -- they went over it, sent it back and said, this is it. It's a little
paragraph that I'm not exactly sure how an indexer would use it, but they use it. I guess they highlight these key concepts. And
it's things like, you know, media, national media, public media, statements by health officials, statements by industry officials,
television commercials, things like that.
Q. Did you save the draft that you sent to these folks and then their revisions to it, which were sent back to you?
A. I've got the final copy of it. It's a little paragraph. I can -- I could get that -- when we break for lunch, I can bring that this
afternoon. I've got that at home in a file. I'll be happy to bring that.
Q. That will be great. And if you run out of time where you ultimately decide not to go home, if you send it to Ms. Lumaghi,
that would be fine.
A. Okay.
Q. So you have the final product. Do you have any of the drafts?
A. I'll look. I might. You know, I tend not to save those thing, but I may have it, and if I do, I'll give it to you.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. And if I understand correctly, you spent, maybe, over the course of a couple of days, maybe a day's worth of time to do this?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you charge these people for your time?
A. No.
Q. Any reason why?
A. It's a National Cancer Institute research project. It's very prestigious to be involved in that. I have been funded by the National
Institutes of Health previously, and it's -- you know, it's prestigious to be associated with it. Mr. Davis is, you know, a person
of some stature in his field.
Q. So all those things are factors that you weighed in your decision to not charge them to consult with them?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
A. I -- you know, my -- I don't charge for doing my research. You know, I'm -- this is -- that's part of my normal research
purview. I charge for my time here and anything related to what I call the mechanics of the litigation.
Q. Well, would you characterize the draft of the key words and concept document, your time spent doing that, would you
characterize that as research time?
A. Well, it's a research project and it -- you know, it's towards a National Cancer Institute -- what's called an R03 research
project. So, yes, I have a very small part of the National Cancer Institute research program.
Q. What was it that you researched to come up with these key words and concepts, if any?
A. Well, I thought -- I mean, I spent some of my own just thinking time, and I put forth what I thought were -- what I thought
were the chief issues that I have testified, and I also put what defense historians, from my knowledge of the chief issues and
put them and their key terms. Because it's not -- it's all the information.
Q. Which defense historians did you refer to or did you think about?
A. Well, I've read, just in my own readings, a lot of them. I'll start giving you the list. I've read at least -- an example of one
piece of testimony from David Sansing, Lacy Ford, Robert Norrell, Joan Hoff, Michael Shaller. I read an expert report, not
testimony, by Bill Stueck. I skimmed through Otis Graham's.
Q. Was that a transcript or a report from Dr. Graham?
A. A trial -- or testimony. And maybe you can help me remember. It's the historian that worked for the defense in the Minnesota
Medicare. Heyman Berman.
Q. With the exception of the expert report of Bill Stueck, is everything else that you read trial testimony?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I've looked at -- well, now, in -- now, my answer is going to be all the defense historians I've ever read as opposed to simply
things I've looked at to get ready for this thing.
I believe I've also looked at an expert report from Bob Norrell.
Q. Now, where did you obtain these trial transcripts of these defense historians that you've talked about?
A. TobbacoDocuments.Org, the web site. The Stueck and Norrell expert reports, I acquired not from that internet web site but
from having them sent to me, and I've testified in four cases and I've collected some material related to that.
Q. Who sent you the Norrell report?
A. That was sent to me by Chad Harz sometime last fall.
Q. And who sent you the Stueck report?
A. That was sent to me by a guy named Dave Burney, who is an attorney for a law firm in Philadelphia called Sheller, Ludwig
and Batey. They sent that to me over the summer.
Q. If I understand your testimony correctly, you had reviewed these things in the past, whether distant or otherwise, and relied
upon what was on there to develop your drafts of key words and concepts which you sent to NCI?
A. Yes. That's accurate.
Q. So you put forth what you thought were the chief issues and you also put in that document what you took from these
transcripts as being the defense historians' chief issues; is that fair?
A. That's fair.
Q. And you told me that you sent this draft, and it came back, and it was basically -- you were told it was not what they wanted;
is that right?
A. Yes. What I sent them were a list of key words. I was thinking index, okay, those are key terms. So I sent them a long
list of names, Clarence Little, Jimmy Hartnett, movies, films. And they wanted something written out in a paragraph and they
wanted it very short. And so I -- it was a formatting misunderstanding. And they were also interested in indexing issues relating
to environmental tobacco smoke, common knowledge about environmental tobacco smoke, which that's not something I've
researched, but they kind of included that in there.
Q. Now, the paragraph that you developed and sent to them, how does that differ from the list of names or the list of terms
that you provided in the draft?
A. Well, the list of terms were actual terms and people, and the paragraph is broad, you know. When I get it to you, you'll
see anything relating to public awareness, you know, movies, mass media, statements by industry officials, health officials,
whereas I put, you know, Burney, Clarence Little, you know, the actual names.
Q. Other than these, I believe it's two changes that we've talked about in your CV, maybe it's three, are there any other changes
from that which was attached to your report?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I don't think so. Let me -- I've got an article coming out on the Grand ‘Ole Opry. I don't know if that's reflected in yours.
That would be on Page 2, under refereed publications. No. It looks the same to me.
Q. And this CV, which we've marked as Exhibit 3, is current as of when? Is it current as of today?
A. Yes. It's current. I -- the new CV, I put it -- it should have a date on it. I did it the 22nd of January of this year, but nothing
new has happened. Everything is listed on here.
Q. All right. We've also marked a set of documents as Exhibit 4. Would you tell me what is in Exhibit 4, please?
A. Okay. Exhibit 4 is a series of various exhibits which I've used. The top of it is a graph of smoking prevalence or adult per
capita cigarette consumption and major events, both relating to smoking and relating to historical events.
I -- the graph data is from the Centers For Disease Control, and then my not very sophisticated Power Point skills added some
events on the bottom, things like the Korean War; anticommunist crusade; other major events of the time; a Newsweek story
on cancer; a Life Magazine story on astronauts; series of American Tobacco Company press releases, select, not complete; a
summary document, an industry document titled, Degree of Public's Concern which summarizes some polling data, various
polling data from the '50s and '60s; a polling question from the Harris, Louis Harris poll archives on doctors and advising
patients who smoke -- or to quit smoking, I should say, from the early '70s; a set of New York Times stories on smoking and
health; some U.S. Tobacco Journal newspaper stories. The purpose of those is to kind of understand the industry.
Q. Do you believe that U.S. Tobacco Journal had -- actually was available to the public at large?
A. No. This would not be -- this is a trade publication that would be read only by those interested -- you know, working
in the industry, but I went through the issues of this to try to understand what the industry was saying about the role of
advertising within their own business, what advertising and marketing meant -- what they thought the purpose and efficacy of
their promotional networking efforts were.
Q. Does this then have any impact on your opinions regarding the public perception of the dangers of smoking?
A. Oh, most certainly, yes.
Q. And how?
A. Well, the public is getting a lot of information about cigarettes. Some of that information comes in the form of newspaper
stories, television reports. But that information also comes in the form of expressions of the social practice of smoking. It also
comes in the form of advertisements. And that's another source of information that shapes the public's attitudes towards the
cigarette.
Q. But, as you indicated, these Tobacco Journal stories were a trade publication and weren't available to the public at large;
is that right?
A. That's correct. And I don't offer them as examples of information that were available to the public. What they offer are
discussions of what the industry saw the role of advertising within their own -- it's a way to understand the way the industry
viewed advertising and marketing within its broader business plan, and that's relevant to understanding the tobacco industry.
It's relevant to understanding how advertising was formulated and promulgated to the public.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. How does the tobacco industry's thoughts about advertising or the formulation of advertising, how does that what I'll call
information in a trade publication not available to the public have any impact on the public perception between smoking and
health?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Objection; asked and answered. You can answer.
A. My apologies. I was actually looking at this piece of paper. Or I'll just read it off the screen.
Okay. That's a clear question. I understand what you are asking. The -- you know, did the industry think that advertising was
effective in shaping the public's view towards the cigarette? That would be, you know, the question one would ask as you go
through this, and then how did they advertise.
Well, the U.S. Tobacco Journal is one source that helps you understand that. I'm looking here, for example, at a May 9th, 1960
editorial titled, “Advertising Pays.” And it basically says -- the editorial writer for the U.S. Tobacco Journal is just basically
saying that, you know, this is essential to how we present our product to the public. So that's the relevance.
Going towards women, there's an article in here which talks about how the huge female market is something that is of interest.
This is a 1953 story. So that's how it relates.
No, the average person is not reading the U.S. Tobacco Journal. I agree. Nor are they reading, likely to read things like
Advertising Age and other trade publications. But they help the historian who wants to understand how this is happening and
why this is happening to make a -- to make a more accurate judgment.
Q. Okay. What else is in that stack?
A. Okay. The next thing is the tobacco education section from a Report of the Joint Committee on Health Education Problems
in Education and the National Education Association. It's a joint committee of the National Education Association and the
American Medical Association, a program for public schools and teacher training, 1924. I just copied the section on tobacco
to see what their guidelines were.
“Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers,” two copies of that. Some of these are not all generated by the Brown & Williamson
company, of course.
A newspaper advertisement called, “Why We're Dropping The New York Times,” published by the American Tobacco
Company, at that time, not Brown & Williamson.
A story from Newsweek magazine on cancer, including an interview with Charles Cameron, head of the American Cancer
Society at that time. It's from the mid '50s.
Some copies of Tobacco and Health. This is a publication by the Tobacco Industry Research Council or, later, The Tobacco
Institute. It is a reprint of newspaper stories that have appeared in the press.
A selection from a Pall Mall marketing study from the early '50s -- or, no, early '60s, I'm sorry, 1961.
A page from “Sold American” on the history of the American Tobacco Company, published by the American Tobacco
Company; a couple of American Tobacco internal memoranda; something called the Tobacco Executive Letter, which reports
a public statement by Robert Heimann in the early '70s.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. He was from the American Tobacco Company?
A. Yes, the American Tobacco Company. Pages from Amy Vanderbilt's etiquette on cigarette use or etiquette relating to
cigarettes.
Q. Is it accurate to say that these documents contained in Exhibit 4 are part of your reliance materials, things you rely upon to
reach the opinions that you provided in the report in this case?
A. Yes. It's accurate to say that.
Q. And we talked about the Amy Vanderbilt etiquette, and why is that significant to you?
A. Well, in that document, Ms. Vanderbilt talks about how to handle smoking in the home, when you entertain guests.
Q. And would you expect etiquette columns, such as those by Amy Vanderbilt, to contain any information about health?
A. Well, it contains information on the social practice of smoking and the cultural attitudes towards the cigarette.
So, for example, I mean, if it was common knowledge to Amy Vanderbilt that cigarette smoking was, you know, a deadly
practice, I would think you would stand to reason that she wouldn't write -- and I'm paraphrasing from memory, a line like,
there's hardly a hostess who doesn't offer cigarettes and liqueur, cigarette smoking and liqueur to her guests after dinner.
Q. Do you actually know what Amy Vanderbilt was thinking, though?
A. No. I know what she wrote.
Q. Let me give you a ridiculous example. Amy Vanderbilt, for example, would tell people about which fork should be used
first during the salad course, if you will, but -- and I would admit that this is a ridiculous example but, for example, the person
that may have sent the question may have some idea -- may have some question about how to behave at the banquet that they're
going to, and it could be a banquet of the Klu Klux Klan or something like that. She doesn't necessarily know the purpose of
the question and you can't actually say, therefore, that what she's written reflects her thoughts on those issues; is that correct?
A. I see what you are saying, and you've made a very interesting point. You know, she's being asked about one limited thing,
let's say in a question and answer format. Perhaps you wouldn't expect her to make another judgment off --
Q. And that's my point. And, actually, you said it much better than I could have. I appreciate that.
A. That's an interesting point. Let me refer to the document. The document is actually not -- it's not taken from a question
and answer format, so it's a good point, but it doesn't apply to this piece of evidence. It's from her book, “Amy Vanderbilt's
Etiquette,” 1972, at least this particular manifestation of it, in which she explains what a proper hostess ought to do when having
a dinner party, but it's not done in a question and answer format.
And she says that if the hostess wishes, individual ceramic or silver trays, with their complement of cigarettes and matches,
see in illustration for a formal dinner, are in each place, or cigarettes may be passed at the end of the dessert course, or later
in the living room, after the service of demi-cakes. Neat dress pipes are now acceptable, even in town, in mixed company, at
any time. Other men are smoking cigars. No gentleman would light a pipe in the middle of any meal or a cigar either, although
many thoughtless people take to the table cigarettes as an invitation to smoke between courses.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
So she's basically giving her view -- this is in the early '70s -- of proper social practice of smoking. And this just illustrates how
central smoking was at an earlier period in time to polite society and our culture.
I was actually -- when I was quoting from memory, I was quoting from Emily Post's, which is also included -- I have an excerpt
included in another place in this stack.
Q. And my point is, that you don't really know what the book is actually based on. You said it wasn't in question and answer
format, but we don't know whether this was based on her prior experience of questions being asked in regular newspaper articles,
which she then synthesized into a book or something like that.
A. Well, now you are not making, I think, as trenchant of a point. This is a summary of -- this is a guide to proper social practice
in these situations, and it's indicative of the fact that one, even in the early '70s, in a polite society, was able to smoke virtually
anywhere and everywhere. Anyone and everyone could smoke if they so pleased and not suffer any kind of social criticism.
For example, she's not saying, smoke outside because the smoke is going to be annoysome, bothersome, that it's going to be
unhealthy to the other guests. No. Put the cigarettes out on the table. They're there for people to use. Pass me the butter and I've
got my cigarette right here. So it's an example of how it is woven into everyday life.
Q. She also talks in there about providing drinks and after-dinner liqueurs and things like that, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. You don't know what her views are on, for example, drinking and driving, do you?
A. No. She doesn't raise that issue in there.
Q. And you wouldn't expect that to be raised in an etiquette book, do you, about limits, and cutting people off and things like
that from alcohol?
A. No. But she does actually offer -- she says to offer two cigarettes in the piece. So, you know, perhaps this indicates she thinks
that you should give your guest two cigarettes, and I guess, conceivably, she could have recommended the whole pack.
Q. But this goes to my point, in that would you expect an etiquette writer to include in their materials any evidence on the
health question or on the safety question?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Objection; asked and answered.
A. Well, I haven't done this, but I would be interested to know what the most current advice books say in regards to drinking
because there is now a much higher awareness of the dangers of drinking and driving, and it's -- people realize now that this
is, in fact, a danger. I think it's reasonable to suggest that they didn't think this was as much a problem, there wasn't as much
of an awareness of the problem in the early '70s. Groups like Mother's Against Drunk Driving have come up against that. So I
haven't done this, so I don't know. But the answer to that would be to look at what a current etiquette book says about smoking
and drinking because I think your example of drinking is an interesting one.
Q. Would it be fair to say the answer to my previous question is, you don't know whether you would expect an etiquette book
like this to contain health or safety information about cigarettes or alcohol?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Not specific health and safety information, but, again, that's not why I'm -- I think it's important and that's not why I'm relying
on it. I'm relying on it because it expresses a larger public attitude towards cigarettes. We're dealing here with what people think
and we can't go back in time and ask them. We have to rely on -- this is the challenge of the historical method. We have to rely
on evidence that has been left to us. And this is an example of how the social practice of smoking indicated that, in the early
'70s, certainly, there was nothing wrong with smoking.
Q. It was socially acceptable?
A. Absolutely, yes.
Q. And I just want to make sure -- and I understand that's why you are relying on that document. But I just want to understand
and get your view on the absence of any health or safety issue in there and whether you would expect it to be in there. What I
understand you saying is you haven't looked at it in terms of current sources, and you have what's in there.
A. Yes. Now, I will grant you that Amy Vanderbilt is not an expert on health. She's -- you know, she's an etiquette expert, not a
medical doctor. So, you know, someone wouldn't say, gee, I wonder if cigarettes are bad for me. I'm going to do some research
on this because I'm interested in the issue, and then say, well, let me see what the etiquette book says. I'm using it as a way to
understand what popular beliefs were towards the cigarette.
Q. Also, again -- and I don't know if I got an answer to my question -- would you expect an etiquette book in 1972 to contain
any type of health or safety information as it relates to smoking or as it relates to alcohol?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Objection; asked and answered multiple times.
A. To answer that question, I guess I'd have to see if current etiquette books offer that and I haven't done that.
MR. ERNY:
Q. Tell me what we have in the documents marked as Exhibit 5.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Now, doctor, you were going to generally describe for me what's contained in Exhibit Number 5.
A. Exhibit Number 5 are just various documents which I've disclosed before. There are certain sections from the Surgeon
General's Report relating to the public understanding and common knowledge and those issues; some material on the history
of tobacco, early history of tobacco; Austin v. Tennessee, Supreme Court decision; and some polling data which I've disclosed
before; and some marketing information that contains polling data. It's an industry internal document, but my interest in it is
that it has polling data.
Q. And that's the Philip Morris document we talked about off the record?
A. Yes. That's one of them. There's also another more extensive Philip Morris survey of attitudes towards cigarette smoking
that answers general questions about what people thought about smoking as of around 1959 or so. A Brown & Williamson
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
tobacco awareness time line from your web site, and a chapter from a book on cigarette prevalence, just basic, you know, kind
of data about who's smoking.
Q. Now, you had indicated that these documents are also part of the material that you rely upon in reaching your opinions
in this case?
A. Yes. They're relevant to the history of tobacco.
Q. And these documents, you indicated, also, have been produced previously?
A. They have. I produced them to a Mr. Paul Kofee of the Jones, Day firm. It would have been in the spring of 2003.
Q. And there's no new documents in Exhibit 5?
A. No new documents.
Q. What do we have as documents marked Number 6?
A. Number 6 are a series of internal documents; some are Brown & Williamson, some are Tobacco Institute documents. The
top one is a Horace Kornagey memo, who was with The Tobacco Institute for many years at that time. And these relate to
what you would call marketing issues.
Again, my interest in these is, you know, how attitudes towards cigarettes were shaped by the industry, industry advertising.
And not every document in here is absolutely relevant, but information on when people started smoking, industry studies and
various miscellaneous things that I've collected over time.
Q. Would you agree that people's attitudes toward cigarette smoking were shaped by a lot of different sources?
A. Yes. Many different sources. The industry would just be one of many.
Q. What are some of the other sources that would shape people's attitudes towards cigarettes?
A. What accepted social practice is, what they read in the newspaper, what they see in television, both in terms of stories
explicitly dealing with the issues of health, but also in more subtle ways, just how cigarettes are portrayed in the paper. Also
by industry advertising strongly shapes attitudes towards cigarettes and smoking; the way cigarettes are used in film. Those are
indicators of -- on one hand, they're indicators of social practice but they also transmit, particularly in the '50s and '60s, the idea
that this is a normal, socially acceptable aspect of everyday life.
Other sources would be media -- let me rephrase that. I meant to say popular culture. I misspoke. Songs, not many songs deal
with smoking, but there are indicators of that.
Other aspects of social practice, like slang. Basically, what we're trying to understand is what people -- or polls, polling data is
useful. It's just -- you know, polling data is not, in itself, proof. It's just one of many sources that one considers.
Q. These are all factors, again, that shape attitudes towards cigarettes; am I right?
A. Well, polling data would be a source that would indicate that. So, actually, there is a difference there. While there are such
things as push polls, in which polls change attitudes, I don't know that the industry was using those. I meant to say polls as one
way to measure and indicate, get a sense of what people's understanding and belief was.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
But things that shape, you know, those things that I've mentioned, you know, statements from, you know, friends, family, that
would be in there. You know, they're all intertwined.
Q. Okay. Now, Exhibit 6 would also be materials that you rely upon in reaching your conclusions in this case, correct?
A. Yes. These are materials that deal with -- you know, with the -- I look at these materials with the theme of, well, how did
the industry formulate its strategy to confront the adverse publicity and the rising of -- the information coming from scientists.
Q. And you used the documents contained in Exhibit 5 to answer that question?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. What do we have in -- I'm sorry. That was Exhibit 6. I apologize.
What do we have in the documents that we marked as Exhibit 7?
A. Exhibit 7 is a continuation of the kinds of materials in Exhibit 5. They were just separated by the photocopier, a divider,
but it's the same type of material.
MS. LUMAGHI:
Exhibit 5 or Exhibit 6?
THE WITNESS:
I'm sorry. I'm getting really messed up here.
A. Exhibit 7 is a continuation of the kinds of materials in Exhibit 6.
MR. ERNY:
Q. And are these documents that you've produced previously?
A. No, I haven't. This is my first case in which Brown & Williamson, as opposed to American Tobacco side of Brown &
Williamson has been a defendant. So I've collected these over time, so these are new.
Q. Are these Brown & Williamson documents?
A. Not all of them. Some of them are -- some are Brown & Williamson. Some are TI documents, TIRC documents, so they're
a mix.
Q. And, again, these are documents that you've relied upon in forming opinions about how the attitudes towards cigarettes were
shaped by the tobacco industry?
A. Yes. The industry side of the picture.
Q. What do we have in Exhibit 8?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Exhibit 8 is a selection from the papers of John W. Hill, of the Hill & Knowlton agency. And, in essence, this is an extension
of the materials of -- at least in terms of their function and purpose, the materials in Exhibit 6 and 7. That is, what we have
here is materials that indicate the way the industry responded to the health crisis or the health scare or the adverse information
about smoking and health.
I might add, also, that Exhibit 8 also includes clipping files which would be, you know, newspaper stories, which, themselves,
indicate the kind of information that the public was getting. So there's -- the Hill & Knowlton papers have two qualities to them.
There's these internal documents that discuss the way the industry is doing this, but then they would prepare clipping files and
publications that would discuss the -- you know, the issue of cigarettes and smoking and that would be put before the public.
Q. Were the clipping files included in the Hill papers that you found --
A. Yes, the Hill & Knowlton agency kept a clipping file and that's also included in here.
Q. Now, have you produced these documents previously?
A. I have. I've produced them in Frankson v. the American Tobacco Company.
Q. Okay.
A. And when I say I've produced them, in that one, because I was not deposed in that case, so I didn't physically hand them
to the defense team in that one, but I sent this exact set to the plaintiffs' attorneys and said, these are my reliance documents.
I don't know that for sure, that it made the cross to the defense team. You see what I'm saying? So that might be something
you want to ask about.
Q. Was it your intent, when you supplied it to the plaintiffs' attorney, that it be supplied to the defense team?
A. It was, yes.
Q. What do we have in Exhibit 9?
A. Exhibit 9 is a selection from a book called “Tobacco Experimental and Clinical Studies,” and I've copied two sections of
it. Of course, it's a much weightier tone than these photocopies indicate. They have a section on popular opinion, which I
photocopied. And they have a chapter called Medical Uses of Tobacco, which I copied.
Q. Okay. Were these documents which you have produced previously?
A. I believe so. I believe that I have.
Q. Okay. And where did you obtain these documents?
A. The University of North Carolina Health Sciences Library.
Q. So the library has a copy of the Larson, Hauge, Silvette publication in it?
A. Yes.
Q. What do we have marked as Exhibit 10?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Exhibit 10 are the newspaper exhibits that my research assistant, Mr. Lubitino, put together, in which we talked about earlier.
Q. These were documents that were generated in 1964, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. All right. What do we have as Exhibit 11?
A. Exhibit 11 are a copy of the series of stories from Advertising Age, which is a trade publication, not generally available to
the average reading public. And like the U.S. Tobacco Journal, these stories deal with just, you know, the way advertising --
the way the industry approached advertising, kind of a behind the scenes view.
To be honest with you, it looks like only the first one of this set of about maybe eight pages is really relevant for our purposes
here, but I'll just keep it all together.
Q. Are these documents that you've produced previously?
A. I don't think I've produced these previously to anybody. It's just from my own files.
Q. You have documents over there that we've marked as Exhibit 12?
A. Yes. This is a chapter on the Hill & Knowlton firm, their tobacco work, and it's taken from a peer reviewed historical study
of the Hill & Knowlton firm by a woman named Karen Miller, and it's just, you know, an example of secondary literature, what
historians call secondary literature, a study.
Exhibit 13 is a pamphlet published in 1939 by Clarence Cook Little on the fight on cancer, and this is a widely disseminated
pamphlet and is relevant to an example of information available before World War II.
Q. Is this a document that has been produced previously?
A. I'm not sure. I don't think so.
Q. And why is this document important to you?
A. Well, it's an example of pre-World War II information on -- geared towards the public on smoking and health. That's not a
technical magazine. It's a popular pamphlet meant to be disseminated. And it's an example of the kind of information one might
argue a little early in the case of Ms. Hale. I have no problem with that.
This is a 1955 Newsweek story called “Shots For Cancer” and an example of some of the information --
Q. You are referring to Exhibit 14?
A. Oh, yes. Exhibit 14. Also included in that -- this was just in the file -- the Saturday Evening Post covers from January 18th,
January 4th through 11th, essentially the time when the Surgeon General's report was released.
Exhibit Number 15, in response to the Schedule A subpoena, I was asked for my Carolina Population Center post doctorate
fellowship application. I have disclosed this previously and it is here again.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
What I have not disclosed, previously because I didn't have it, I was asked last time, is the evaluation of my work by the
supervisor, the head of the Carolina Population Center, basically stating what I've done in my period over there. So that's --
that last page is unfamiliar to you.
Q. Okay. How about Exhibit 16?
A. Exhibit 16 are the Power Point slides from a presentation I gave to the Tobacco Products Liability Conference. This is a group
that met at Northeastern University Law School, and they invited me to speak, and I did so in late September, and these are the
Power Point slides which I gave. And these have been disclosed before. This time, I printed them out two to a page to save paper.
The last thing are some selected --
Q. And you are referring to Exhibit 17?
A. Oh, yes. Thank you. Exhibit 17 are some selected pages from Ebony magazine, some advertisements for Kool, the cigarette,
Kool, and some other newspaper stories that indicate the social practice of smoking. I wasn't able to find anything on smoking
and health in Ebony.
Also attached to this exhibit is -- you did ask me about e-mails in the Schedule A, and I don't generally save e-mails, but I did
save Mr. Lubitino's bill that he sent to me, and so I've included that. And my reply note said, thank you for your work. But it
includes Mr. -- the bill that he submitted and the e-mail in which that came.
Q. Would you mind if we separate that and mark that as Exhibit 19?
A. That's fine.
Q. Okay. Let me do that.
(Exhibit 19 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. And I also understand, from discussions with you at the break, that the Ebony pages that are marked as Exhibit 17 are your
only copies, so you are requesting that the court reporter return these original marked documents to you; is that correct?
A. Yes. And that actually would be true of the e-mails from Mr. Lubitino because I just printed those.
Q. In Exhibit 19?
A. Yes. Those are my only copies, as well.
Q. What do we have in Exhibit 18?
A. Well, this maybe, perhaps, is misidentified as an exhibit. Exhibit 18 is, actually, I put together an invoice indicating my
standard per diem rate, which has been my rate for some time, and then the time to prepare the documents, and my out-of-
pocket expense for photocopying, and then I also included a W-9, which is the request for taxpayer identification number and
certification, which you need --
Q. You've requested a taxpayer ID number?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. This a W-9 which your bookkeeper will request from me.
May I say that I'm uncomfortable with these being an exhibit because they have my social security number on them and, you
know, due to the problem of -- I didn't intend for these to be evidence in the case. With the problem of, you know, ID theft
-- this is really my -- instead of mailing it to you, I brought it with me. I didn't know what way -- and that's just my charges
for my time today.
MR. ERNY:
Let's go off the record.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
We've agreed to redact Dr. Kyriakoudes's social security number from the two documents contained in Exhibit 18, and the
redacted version will be that which is attached to the transcript, and I will personally retain the original of Exhibit 18 marked
with the social security numbers, and that will be in my files as opposed to being part of the public deposition record.
Q. Is that acceptable, doctor?
A. Yes. That sounds fine to me.
Q. And then, again, Exhibit 19 is the e-mails that you received from Mr. Lubitino and his bill, and, again, you want to have
these originals returned to you; is that right?
A. Yes, please. Because those are my only copies.
Q. You also produced two disks, which I think we should probably talk about because it appears both you and I have forgotten
about them. You've produced one disk called Kyriakoudes Media Files. And if I understand correctly, this has been a document
-- this disk contains documents and images that have been produced previously?
A. Yes.
Q. And these are also things that you rely upon in reaching your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. They're more examples which I use to show the jury, but, yes, so they are part of my reliance materials.
MR. ERNY:
And we're going to -- we're going to mark that as Exhibit 20.
(Exhibit 20 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Obviously, we're not going to put a sticker on the disk but the court reporter will be putting it in a jacket which will be
marked as Exhibit 20 and that will be attached to the original deposition.
And then the second disk is marked, Miscellaneous Print Advertisements, Congressional Hearings, and it's signed Louis
Kyriakoudes, Mash v. B&W. And this contains other material that you relied upon in reaching your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. Again, I went to that -- on my computer and thought, well, I do have this other set of advertisements. There's some
Power Point slides of advertisements in there, actual advertisements that I've collected over the years. Some are Kool, some are
other brands of cigarettes. The congressional hearings, that includes the 1957 misleading advertising filter tip cigarette hearings,
the so-called Platnick hearings, the '65 and '69 label hearings.
Q. Are these materials that you've produced in the past?
A. I don't know. I think I have produced the '65 hearings. I have done that. I don't think I've produced the Platnick hearings.
Q. But this is nothing other than a downloaded image of the congressional record?
A. That's right. A copy of the congressional record.
MR. ERNY:
We're going to mark this as Exhibit 21, similar to what we've done as 20, not by putting a sticker on it but by putting it in a jacket.
(Exhibit 21 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Having gone three these documents, is this the sum total that you are going to be relying upon to give opinions at trial in
the Mash v. Brown & Williamson case?
A. Yes. This is what I brought today. This is what I brought on my own for this particular case.
MR. ERNY:
Let's go off the record.
(Off the record.)
MS. LUMAGHI:
I'd like to try to resolve the fee dispute for Dr. Kyriakoudes. Maybe during lunch, you could call your client. And I was a little
confused, also, about what you were disputing, whether it was the $5,000 or whether it was the three hours of time he spent
in accumulating documents for today.
MR. ERNY:
Why don't when we come back, that will be the first thing I'll question him about. I'll get some information on that, and we'll
just kind of go from there.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
(Off the record.)
(Exhibit 22 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to hand you what I've marked as Exhibit 22. And this is a copy of the report that was provided by Ms.
Lumaghi to me on December 8th. Do you recognize that document?
A. Yes.
Q. Is this the report that you prepared for this case?
A. Yes.
Q. When did you begin the preparation of this report?
A. Well, this is a report that's based on a standard report that I have had or one that I've developed before, so I didn't write it
from scratch. But Ms. Lumaghi contacted me, and I put something together for that case after she contacted me, and got it to
her pretty quickly. I don't know the date that this was submitted. Normally, these are signed by me. This one isn't signed by me
which, I guess, maybe your rules are different. But I got it to her pretty quickly, worked on it over the weekend.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, if I recall your testimony from earlier this morning, you were called by her sometime in December?
A. Yes.
Q. And then this was submitted December 8th?
A. Yes.
Q. How long did it take you to prepare this report?
A. I put about four hours. I put four hours into this report.
Q. And what -- I think you said that was done over a weekend? Was it four hours straight or was it kind of --
A. No. It was broken up.
Q. And I see up there in the second sentence, it says, your fee for testimony is $500 per hour.
A. Yes. That's -- it should read $500 per hour, $5,000 per day. I sent Ms. Lumaghi some materials. This -- that's just a mistake.
It should be $5,000 per day, when I have the per diem. And I've, of course, testified to that previously, in two trials.
Q. And I would --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. One of which Brown & Williamson was a defendant.
Q. And I will tell you that I -- other than the report, I don't -- I don't recall receiving anything else from Ms. Lumaghi saying
that the per diem was $5,000 per day, and do you -- is it your testimony that you sent her something to that effect?
A. I explained to her over the phone that that was my fees.
MS. LUMAGHI:
I believe there may have been an e-mail. I'm not sure if it was sent to other parties. It may have just not been included. I don't
know if that's going to be a big issue.
MR. ERNY:
I don't know either. Okay.
Q. She asked you to write a report, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you prepared a report. Are there any prior drafts of what we've marked as Exhibit 22?
A. No. No. I'll tell you exactly how this happened. First, I, you know, do my own writing. Secondly, all -- what Ms. Lumaghi did
was, I sent her -- I have an expert report that's in a slightly different format from this, with numbers on the paragraphs instead of
the paragraphs like this. And then I have a short expert report that's one-and-a-half pages long. And some jurisdictions require
this real short report; some require long reports; some require both. And I sent both of those to her. And what she did was
basically cut and paste or maybe her secretary, someone in her office cut and pasted them together. So --
Q. So if I understand correctly --
A. So pages -- well, the pages aren't numbered on this, but the first leaf and the third leaf are from my short report.
Q. First and third page?
A. First through third, one page is what's prepared from my short report. Where it says tobacco in Europe, that's just cut and
pasted from my longer report.
Q. That begins on Page 4?
A. Yes. So that -- this is in a slightly different format than things that I've submitted in the past. Normally, the reports start out, I
send them the text report. I have numbers on all the paragraphs for ease of reference. And then on the front page, they have this
elaborate header that the secretary at the law firm will insert for me, which has the case number, blah, blah, blah, you know,
make it look like a legal document. So this is in a slightly different format. That's the only difference.
Q. And if I understand your testimony, you provided what you have used in the past as your long version and your short version
to Ms. Lumaghi, and then you believe that she cut and pasted that to create --
A. Well, she told me that over the phone.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. She cut and pasted that to create Exhibit Number 22?
A. That's right. That's why there's a change in tone. Because the first three pages are written Dr. Kyriakoudes will. In essence,
it's in the third person. Once it goes to where -- essentially, into the first person, if you could. That explains the shift in tone,
if you will, in that regard.
Q. At the time that this Exhibit 22 was created, did you know that was happening, that your two reports were being synthesized
into one?
A. Yes. I said, these are my two current statements of my opinions, a long one and a short one, and I said, whichever -- you
know, because my experience has been some places want a long one, some places want a short one. And she said, well, is it
okay if we combine them? Simply did a cut and paste. I said sure.
Q. Were you given the opportunity to see what I would refer to as her cut and paste version before it was sent to me?
A. She did send it back to me and I skimmed at it superficially. She said she made no changes to any words and simply cut
and pasted it and that was good enough for me.
Q. Was that in an e-mail version?
A. Yes. An attached document, yes.
Q. Did you save that e-mail?
A. I don't think so. I would have brought that with me.
Q. Okay. Now, is this report accurate and complete, to the best of your knowledge?
A. It is.
Q. Does it represent the opinions that you intend to offer at trial?
A. It does.
Q. And with the addition of the documents that we've marked, the disks that we've marked, does it accurately reflect all the
materials that you rely upon for your opinions in this case?
A. Yes. At this point in time, exactly so.
Q. Other than the two versions of your report, the long and short version that you've sent to Ms. Lumaghi, was there any other
memos or reports or written or electronic communications to her about research interests or other conclusions that are not
contained in this report?
A. No.
Q. Now, I understand that your position at University of Southern Mississippi is a salaried position, correct?
A. That's correct.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. And on Exhibit Number 15, the last page of that document is the Ruth Kirschstein National Research Service Award,
Individual Fellowship Termination Notice. And this was a document that you provided to me earlier today. And that document
resulted at the end of your North Carolina -- what is it, a fellowship?
A. Yes. It was a -- well, it's a post doc National Institutes of Health post doc.
Q. And in there, there's salary information for the years 2001 and 2002; is that correct?
A. Yes. Actually, beginning in the summer of 2001, concluding in the summer of 2002, that would be the first year. It's following
the academic year as opposed to the calendar year. The second year beginning, of course, 2002, the summer of 2002 and
concluding the summer of 2003.
Q. When you say “academic year,” do you mean September through June?
A. Yes. Actually, I started with the pop center in July and ended in July.
Q. Now, the salaries that are reflected there, is that -- even though it is for the school year, does that reflect your yearly annual
salary at that time?
A. Well, I did -- I did take a hit by when I took my leave of absence from the university and took a lower salary with the
University of Southern Mississippi. I get -- my salary, I'll happily tell you what I make, if you want to know that.
Q. That's fine. We'll get to that. But what was your salary, then, at the university prior to taking this post doc fellowship which
would be, I guess, in the summer of 2000 to the summer of 2001?
A. Right. I was making about 40 for nine months, and summer school, that adds another twelve thousand or so dollars. University
contracts work a little differently. My regular salary is a nine-month. That would be, you know, August through May, and
then I have the option to teach summer school, which sometimes I've done, sometimes I haven't. Sometimes I've had grants
to cover the summer.
Q. Now, I understand your salary is for time spent in the school year. Do you have the option of having the payments made
over 12 months or nine months or do you just get paid over the nine months?
A. Oh, I see. Some people can have -- have the option of spreading out their nine-month salary to twelve months because they,
presumably, are not good at budgeting, I guess. It's kind of like using your federal withholding savings account, I guess. But
I've always elected to be paid for my nine months. There are many ways college professors make money. This is, like, a base.
For me, I've taught summer school, given the option of writing textbooks, which is another thing that professors do. The -- you
know, consulting, and writing books and other kind of outside income sources are the standard, but it's kind of typical.
Q. Did you, in fact, take any of those options of writing textbooks?
A. Well, I was given the option of writing a textbook and I opted to -- I felt like this work was more important and would have
more impact, and so I actually had chosen to pursue this with that extra time, if you will.
Q. When you say “this work,” you mean testifying in tobacco cases?
A. Yes. Research in tobacco, testifying in cases and I'm working on a book on the history of the cigarette.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. And then what would your salary, your annual salary be currently from the summer of 2003 to the summer of 2004?
A. To my current -- my current nine-month salary is just under $45,000. It's like $44,900, something or other, round it to $45,000.
Q. And last summer, in the summer of 2003, did you teach summer school?
A. No. Because I was still finishing up my Carolina population post doc. My date of termination was sometime in July. I forget
the exact date. The 11th of July was on this one. I actually moved out of my office around the 22nd or 23rd of July and moved
with my family back here to Mississippi. Summer school is June and July.
Q. Okay. Now, you said earlier, you were given the option of writing textbooks. How much income would that have provided
to you had you decided to exercise that option and engage in that activity?
A. Yes. I'm -- Prentiss Hall approached me about a textbook. It can be quite lucrative. People that I know in the field who go
into writing textbooks can make a substantial amount of money. There is -- particularly when you work on the freshman history
textbook or freshman history documents, reader and alike. I'm sure it varies, but it's a substantial amount. Of course, a lot of
that depends upon how well the textbook sells, so there's no guarantee.
Q. Were you approached about writing a college freshman textbook?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. And what would that have been on?
A. A -- it was Prentiss Hall. They asked if I was interested in doing a collection of documents that you would use in class for
a history of the old south, history of the new south.
Q. And when they approached you, did they discuss in any way the approximate amount of income you could have expected
to receive?
A. No. Because, at that time, this was about -- I guess it was about a year-and-a-half ago, I was more interested in pursuing this.
I find this more interesting. This is leading to a publication on this subject, and that seems, to me, just more fun than writing
a textbook. Which most people I know that write textbooks do it because it will -- you know, it's financially rewarding but,
you know, they don't get up in the morning and say, all right, we're going to work on that chapter on cessation today and it's
going to be real exciting.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. How much do you charge for your research time?
A. I don't charge for my research time. You know, I've come into this not knowing what the standard practice is, when I first
started doing this, really in earnest, about a year ago, and it became clear to me that for me to keep my independence and
integrity that I would -- that I should charge only for what I call the mechanics of the litigation, documents directly related to
the litigation, testifying, and my own research, that is, my visit to archives and alike, not charge for that time. And it's a lot of
time, in fact. I don't know that there's anyone that's willing to pay for it, either.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. With the exception of the charges that you have charged for assembling the documents responsive to the subpoena, do you
charge for the preparation of a deposition?
A. You mean, like, reading through my documents and stuff?
Q. Yes.
A. No. And I don't charge that to them or -- I don't think I can charge for that, but I don't. I've billed them for the preparation
of this affidavit and the telephone time.
Q. Is that included in some of the documents you've produced today?
A. No. But I'll tell you how much it is. I charged that firm $2,000 for four hours of work.
MS. LUMAGHI:
I think it was on the e-mail with the $5,000 per day, now that you said that. I think it was. Because I think it was just an e-
mail. I don't think it was a really --
THE WITNESS:
I thought it was just over the phone, I told you over the phone.
MR. ERNY:
Q. Now, in terms of preparation for testifying at trial, do you charge for that, as well?
A. Well, here's how it is. There's two things involved here. I need to go back over my own research notes and look at my own
exhibits to remind myself what to say and alike. I don't charge for that. They send me a note or they call me on the phone and
they say, we need a short affidavit on some issue. Can you -- you know, we're in there in front of a judge, and this issue has
come up and it's relevant to what your testimony is, can you do some small affidavit on this? And I will charge for that.
But I don't charge -- I bill for the days that I'm there. If the law firm says, well, we want you to come out here to New York
and we want you to -- we're going to have the lawyers here and we want you to present to all the attorneys or whomever, you
know, and explain your testimony and talk about it and have an all-day meeting, I will charge for that.
Q. And for your travel time, and travel expenses and things like that?
A. Well, I -- I don't charge for my travel time because that -- you know, I mean, usually, I leave the night -- you know, late the
night before or take the red eye. It's not been, you know -- I do ask that they cover my expenses, my out-of-pocket expenses
for the plane ticket. Sometimes they'll purchase the plane ticket, but lately, I buy the plane tickets because I know the easiest
way to get out of Mississippi, and just reimburse me for that.
Q. And those activities, is that the $500 per hour?
A. Yeah, and $5000 a day. And I haven't done much of that, going for a meeting because, usually, we just handle it over the
phone.
Q. Has it always been $500 an hour and $5,000 per day?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. Like I said, I didn't know exactly how to handle this when I first started doing it. I started at a lower rate.
And then in the spring of this past year, I sat down, I canvassed people that I knew and asked, you know, what are standard
practices. And some people said, well, you know, these seem to be standard practices. And with the exception that I don't charge
for my research, that's just something I felt like it would be important for me not to do, in terms of my credibility as a historian,
with amongst my peers. I don't think it matters much in this environment because people take on those jobs all the time. But I've
made this project, you know, my research focus now and my publication focus, so I need to, you know, distinguish between
my research and my paid activity as a witness.
Q. What started first; your research and publication interests in this area or your involvement in litigation as either a consultant
or a witness?
A. My interest in tobacco started long before I was involved in any of this aspect of it. I suspect maybe that's how I was initially
contacted. I'm a historian of the south. I'm an economic and business historian, and I'm really interested in the full spectrum of
tobacco, from the culture of growing tobacco, really, to the industry side.
And back in 1995, I was -- when I was still writing my dissertation, before I began my current position at Southern Mississippi, I
was living in Chapel Hill and I was a part-time adjunct instructor. It's common when you are not finished with your degree. And
participated in something called The Future of the Tobacco South, which was a public/private academic/non-academic working
group looking at the future of the tobacco south, what is going to happen to these growers now that the quota system and the
Lochman system is being phased out. In North Carolina, that's especially a big issue. As part of my work on that, I actually had a
very pleasant day interviewing a gentleman by the name of Fred Bond, who is a long-time head of the Cooperative Stabilization
Board For Tobacco. He was quit ill at the time and, actually, still found time to talk with me. And another guy named Billy
Urigan, who was a warehouse operator in Oxford, Mississippi.
I talk about the tobacco industry, growing industry in my book, which is on migration and urbanization and agricultural change.
My initial research proposal to the pop center was on comparing textiles in cigarette industry workers. Then once I got to the
pop center and saw that the public health side of it was so big, I made that part of my pop center research.
You know, I -- I was initially deposed in 2000. I had done little bits of side research for a gentleman named Louis Fondren in
1998, '99. February of 2000, I was deposed on a case called Burner v. Brown & Williamson by Mr. Busheflin. And then I didn't
think anything would ever come of that, as far as the litigation. Occasionally, would do little things for Mr. Louis Fondren in
Pascagoula, but I continued my interest in the subject because it is of such historical concern.
Q. Your current research activities, at least as set forth in your CV, is The Cigarette, Health and American Life. That seems to
be a much more pointed research activity versus just being involved and being interested in tobacco in the south.
When did you develop the research activity and interest in cigarettes and health?
A. Back in 1999, you know, I began to see that this -- the issue of how people perceive cigarettes -- this is when the master
settlement was still very much in the news. This was a national issue. I was in Mississippi then. And the master settlement story
got a lot of press in Mississippi because of Attorney General Mike Moore's role in it. I think that's the same year that “The
Insider,” a popular film, was released, which I only mention as an example of public interest in the subject. I don't rely on the
movie. And, you know, I started thinking along those lines.
I had to get my book -- the first book that I was working on finished, you know, which became the book that cinched tenure
for me, promotion and tenure, I should say, and once I got finished with that, moved to these other issues. I see them all as
interrelated.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Okay. Did you meet with Ms. Lumaghi this morning before the deposition?
A. No. The first time I met her was when I came into this room, and I never met her in person before.
Q. Did you have any conversations with her about the deposition, other than the mere scheduling matter?
A. None whatsoever.
Q. Did Ms. Lumaghi or anybody in her law firm provide any documents to you?
A. No. No.
Q. Doctor, in your report, there is reference to, on the first page, scholarly presentations, including your presentation to the
Tobacco Products Liability Project.
A. Yes.
Q. And that's also mentioned on Page 2 of your curriculum vitae.
A. Yes. I've included that and I supplied the Power Point slides.
Q. Right. And your CV also mentions other scholarly presentations.
A. It does, yes.
Q. Do you have -- is the copy of your CV over there?
A. Probably.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. I just want to talk about some of these scholarly presentations, other than the Tobacco Products Liability Project.
A. Okay.
Q. Briefly, how does one get involved in making a scholarly presentation?
A. You are either asked or you submit proposals to some places they ask you to speak. They put out a call for papers and
you submit your -- either the paper or a summary of the paper, and they put you together, and they put like-minded subjects
together and create panels.
Q. Do you recall which of these you were invited to give versus which ones you've submitted papers to?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Which ones were you invited to give?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Of course, the one to the Tobacco Products Liability Conference, the one on Southern Sharecroppers and Farm Laborers
from World War II, and on Page 3, the third one down, Real Urban Migration Market Linkages, et cetera. You can see it there.
Those were invited.
The others, you know, they would have a call for papers, and I would send in a summary of what I was working on that might
seem relevant to whatever that conference was.
Oh, there's maybe a third category, here. Sometimes people will put together a session of three papers and then make a proposal
or submit that session to the larger conference, and on the top of Page 3, the paper that begins, “I Got a Job Quick As I Got
Here,” I was contacted by the gentleman that was organizing a panel of papers, if you will, asking if I would submit something
on my -- on my work. And I've been asked to speak this spring at a conference.
Q. What conference is that?
A. It's called the Southern Labor Studies Conference. They want me to talk about my book on the social origins of the urban
south. That hasn't happened yet, so I didn't put it on here.
Q. At these conferences, these scholarly conferences, I take it, generally speaking, you go and you discuss the paper or your
work or things like that; other people present their work, as well?
A. Yes.
Q. And are there -- I don't want to say minutes because that sounds too formal, but are there proceedings that are often published
out of those things that would include, for examples, the papers you've submitted and things like that?
A. Sometimes that's happened, yes.
Q. And when those proceedings get published, where do they generally reside? Are they sent back out to all the participants
or are they kept in various libraries?
A. Well, in the one case where I had proceedings published, it was on Page 3. There's one called The Urbanization of Black
Southerners in the Era of the Great Migration, the Agricultural History Society's 1997 Symposium. That later was published
as an article in The Journal of Agricultural History.
And where -- and all the papers that were given -- or I think all of the papers, most of the papers. Maybe not everyone participated.
But it was presented as if you give a paper at this conference, that we're going to publish all the papers in this journal. That's
how that worked.
Q. But the journal is publicly available?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And, generally speaking, the reasons for these seminars or meetings and all that is to share with others your views on a
various topic, hear what other people were saying, see what kind of papers were being published, things of that nature?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, the Tobacco Products Liability Conference, which you've called a scholarly presentation, isn't exactly that way, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, it's a little bit different. I gave a Power Point presentation. I was asked to give this talk. I agreed because I thought that
-- well, I was just delighted that a bunch of lawyers and public health people would be interested in historical issues. I was, you
know, surprised, really, and pleased that they would be interested in history, so I went up there and I gave that talk.
Q. Did you know, when you were invited to give this presentation, did you know about this group?
A. Just from what I read on their web site. I didn't know anybody from the group. I didn't know what the group did except from
what I read on the web side. And I got a phone call from a man named Richard Daynard, and I think I may have checked their
web site in the past but then went back and read the web site.
Q. What do you recall reading on the web site about the group?
A. Well, they are an academic and public policy, public private group sponsored by Northeastern University, and they promote
tobacco control policies. They support tobacco litigation against tobacco companies in various ways. I don't know all the ways
that they do this. I'm not an expert in what their activities are, but I recall that's what they said on their web site. And their name
is -- they have the Tobacco Control Resource Center or institute or something like that, which a subset is this Tobacco Products
Liability Conference or center. I forget exactly how it's termed.
Q. When you were first contacted by Mr. Daynard and asked to appear here, did you agree during that initial phone call or did
you have subsequent conversations after you looked at the web site?
A. No. In fact, I turned him down initially. I told him I couldn't do it. I told him I was interested, but I couldn't do it because I
had planned to take my family to France for the fall. And for a study -- it was my turn to do study abroad, and the enrollment
was way down, which we attributed to the unsettledness of the international situation, so I voluntarily surrendered my place so
that someone else could go. And it ended up -- I think it ended up being cancelled anyway.
But then I -- after that I thought, well, you know, I'll go talk at this group and I'll bring my family and we'll have a nice time
in Boston with the kids. And, again, I was -- I was pleased that these people were interested in historical issues because I'm a
-- I do believe that history is under-appreciated and is terrifically important.
Q. In between the time that you initially turned him down and the time when it became possible for you to go, was it during
that period of time that you looked at the web site?
A. Yes. But that didn't figure into it. If I hadn't been going to France, I would have agreed to it at the first time. So, you know,
it was a scheduling conflict and that scheduling conflict no longer existed, so I thought, well, let's go do it.
Q. Now, you had to sign an affidavit when you presented at that --
A. Yes. That has become something that's been following me like a cheap suit. But that's okay. My understanding was that there
were people from the Department of Justice in attendance at this conference that were actively engaged in the Department of
Justice suit against the industry, and that -- and since they discussed ongoing litigation -- I did not attend any of those talks. In
fact, I went to my talk and that's it. But that's my understanding.
In retrospect, I -- that's the purpose of it, and I have no problem with that.
(Exhibit 23 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. I've put before you what's been marked Exhibit 23. Is that a form of the affidavit that you signed when you attended the
conference?
A. Yes.
Q. And as I understand your testimony, your understanding of the reason they had this affidavit was because lawyers from the
Department of Justice were going to talk about the progress of their case?
A. Yes. People talking about ongoing litigation matters, of which I was not interested in and did not attend. It was a multi-
day conference. I went to my section of it, and enjoyed doing that, and enjoyed giving my presentation and was delighted to
do so. But, yes, that's --
Q. From whom did you gain that understanding that that was the reason for this affidavit?
A. I talked to the people at the center. They said they have ongoing litigation matters.
Q. When did you speak to the people at the center about this?
A. When I showed up, you know, and they presented me with the affidavit. They had a little -- like, the first night, in the hotel
in which we were staying, they had, like, you know, a cocktail party type deal with heavy hors d'oeuvres, to which I brought
my family. And, you know, they asked me to sign it. I looked at it. I thought, well, okay. I don't have a problem with any of
these things.
I'll have -- you know, I don't see that this precludes me from making presentations, say, for example, to an industry group, and
if they're happy to -- if they want to ask me to come speak, I'll give the same talk.
Q. Well, your affidavit or the affidavit that you signed, at least in Paragraph 2, you agreed not to appear as an expert witness or
work as a consultant or in any other capacity for a tobacco defendant before December 1st, 2006, correct?
MS. LUMAGHI:
I'm going to object because we don't have the signed copy in front of us. I don't know if it's the exact one that he signed.
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, does that look like the affidavit that you signed other than the fact that it's a poor copy?
A. It looks like it. I signed the affidavit when it was put before me and then handed it back in.
You know, this became an issue sometime this fall. I was asked to supply the documents related to the conference. And, in fact,
I didn't bring any documents home from the conference because they were heavy and they seemed of no relevance to me.
But the good people at the Tobacco Products Liability Conference mailed them to me at about the same time that I received
the subpoena. I said, well -- and I, in fact, brought the virtually unopened box -- I had opened it that morning to make sure it
had what it -- this it. This is back in December.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
But I spoke with people at that office on the phone, Mr. Daynard and another fellow that works in that office whose name I
couldn't remember and said, look, you know, I've got nothing to hide on this, and if you send it to me, if I've got it, I've got to
give it to them. And they seemed -- didn't have a problem with that.
And, you know, I explained, while I signed this affidavit and I don't intend to represent the tobacco industry in court because
I don't think my testimony is of the type that the industry would be interested in me giving, you know, I -- I'm not really a --
of their work, and so -- you know, I did sign this. My understanding was that -- and they mentioned, well, we do this because
we have people that do ongoing litigation, and they discuss strategy and all the legal stuff, which I don't take much interest
in. That's good enough for me.
Q. Let me get back to my question. In that Paragraph 2, one of the things that you agreed to do or not to do was work in any other
capacity for a tobacco defendant. Do you believe that would cover making a scholarly presentation to the tobacco industry?
A. Not really. If I made my presentation to your group, if you don't have a problem with that. Maybe I wouldn't take any
money for it.
Q. Well, this doesn't say --
A. Work is work, you know.
Q. When you make a scholarly presentation to one of these societies, you work in preparation, right? And actually giving it
is work, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. You are not paid for that, right?
A. No, not directly.
Q. And also, you understood, after reading this affidavit before signing it, that at least one of the intents of the Tobacco Products
Liability Project was to encourage and support litigation against the tobacco industry, correct?
A. That part, I knew. I knew that this was a legal group. It was a combination of people from the public health community
and from the legal community. That some of the people in the room would be involved in the legal aspect. Some would be
involved in the public health aspect.
Q. So there were public health people there and there were plaintiffs' lawyers there. There were no defense lawyers, right?
A. I don't think so. I don't know all who was there, but I'm -- I would assume that there probably weren't defense lawyers
there, but maybe.
Q. In any of these other scholarly presentations that we've talked about that appear on your CV, were you ever asked to sign
an affidavit to this effect?
A. No. This is unique.
Q. And so, at least based on that difference, this really wouldn't qualify as a scholarly presentation, along the lines of your
other scholarly presentations?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, it was the results of my research.
Q. I understand that. I'm saying, based on this -- the distinction of signing this affidavit.
A. You know, this doesn't often happen in humanities and social sciences, but I'll tell you where this is quite common, and that
is in fields like pharmacology and alike, where you have university people working with industry to develop, you know, new
drugs, what have you. I have friends at UNC who do this kind of work.
And in that regard, they are required to sign various forms of confidentiality agreements. So it's -- it's not unprecedented that
this -- it's unusual for history, I would grant you that, but in certain branches of the sciences, you know, in drug development,
in computer science, computer engineering and the electrical engineering industry, this does happen.
Q. In those instances, a person will sign a confidentiality agreement and agree not to divulge trade secrets or confidential
information that that person learns at the seminar, correct?
A. Well, it's more like they will not divulge the product of their research until a certain period of time, will keep it within a
certain community, what have you.
So this is like that, with the difference being that, while I signed the affidavit, I have no secrets as to what I said.
Q. Going back to your example of, for example, pharmacologists and things like that, you are not aware of any of those instances
of pharmacologists or a computer science person agreeing not to testify against any of those companies? In other words, a
pharmacologist who is consulting with, say, Pfizer on a drug for allergies, you are not aware of any instance where he would
be precluded from testifying against Pfizer relating to a drug for foot fungus, would you?
A. No. But that's actually not a very good example. I mean, a more accurate analogy would be, like, a noncompete clause in
a contract. Well, you know, you agree -- you are working on this joint Glaxo-Welcome university research product, and you
agree, for a certain amount of time, you are not going to divulge the secrets nor will you go to work for Pfizer.
Q. We are going beyond now just making a scholarly presentation. You are actually referring now to a contact that includes a
covenant not to compete. We're getting away from my example.
Let me go back. Are you aware of any instances where any of your friends, pharmacologists or computer science people,
whatever, have just made a blanket agreement that they will not testify against the company that they make a scholarly
presentation for?
A. Not in testifying, but that's not the work they do. The work they do is development and alike.
I have -- you know, I have no problem with this affidavit. It was something I signed when it was presented to me. I looked at
it. I thought, well, you know, I don't intend to work for the tobacco industry. I can't imagine that they would want me to work
for the tobacco industry, that the industry would want me to work for them. I'm here to present the product of my scholarly
research on this particular subject. I'm going to give my talk and entertain questions, which I did, and explained the issues, and
I found it a very pleasant, fruitful, intellectually fruitful experience, very bright people in the room.
Q. When you went up to this conference, you had already previously testified in tobacco cases, correct?
A. I had testified in two cases that spring.
Q. Both at trial and you had been deposed previously?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. That's right. At depositions, as well, yes.
Q. And you knew, going up to this conference, that it would be attended by not only people involved in the public health
community but also by lawyers who bring litigation against the tobacco industry, correct?
A. I knew there would be lawyers there, yes.
Q. Did you view this as somewhat of a marketing opportunity?
A. No. And I'll tell you why. After my testimony in the spring of 2003, I got plenty of telephone calls and was booked up. No.
I -- this is not a -- this is not an efficient way to do that. My testimony in the trials is the clearest statement of -- from a lawyer's
perspective, I think my testimony at the trials is a statement of my -- whether or not I'm valuable to them or not, whatever
their particular case is. I don't need to go and give a 45-minute Power Point presentation. That carries a lot less weight, this
is my guess, to these attorneys.
I looked at it as a way to promote the communication of the historical field with the legal field and the public health field. I'm
a historian who's a little bit different than most. You know, I just come off of two years at the National Institutes of Health at a
population center where I was the only historian, and I truly enjoy and I think is especially important the connection between
history and people that are active in public policy and public health and more presentist activities.
So I enjoy dealing with those intellectual endeavors. My approach to history is more along the lines of social science than
humanities. And this was an opportunity to promote that, and it had the added benefit of being in Boston, which made for just
a wonderful family trip.
Q. Since giving your presentation at the Tobacco Products Liability Conference, have you been contacted by any of the attendees
at the conference?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Did you know everybody present at the conference?
A. No. But the people -- no one has identified themselves as an attendee to the conference. The case that I testified in November,
one in Florida, that was with Howard Acosta, he contacted me about that case over a year before. The case in New York, I had
been contacted about that case in June, something like that. This case, here, when Ms. Lumaghi called me on the phone, she
said, I've been reading through your testimony and I was wondering, you know, if you would be interested. So, apparently --
I don't remember. She didn't say which case it was, but --
Q. Did anybody from the Iowa group of plaintiffs' attorneys attend this, Ralph Walker, David Darro, anybody like that?
A. I met Mr. Ralph Walker at that conference. Now, I had already been asked to work with them, going back some almost a
year earlier, but I did meet, in person, Mr. Ralph Walker. He was in the room. Previous to that, I had dealt with another fellow
in his office named David Darro over the phone. I did meet him there. And we exchanged pleasantries. We didn't really talk
about anything of substance.
Q. Other than Ms. Lumaghi, have you been contacted since this conference to be an expert witness in cases brought by attorneys
that you didn't know of before the conference?
A. Oh, okay. Yes. I've been -- I've got -- one guy called me just recently in New York City. Block is his last name.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. I'm sorry?
A. Jerome Block. And he had a case -- it was a Lorillard case. And that one is up in the air right now. I'm not sure if I can do
that one. I asked him to tell me when the trial would be, and he's going to get back with me on scheduling because, you know,
I've got to -- I try not to do these during the school year. I try to do them in the summer, as much as possible.
Q. Anybody else?
A. That's it. Nobody else.
Q. Now, one of the aspects of the conference was to provide to the attendees keys for winning cases.
A. That may or may not be the case. I think they called it winning and losing. I think that was the theme of the conference.
Q. When you -- I understand you made a Power Point presentation, copies of what you've produced here?
A. Yes. I have produced that here.
Q. Did anybody help you put that together?
A. No. I put it together myself.
Q. Now, when you prepared the two reports, the short report and the long report that you sent to Ms. Lumaghi, was that current
as of that time?
A. As a statement of my opinions?
Q. Well, as to what was contained in the materials that you provided to her.
A. Well, I mean, it -- yes. This is a statement of my opinions relating to these issues.
Q. And I'm talking about the -- was there anything in this document that was incomplete, that was inaccurate?
A. Inaccurate? No. I don't think so.
Q. If you look at Page 2, and it talks about where you've testified or been deposed in the last four years. As I understand, you
also testified in the Hall case down in Florida in November of 2003, correct?
A. Oh, I see. Yes. It does not have all the cases that I -- I testified in two cases in November and they're not listed here.
Q. Was there any reason why you didn't list those?
A. No. Just --
MS. LUMAGHI:
Isn't the Hall case at the bottom?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I was deposed in that in February of 2003, but it went to trial in November. But it doesn't have -- you are right. It's hard
to -- I left it off. Sorry.
MR. ERNY:
Q. And I'm just trying to figure out --
A. Not by design. I think my participation in that was fairly well-known.
Q. And it was, in essence, really only at least as far as the New York case was concerned and maybe even as far as the Florida
case was concerned, it was less than a month after when you submitted your two reports to Ms. Lumaghi, and I'm wondering
why it was that it was left off.
A. Well, I had testified on that -- I testified in that case, I was in the courtroom on Monday and Tuesday before Thanksgiving.
I think that's, like, the 23rd or the 24th or maybe the 25th.
Q. You are talking about the New York case?
A. Yes. Frankson v. American Tobacco. And then this stuff, the first -- right at the first week of December, if you will. Yes.
I'm sorry. I left that off. That's an omission. But I certainly am not trying to conceal that, and I don't -- even if I had wanted to
conceal that, that would be quite difficult to do from the Brown & Williamson Corporation.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you about your National Research Service Award from the NICHHD. And we've talked about that before,
right?
A. Yes.
Q. And in response to exhibit -- I'm sorry, Number 13, the subpoena, you've brought some of those documents with you.
A. You asked for the application.
Q. Right.
A. And then any correspondence. What I did -- it had not been generated the last time I submitted this to defense lawyers was
this last document which I received at the end of my service there.
Q. Are there any other documents -- in other words, along with the application, did you have to provide other correspondence
or letters of recommendation or anything like that along with that application?
A. Well, I provided a list of references, as far as the initial application, and these people supplied them directly to the Carolina
Population Center. They're confidential. I never looked at those.
Q. Did you make the application to the Carolina Population Center?
A. Yes. That's how this one worked. I sent this in to what we call the CPC. And they had a committee, training committee, post
doc committee that would -- you know, makes the decision.
Q. The salary that was paid to you, which is reflected on the last page, did that come from the Carolina Population Center,
University of North Carolina, federal government? How does that work?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. It is -- it is federal funds administered by the University of North Carolina.
Q. Through the CPC?
A. Through the CPC.
Q. Did the federal government have any input into the process of selecting the candidate to which it was awarded?
A. No. It was a -- a committee at the -- at the Carolina Population Center, is my understanding, is how that process works.
Q. Was there any communication between the folks at the Carolina Population Center and you regarding your application, such
as an award letter, such as we need more information, anything like that?
A. They did send me an award letter. I can't find it. But it was, like, congratulations, you know. They called me on the phone.
That was how they notified me, and then they sent me a letter which I had to sign and send back, saying that I accepted the offer.
Q. Did it set forth what your salary was going to be, what benefits you would have?
A. Uh-huh. Yes.
Q. When you have to move and things like that?
A. Yes, it did.
Q. Is it accurate to say you don't have a copy of that?
A. Yes. I looked for it. I couldn't find it.
Q. So in response to the subpoena, you looked for that document and you couldn't find it?
A. Yes. This is all I could find. It was in my CPC folder. I tell you, I recall that letter. It just said congratulations. They called
me. That's how I initially found out, they called me on the phone at home. And it said what my salary would be, it said the
duration of the award, two years, and that I could start at any time. You know, it's a flexible window for starting it.
Q. Now, when you go on the post doc, what happened to your position here at USM?
A. I took a leave of absence.
Q. Okay. Did you supply documents -- how do you do that? Do you contact the chairman and apply for a leave of absence or --
A. I -- I called the dean. I told the dean what I had gotten. I went and met with him. He said it was a great thing, that they, you
know, would happily, you know, give me a leave of absence. They were very generous. They paid my summer school salary
while I was gone, so what normally one gets for summer school, they paid that to me.
Q. Even though you didn't teach, they gave you that salary --
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. For both summers or just for one summer?
A. Both. USM has been very good to me.
Now, I still had some responsibilities to do here and I had to come back and take care of those. I had two Masters students
who needed their Masters thesis completed, so I actually had to make trips back and fulfill some of my graduated educational
responsibilities. You know, just -- I couldn't completely cut myself off. Undergraduate teaching, when you are not leading a
class, that's easy to do, but graduate students, the nature of the mentor, the mentor relationship, so that, I kept -- I did that.
Q. Who were your Ph.D. candidates at that time?
A. Masters thesis students, a fellow named Toby Graves, and another guy named Edward Davis.
Q. Did Toby Graves go on and get his Masters?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Did Edward Davis get his Masters?
A. Yes. They both completed them while I was gone. I came back for the defenses. It's kind of an academic ritual.
Q. In your report, underneath the listing of prior testimony, it gives a summary of opinions, and it says you are going to testify
about information and misinformation.
A. That's right.
Q. I want to talk to you first about the information portion referred to in your report.
A. Okay.
Q. In the early 1950s, and I think you already talked about this earlier today, there was a great deal of publicity about the issue
of cigarette smoking and health, wasn't there?
A. It was a story of interest, yes.
Q. And, in fact, I believe that you testified in Frankson that this is the point where the science actually backs up the accusations
that cigarettes cause cancer, causes heart disease and alike, correct?
A. Well, now, that's -- I hold the position that the science was well-established by -- you know, in 1950 or so, but I am not a
state-of-the-art witness and I'm not an expert in the science.
In the Frankson case, as I recall, there was a prior expert witness, an expert in the history of medicine who -- and the history
of cancer research who testified about the state-of-the-art in peer reviewed studies, and I recall the questions given to me in
Frankson went along the lines of, Dr. Kyriakoudes -- this is the plaintiffs' attorney -- we have had prior testimony indicating
that by 1950, I believe is what the date that the expert chose, taking that to be true, and then asking me the question about
common knowledge issues.
Q. Well, let's break it down, then. You would agree that prior to 1950, there were accusations throughout the past 40 or 50
years about cigarettes and cancer, weren't there?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. In the popular realm.
Q. Okay.
A. Yes. That's really what you want to ask me about, is the popular realm. You had said science, so that made me think state-of-
the-art. Sure. Cigarettes have always been controversial from the beginnings of the introduction of the machine-made cigarette.
Q. And in the 1950s, you actually begin to see a number of scientific studies actually backing up those accusations?
A. Well, yes. And let me say that the way, as a historian of the public awareness of this, I would say is what you get is reporting
on these studies. These studies break through the scientific area, you know, break out of the limited scientific realm, where only
specialists would look at it, and they come to be reported in the national media.
Q. Right. These were reported in both national and local media, correct?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. And they get into the public sphere?
A. Yes.
Q. In the early 1950s, you would agree that there was a cancer scare with respect to cigarettes?
A. Well, that's how the newspaper refers to it, yes.
Q. And, in fact, that's how your report refers to it, as well, correct?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. You've also referred to that as a panic?
A. Did I use that word in here?
Q. Not in your report. In previous testimony, you've referred to it as a panic, correct?
A. Well, briefly, yes. I don't have a problem with that.
Q. And this information became available to the public by a number of different sources, right? And we talked about some of that
earlier today. You have newspaper articles, magazine articles, popular culture, slang, music, movies, things of that nature, right?
A. Right.
Q. It would also be made available to the public by the publication of the results of polls?
A. Well, now, the polls are not presenting information to the public. You know, that's a little bit different. They're measures of
the distinction between the public's awareness of accusations that cigarettes might be harmful, measures of the level of belief
that they are, indeed, harmful, and then, of course, the third question is, well, how harmful. Polls tell us a lot less than people
think they do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. But they do represent a measure of awareness or belief or understanding or they can represent that?
A. Yes. They kind of snapshot measure, uh-huh. Yes. I'm -- you know, I use polls. Obviously, I've disclosed them. You have
to use them carefully, but they are certainly a source I rely on.
Q. Now, you described this morning a process where you retained a Mr. Lubitino to look at the St. Louis newspapers.
A. That's right.
Q. And your research assignment to him was to look through the St. Louis newspapers for 1964 and provide anything that
mentioned cigarette smoking or health or things like that.
A. Yes. Anything, yes.
Q. And I just want to just go through this. I went through this at lunchtime, and I'm referring to Exhibit 10, and as best that I can
understand it, is the first article that he has provided to you is dated November 21st, 1963, from The St. Louis Post Dispatch.
A. Is that November 22nd?
Q. What did I say?
A. 21st. It's real hard to read.
Q. And then what I see as the last St. Louis --
A. June.
Q. Post article would be June 29th, 1964.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. So he sent documents to you for about a seven-month period, between the end of 1963 and the beginning of 1964.
A. That's right. I told him to stop halfway through the year. We were operating under a deadline. Initially, this was -- this
deposition was scheduled for January, and then it got pushed back, which gave us more time. But I wanted -- I wanted to know
the fall-out, how the Surgeon General's Report was reported in the local press because that is such a -- it's an important milestone
in the history of the public's awareness of the risks of smoking.
Q. And for The St. Louis Argus weekly newspaper, I have a beginning date, at least on the copies that Mr. Lubitino provided
to you, of Friday, August 2nd, 1963, through Friday, October 8th, 1965.
A. Right.
Q. And that, in sum and substance, is the material that he has provided to you as a result of your research assignment to him?
A. Uh-huh. Yes. For the local materials.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. And you indicated in your prior answer that you were running short of time and so you cut it off. Has there been any further
research on his part in any of the St. Louis or Missouri newspapers?
A. Not yet. I would like for him to, you know, look a little bit more around that time period, but given the age of the plaintiff,
I don't see it being particularly valuable to go back to the early '50s, for example, when she was not capable of reading or
when she was a child.
There's one area in which I want him to look into, and that is some public education materials that may or may not be unique
to St. Louis, to see what was used in the African-American schools.
Q. Has he been working on those tasks or have they not been provided to him yet?
A. I have not provided it to him. He's a little bit busy right now, and in consultation with Ms. Lumaghi, I was going to see
what her budget was for this kind of research. Any additional materials I get, I'll immediately forward to Ms. Lumaghi, and
therefore, onto you.
Q. You said you didn't see it particularly valuable to go back into the early '50s and review newspaper articles in the St. Louis
area. Would you agree that those articles may provide a source of information to older people who, in turn, were a source of
information for Ms. Hale?
A. Well, that would be -- that would be one way to think of it. Given the constraints of time, my data set of the national press,
Reader's Digest, Life, Time, Newsweek, some of which is here, but I think we all know what those articles are, gives me a firm,
you know, sense as to what the general information that was being released at that time period. The films that I have, electronic
media exhibits, national TV broadcasts covered that period.
So the local newspaper has been, in this litigation, exalted to a position that it really ought not to enjoy, as far as a transmission
of information.
Q. You would agree that one of the early studies in the early '50s was done by people at St. Louis University or Washington
University in St. Louis?
A. Yes. Of course, Mr. Winter.
Q. And you've not gone back to see how the St. Louis press, in and of itself, treated those studies?
A. No, not yet. Given limited time and a prioritization, I think you start with what's going on at the time that the person is
beginning or likely to beginning to smoke, and then worked back from there. I fully expect that the Winter and Graham research
got wide publicity. It got wide national publicity, and was reported, you know, in, you know, newspapers of record like The
New York Times, but even more widely in popular magazines, like Life.
Q. Have you verified whether the work that Mr. Lubitino did for you and provided, at least in Exhibit 10, is complete?
A. No. To do that would be to go and do the work over again, myself, that I asked him to do. There didn't seem to be much
point to that. I'm relying on my sense of his responsibility, which I have a high sense of that, and his recommendation and his
training as a historian. And he'll soon be a full-fledged member of my profession, and is a bright, industrious and careful fellow.
The evidence, as it's presented to me, too, is completely consistent with the kinds of coverage that other newspapers have.
There's no -- there's nothing in that data set to make me think that anything is missing.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
(Exhibit 24 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. I'm handing you what's been marked as Exhibit Number 24. This is The St. Louis Post Dispatch article on January 11th,
1964, announcing the Surgeon General's Report. Do you see that?
A. Yes. This is your copy of it. There's a copy in the data set, as well.
Q. Is there one in there? Would you mind taking a look and seeing if you can find that? And I believe that they're all in date order.
A. Here is the January 12th.
Q. And that, of course, is not the January 11th article, which is in Exhibit Number 24?
A. Well, you know, I mean, the paper may have had, you know, multiple editions. Oh, I know. I told him to be sure to check
January 12th to get the coverage of the story. I assumed it was a morning paper. It was my understanding that The Post Dispatch
was a morning paper, but it looks like they came out with a later Saturday edition.
Q. And you would agree that he missed the later Saturday edition that says, U.S. panel -- the headline of which read “U.S. Panel
Says Cigarettes Are a Major Cause of Deadly Disease”?
A. Well, this headline says, “Scientific Team Calls Smoking of Cigarettes a Major Hazard,” so --
Q. My question is very simple. You would agree that he missed the Saturday, January 11th, 1964, front page, top of the line,
St. Louis Post article that says, “U.S. Panel Says Cigarettes Are Major Cause of Deadly Diseases.”
A. He didn't -- no. I -- well, I told him to get me the Kennedy assassination, and then go and get the coverage of the Surgeon
General's Report, which I told him would begin on the 12th. I had assumed that the paper would save it for the edition for
the next morning.
He has in here a selection from The Everyday Magazine, dated January 11th.
Q. So, in response to your telling him to get the Surgeon General's Report from January 12th, he also went back and found
things from that source from January 11th, but he missed the front-page article from the St. Louis Post Dispatch, on the date
the Surgeon General's report was issued.
A. Yes. I'll have to contact him and find out if this was on the microfilm that he consulted, if his microfilm had this. But, you
know, it's inconsequential. It's essentially the same story.
Q. So is it your testimony that the January 11th version, missing that on the topic that you asked him to look at, is
inconsequential?
A. No. The differences are inconsequential between the stories.
Q. Does it concern you that he missed an article on the date that the Surgeon General's Report was issued?
A. No. Because I told him to check it on the 12th, assuming that it would be covered the next day.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Do you agree --
MS. LUMAGHI:
Please let Dr. Kyriakoudes finish his answer before you ask another question.
A. Well, he has this little incidental magazine from the 11th. The way microfilm works, you get this -- you think it's always
for previous issues, like it's pages on a book, but that's a lot of distance on microfilm. If he was looking for the 12th, he found
the 12th.
I don't really know what the -- there's no mention of cigarettes in this Everyday Magazine publication. This was probably at the
end of the -- at the end of the issue of the Saturday paper or the beginning of the Sunday issue.
Q. Now, at least in Exhibit 24, the Saturday, January 11th, St. Louis Post Dispatch, the only comment by the Tobacco Institute
is that the institute is reviewing the report and will make an announcement after the initial review?
A. That seems to me what they said in all of the papers. This is simply an AP wire story. There's nothing unique about this to
St. Louis. Again, going back to what I said earlier, as is typical, and this is why local papers are really overrated as sources of
information. Simply an AP wire story that they published.
Of course, the industry would have to, you know -- that's what their common statement was. But later, they did offer denials.
Q. But there's no denial in this article?
A. I'll take your word for it. I could sit here and read it, but I believe you.
Q. Do you know whether Stella Hale read The St. Louis Post Dispatch?
A. Now, wait a minute. Now, as I'm -- can we go back -- before I agree to -- a spokesman for the tobacco -- I might be reading
this wrong. “A spokesman for the tobacco industry said that the institute is reviewing the report and will make an announcement
after...” Can you help me see this? Where does it pick up? Oh, after this initial announcement.
Q. It's doubled on the pages so we've got the whole article.
A. Yes. That's fine. Oh, you had asked me a question about Ms. Stella Hale.
Q. Yes. Do you know if she read The St. Louis Post Dispatch?
A. No. I don't know if there's been testimony that she read it or not.
(Exhibit 25 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Okay. And, sir, I also want to mark as Exhibit 25 a -- I'll call it a cartoon from the January 15th issue. And I will tell you
that there is a copy of that in your materials, although since it is a smaller copy, I decided to use that. Can you describe for
me this cartoon?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Uh-huh. This is by, I believe, it's Bill Modlin. This was a widely circulated cartoon, and it is called Guilty As Charged, and
it is depicting the cigarette as a tombstone, cross.
Q. Stuck in a grave?
A. Yes. Right.
Q. And this would imply what to you?
A. That Mr. Modlin believed cigarettes to be deadly.
Q. And also that the Surgeon General's Report found the cigarettes guilty as charged?
A. Yes. As Luther Terry said, I believe it was appropriately, remedial action was his call from that.
Q. Okay.
(Off the record.)
(Exhibit 26 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to hand you what's been marked as Exhibit 26. And I will also tell you that I reviewed the documents that
Mr. Lubitino provided to you, and this document is not in there either.
This is a January 26, 1964, St. Louis Dispatch article, talking about a survey that was done at one of the local senior high schools
with regard to their smoking since the Surgeon General's Report.
Just to confirm, is this something that Mr. Lubitino did not provide to you?
A. If it's not in this stack, it's not part of the materials that he sent me.
Q. So this would be something that he missed again?
A. Well, I guess so, in this case. This one could not be accounted for by my direction that he start on the 12th, after beginning
with the Kennedy assassination.
Q. And this one reflects that more than half of the students that were surveyed or polled or studied at Hazelwood Senior High
have either stopped or reduced the smoking habit since the government said cigarettes endanger health?
A. I'll have to review that. Only one-third of them are smoking. Only 6.6 percent of the mothers who smoked stopped. 7.2
percent of the fathers. This is very interesting.
Q. And it reflects that over half. And actually, if you look at the numbers on the second page, about 52 percent of the students,
high school students have either stopped or reduced the habit since the Surgeon General's Report?
A. That's what it says. It says that they reported that. You want to know how that was maintained. That's the problem with the
snapshot of the poll. You don't know how things develop. It's just catching it at one moment in time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Well, this would show, at least in this snapshot of these people that the Surgeon General's Report in 1964 had an effect in
at least over half the people, correct?
A. Yes. So 48 and change, 48 percent, it didn't have an effect, yes, correct.
Q. Now, your report also indicates that you rely on magazine articles, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And are there magazines that you've conducted what you believe to be a comprehensive review of the magazine?
A. Yes.
Q. What magazines are they?
A. The major national news weeklys, Life Magazine, Time Magazine, U.S. News & World Report, Newsweek. I've also looked
at Saturday Evening Post.
Q. And in each of those magazines, for what time period did you conduct your review?
A. I began my review, 1950.
Q. And what time did you --
A. I've taken it through the mid 1960s, farther for Life and Time; less so for Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report, using
the Reader's Guide. It's a periodical literature, which is a standard index, looking under cigarettes, smoking, smoking and health
and those kinds of entries. I've also, in the '50s, just simply read through Life, Time and Newsweek, as well.
Q. Is that where you go through an archive and just flip through each of the magazines?
A. Yes. Just get the bound journal off the shelf and just go through them --
Q. You've done that through the 1950s for Time, Life and Newsweek?
A. Yes. Where I've just read the thing, you know, without regard to the index, but I've used the periodic -- the Reader's Guide
to Periodic Literature for the broader period.
Q. You indicated, on Page 5 of your report, that Harper's Weekly was the leading news magazine in the mid 19th Century?
A. Yes. We're going back in time there, yes.
Q. Now, did you conduct a systematic and thorough review of Harper's Weekly?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. For what years?
A. For the 1850s through the 18 -- through 1875.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Was there a reason why you didn't continue further on past 1875?
A. Yes. I relied on a source called Harpweek. A very industrious company has taken this magazine for the civil war era and
made it machine readable.
Q. That's a web site you can go to?
A. Well, yes. It's a subscription web site. You have to subscribe. The fees are quite high. Most major research libraries have
access to it, and that's where I accessed it. And it's eminently searchable and very easy to use.
Q. Did you look in the Reader's Guide for articles of interest after 1875 or did your research stop at 1875?
A. The Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature begins around 1909.
Q. That's a bad question on my part.
A. That's all right. That's an obscure piece of knowledge. But there are some 19th Century indexes.
I relied, instead, Atlantic Monthly is available in a similar format for most of the 19th Century, and there are a series of other
19th Century news magazines.
Q. Well --
A. That I've used.
Q. Let me go back. After 1875, did you continue your review in any of -- in any form of Harper's Weekly?
A. No. No. The -- and the reason is that, you know, going back that far in time, considering the issues that I've been working
with or taking place in post World War II, primarily, doesn't warrant the expenditure of time and effort.
Q. Okay. You also mentioned Atlantic Monthly, both in your testimony and in your report.
A. Yes.
Q. For what years of Atlantic Monthly did you conduct a review?
A. That is available in a similar format for maybe the whole 19th Century. I forget the exact ending dates and beginning dates.
That's a very old magazine. I believe it began in the 1850s and is still in publication.
But, yes, I followed that one more extensively. And there were others. I didn't cite everything in the report.
Q. I understand that. That's why you've brought all these documents here.
A. Yes. I didn't bring my 19th Century materials. They just didn't seem relevant to this particular case.
Q. After the 19th Century, did you continue your review of Atlantic Monthly to the present time?
A. No. No. I focused on -- in fact, even in the 1950s, there are not many stories in The Atlantic Monthly on the issue. Some.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. You also mentioned in your report, Reader's Digest.
A. Yes.
Q. For what time period did you review Reader's Digest articles?
A. Goes back to the late 1920s, which is about the beginning of their -- of the magazine. You know, it's well-known, by their
own admission, had about 36 articles on cigarettes and smoking between the 1920s and mid 1960s.
Q. So you've -- is it accurate to say you conducted a systematic review from the 1920s through the mid 1960s?
A. Yes. And I've seen all the relevant Reader's Digest pieces.
Q. How did you conduct that review?
A. You know, Reader's Digest has an index. It's indexed in the Reader's Guide. But the bound issues of the Reader's Digest also
have an index. In fact, the 1959 edition of the Reader's Digest I had used at the University of North Carolina had a retrospective
ten-year index, which was very helpful in finding the 15 or so cigarette stories that appeared over that decade.
I've also accumulated a terrific amount of material that's been sent to me as part of the litigation process. Particularly, in the
last year or so, I've had -- that saved me from having to use the photocopier as much.
Q. Who were they sent to you by?
A. Oh, the Eubanks firm sent me a bunch of defense exhibits leading up to the Burner trial. I had already gone through Reader's
Digest at that time but hadn't photocopied all of the articles because that's so boring, to stand in front of the photocopier doing
that, taking notes. But in accumulating my collection of the actual photocopies, I've benefited from things that had been sent
to me.
Q. So you had reviewed them before, just didn't make copies of them --
A. Right.
Q. And then Mr. -- is it Eubanks?
A. Actually, the attorney's name was a guy named Gary Holt.
Q. So Mr. Holt provided you copies of the Reader's Digest articles that the defense historian used, and you incorporated those
into your collection?
A. Yes. It's just simply a way to not have to go through the tedium of making my own photocopies.
Q. And Reader's Digest, at least in your report, you indicate that it's a national magazine?
A. Yes.
Q. I think it's on Page 8.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. This one is missing the page numbers. Well, in any case -- oh, yes. I cite the subject index of Reader's Digest. Yes. Oh,
there's no question Reader's Digest is leading on this issue. I mean, they are really -- they're pushing this harder, the implication
of cigarettes and cancer.
Q. Okay.
A. Harder than any other magazine.
Q. Do you know if Stella Hale read the Reader's Digest?
A. I don't.
Q. Did Reader's Digest accept cigarette advertising?
A. No.
Q. And in addition to being a national magazine that was pushing this issue hard, the writers of those articles also received
some awards for their writing on this issue, correct?
A. Yes. The husband and wife -- a husband and wife team. I'm forgetting their name. But the man and woman that --
Q. And I understand one is Lois Maddox Miller?
A. Yes.
Q. And I don't know if the man is her husband or not, but that team, they received awards for their writing?
A. Yes. Sure. Yes. They also met with TIRC representatives.
Q. And, obviously, the TIRC didn't change their mind at all on anything they wrote, did it?
A. No.
Q. Were there any other magazines that you've conducted reviews for this case other than the articles that we've talked about?
A. Oh, other titles of magazines? No. I've -- those are -- did I mention one, Saturday Evening Post?
Q. You did. The reason I ask is, one of these exhibits has some Ebony articles in it.
A. Oh, yes. Yes.
Q. See, I'm not trying to trick you. I'm just trying to make sure that we're thorough.
A. Yes.
Q. Exhibit 17 has --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yes. This is my own -- yes. This is -- I conducted this thinking that -- I had not turned to Ebony previously because no
African-American plaintiffs were involved, but since Ms. Hale, of course, was an African-American woman, I reviewed Ebony.
I also looked at -- in the Reader's Guide of Periodical Literature, what Jet had published on the issue of cigarettes.
Q. Let me see Exhibit 16. As I interpret it, you have copies made from --
A. '68, '69.
Q. Okay. November 1968 through October 1969.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. What was the method that you used to conduct a review of Ebony?
A. I sat down with the Reader's Guide of Periodical Literature. Ebony and Jet are two magazines that are part of their indexing
purview. And just went through, beginning in 1953. I sat down with the '53 to '55 issue, and went through and looked for stories
on cigarettes and the cigarette index heading, to which were in Ebony and Jet.
Q. Did you find anything?
A. I didn't find anything.
Q. Okay.
A. Now, it's possible that there may be some small mentions of cigarettes in relation to health in those magazines that the
indexing service missed, possibly, but, you know, we're looking for probabilities here and significant coverage, and so it -- I
didn't see anything.
Q. Okay. You began in the Reader's Guide in the 1953 to 1955 issue. How far out did you carry your review?
A. To the Surgeon General's Report, which in that particular volume, ended in early 1965. That seemed, to me, to give me a
sense of what its coverage was.
Q. Okay. Now, you've --
A. And I might add that technically, I actually started that way and worked my way backwards.
Q. You started in early 1965, that volume, and worked your way backwards?
A. Worked my way backwards.
Q. You have, in Exhibit 17, some advertisements or articles, things like that. How did you find those?
A. Well, having gone through the Reader's Guide and having basically come up dry, and having been a little surprised at that,
I went to the first issue that was on the shelf in my library, and I said, well, you know, they've got to have something. I mean,
'69 was an important year. And I wanted, also, to get a sense as to what kind of advertising Ebony carried.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
So I went to the extend volumes in my university, which begins in '69. And I just opened up. I took some photocopies. This
is not -- you know, I took representative ads, Kool. I think I might have taken -- yes, just Kool. Oh, a Kent, of course, which
is not a Brown & Williamson product.
And I'm always interested in the social practice of smoking, so I thought, well, you know, as I'm going through this, is anybody
smoking? And, you know, funny, you know, they're advertising clothing but the models are smoking a cigarette.
Jerome Bennett, Jr., is the much esteemed long-time editor of Ebony magazine and also a figure of first rank as a scholar of
African-American life, and I thought it was interesting that his picture, which accompanies an excerpt from his book, “Before
the Mayflower” -- oh, I -- I stand corrected. The excerpt is from a book called the “Negro Mood,” he's smoking, although it
looks like he's smoking a cigar, not a cigarette.
Q. I was going to say, it looks like a cigar to me.
A. I thought that was interesting.
Q. Why didn't you copy the Kent advertisement?
A. I don't know. It was just another ad. I copied a few other ads, too, like Salem. There seemed to be a lot of mentholated
cigarette ads in this paper but didn't include them for you. I think the Kent one just got stuck in there.
Q. Well, are you saying that you, in addition to the articles and the pages that are in Exhibit 17, are you saying that there are
additional copies that you made that you haven't produced?
A. Well, I-- I did take a couple of -- like, literally two other ads of non Brown & Williamson products, I think from the same
magazine. I think I might have pulled those just simply because you don't make those. I'll look for them. They're literally just
like this.
Q. Would you agree that Brown & Williamson is not responsible for advertisements made by other cigarette manufacturers?
A. Yes. Brown & Williamson, I mean, clearly, is advertising their own products and they're not advertising the products
manufactured by other people, nor are they hiring the advertising agencies of other competitors' products.
Cigarette advertising -- there are certain periods of time when cigarette advertising is significantly health oriented, so it seems
to me that the way that cigarettes are portrayed in advertisements generally has some bearing on what the public thinks about
cigarette smoking, in general. Particularly, this is true of the period before, let's say, the late 1950s, when health claims are
more explicit and become less implicit in the advertising.
Q. Did those advertisements, themselves, by making health claims, indicate that there are some health concerns with smoking?
A. Yes. Now, that, I think, is an accurate point, and then the advertisements go to minimize or if they don't minimize, they
argue that their particular product doesn't suffer from the health concerns.
But the issue is not do people think cigarettes were positively good for them. I don't think that's the case at any point in time, on
the cigarette product. Did they think they might cause some minor problems with smoking? I think that was widespread. And
you could -- the advertising gives you a good sense of that because advertising is in conversation with the public.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
So when there's -- and these are not Brown & Williamson products, but when there's no cough in a Carlo or no cigarette
hangover involved with a Philip Morris product, they're making a claim that the immediate symptom that you might feel from
smoking is not a problem.
Now, one Brown & Williamson product which they do talk about in the report, Viceroy, is a little bit different than that one,
played on the filter as a health element, which Kent and other companies also did.
Q. And the Viceroy ads that you referred to in your report were ads that appeared in the early 1950s; is that right?
A. Yes. These are 1952 advertisements.
Q. Okay. You said before that the issue of whether smoking causes some minor problems with smoking, you think that was
widespread, are you referring to in the 1940, 1950 time frame when this advertising was going on?
A. Yes. I could go back even earlier.
Q. When you refer to minor problems, what are you talking about?
A. Harshness on the throat.
Q. Giving you a sore throat?
A. Smoked-out feeling, irritation, what I would call, you know, the symptoms of smoke -- of smoking the cigarette.
Q. What is a smoking hangover?
A. Philip Morris talked about that a lot. I'm not a cigarette smoker, so I don't really know, but my sense of it is it's probably
just kind of a dried out, irritated throat from having smoked all day, but that's my guess. That's certainly more meaningful to
early 1950s smokers than it is today.
Q. You had talked about some additional things that you might have the research assistant in St. Louis do, and one of the things
that you mentioned were educational materials. Is it accurate to say that you've not conducted a survey or review of materials
that were used in St. Louis to educate students?
A. That's true. I have not looked at that. I want to look at that. I've looked at educational materials, generally, and like with
newspapers, these things tend to be driven from a national perspective. Groups like the AMA and the National Education
Association would issue guidelines.
Q. And I believe you talked about that earlier this morning.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Is it accurate to say you don't know whether those guidelines were accepted or complied with in St. Louis?
A. That's right. That's something, at this point, I don't know. I would like to know.
Q. You have not reviewed any textbooks that were utilized by any St. Louis school systems?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. I've reviewed many textbooks. Some may have been used by St. Louis and may not, but I need to find out which ones
within, you know, reasonable level of certainty. Sometimes that information is tough to come by but --
Q. And what is included in textbooks that were used to educate the youth can impact on common knowledge?
A. That's another source to consider, for sure.
Q. Would it be important to know what, if any, information was actually in the textbooks used by Mrs. Hale?
A. Well, if it's possible to get to that degree of certainty, you know, and to identify the specific book and to know that she took
a specific course that used that specific book. I don't know that that is known right now. If it is known, let me know and we'll
try to hunt that down. But barring that.
Then you look at, you know, the broad array of what are prevailing textbooks at the time, and hopefully, there will be some
piece of information that will indicate which one of them might have been chosen by the school system. Now, you know --
so that's something to know.
Now, there are problems with that. The first and foremost which is, you know, in an age when a bit over half the population
smoked, how persuasive is a teacher's message on the evils of cigarettes going to be when, you know, the teacher's smoking
lounge is bellowing smoke. But it's still a source.
Q. Let's go up a degree, then, from the Stella Hale specific. Would it be important to know what information was actually in
the textbooks that were used in the St. Louis area, as impacting on the perceptions of people in the St. Louis community?
A. Well, I wouldn't be surprised. Sure. That would be good to know. But I would be surprised that a health textbook would talk
about what the people in the community knew at that time, if that's what you are asking me.
Q. Well, would it have an impact on the perception that is held by the community?
A. Well, it would -- you know, that impact would be strongest in the students that are using that textbook, and then it would
diminish greatly as you move farther away from those individuals.
Q. Okay. One of the things we talked about today was sources of music that you looked at. Have you done -- have you conducted
a systematic or comprehensive review of music about smoking and health?
A. I have some indicators of popular music which were likely not listened to by Mrs. Hale. This is a little bit harder to do,
but I've been trying -- I'm not much of an R&B expert. I mean, I have published on the Grand ‘Ole Opry. I know a great deal
about country music. But of the music that Mrs. Hale was likely to listen to, I'm still working on ways to get that. That's a
little bit more difficult to do.
Q. Do you know what kind of music she listened to?
A. No. But I'm assuming that popular music that might have been popular amongst African-Americans of her age at that time
period would be where I would go. Because even if, hypothetically, let's say she had a great love for opera, which may have
been the case, but her friends would have been listening to popular music and she would have heard it even in her contacts.
Q. You said you had some indicators in popular music. From where did you get these indicators?
A. Well, you know, the well-known, “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke,” which is a great late 1940s country standard, but that's about it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Is that the only --
A. That's the only one I know of.
Q. And where did you get the “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke” reference?
A. Well, I had known about that song for a long time, but -- and when I learned that it had been used in this litigation by defense
historians, I thought, well, yes, that makes sense. I can see why they would do that. So I knew about it because it's a -- it was
a million selling record, one of the biggest country hits after World War II.
Q. Okay. Have you looked for other songs other than the “Smoke, Smoke, Smoke”?
A. I have kept my net open, but I really haven't found much. You know, the references to smoke, from the music that I listen to,
beginning in the 1970s, would refer to a different kind of smoking, which Brown & Williamson has no connection whatsoever to.
Q. Do you -- when you say you've kept my -- kept your net open or I've kept my net open, what does that mean? Does it mean
you are out there looking for it or you are just kind of sensitive if somebody mentions something, you can go explore it or
something totally different?
A. Well, you know, I'm -- I'm in the library a lot and I'm going through all kinds of things as I conduct my various research
projects. And, you know, it's amazing what I find when I'm not intentionally looking at it. I'm looking at, you know, 19th
Century magazines for another purpose and, boom, I might find something talking about tobacco; not so much cigarettes at
that time, but tobacco.
So that's what I mean. You know, I come across stuff, even when I'm not purposefully looking for it. That's what I mean by that.
Particularly on these more obscure -- I mean, you sit down and you look at the newspapers and you look at the major magazines,
you go and you look at it. But references to songs, things that are more ephemeral, less systematic, more idiosyncratic even.
Q. You also mentioned some films here today, “From Here to Eternity” and things like that.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Have you conducted a systematic or comprehensive review of American film on this topic?
A. Well, this is what my method was on that one. Okay. There is a lot of smoking going in films. Let's start looking at leading
films. In my case, I started in the '40s. I have some earlier films in which you just know that the cigarette is important, Humphrey
Bogart, Loren Bacall films. What is the German actress that starred in “The Blue Angel”? Marlena Detrick. I mean, those are
obvious places to start.
So I looked at, beginning in the late '40s, Academy Award winning movies that are not historical dramas. Like “Ben Hur” and
“Spartacus” don't count, but movies like “The Apartment,” “From Here to Eternity”. What is the Betty Davis film? I believe it
won the best picture award in 1950. “All About Eve.” I'm kind of reaching deep into the memory there. I looked at these movies.
I looked at other movies which -- you know, to be honest, defense historians had said that these movies discussed smoking and
health. I certainly looked at those. That would be movies like “A Letter to Three Wives,” and “Damn Yankees.” What is the
Paul Newman, Gerald Lee Page film, around 1960, '61? I'm just not remembering the title.
Q. Is that in one of these disks?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. No. I have a smaller subset of that. I mean, I've watched a lot of movies. And, you know, I keep up on that, but I've
included kind of the top ones in there.
Q. Now, as I understand your methodology, you began by looking at Academy Award winning films that were not historical
accounts beginning in 1949?
A. Yes, late '40s, yes.
Q. For how long did you go?
A. To 1960. “The Apartment” being, I believe that's the 1960 best picture winner.
Q. And then you also looked at movies that are -- or films that were referred to by defense historians?
A. Yes. Because that's interesting, and really, you know, kind of tried to see if these were evaluated properly and if they were
characterized properly.
Q. And was there any other aspect of your method or methodology that you haven't mentioned other than these two?
A. No. That's how I went about that. You know, and if I hear about a film that -- you know, I ask around because I just don't
want to sit and watch movie after movie after movie. But if I hear about a film from somebody that has some mention of
smoking or along those lines.
For example, over the 4th of July, I was on vacation, and I saw a movie which actually referred to, I believe in this report, a
John Wayne movie, called “The Wings of Eagles,” along that -- I believe that's the title. And that was just on the Ted Turner's
movie channel, Turner Network Television. And I've always liked John Wayne movies, so I started watching this one. And
I know that John Wayne was a smoker. And “The Wings of Eagles,” 1957. And this one was a particularly interesting, you
know, portrayal of smoking.
Q. Is the -- did you make an excerpt or media clip from --
A. I have yet to do that. I'm a member of Net Flicks, and the last time I checked, they did not have this in their inventory. If I
get it on -- a videotape, it doesn't do me any good because I don't have a way to record that. But if I get a DVD, my computer
now allows me to copy an excerpt. That's --
Q. And how much time was dedicated to looking at these Academy Award winning films? Was it actually going and getting
a VHS tape or a DVD and reviewing --
A. Watching the movie.
Q. For 11 years. So you watched -- well, I guess less than 11 films because Ben Hur, you had to take out?
A. Yes. Spartacus was a winner one year. Yes. And, you know, I watched them with my family who, if you think about movies
from that period, you can do that.
I'm looking for things that illustrate the social practice of smoking. That's really what the movies tell me. I know that, say, for
example, defense historians have been interested in movies that -- where they characterize the cigarette, the use of slang or
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
some other method, and I certainly, you know, evaluated that aspect of the evidence. But my interest was more in portraying
the social practice of smoking. That's a little bit different.
Q. Okay. In terms of the films or the movies that the defense historians used, would you then go out and rent those tapes or
DVDs and review those?
A. Most of them, yes. I didn't watch “Damn Yankees”. That's one I haven't watched all the way through. I've seen that movie
before. That would be one of them. But some, yes, I did. Like “A Letter to Three Wives,” it's actually a very good movie,
that one, yes.
Q. Did you obtain from any of the plaintiffs' counsel that you've worked with before excerpts of movies or excerpts of films?
A. Yes. And let me explain this because I never fully explained it.
Back in November of 2002, I went down to Florida to meet with a group of plaintiffs' attorneys, Woody Wilner and people in
his firm. I went to Jacksonville. And Mr. Howard Acosta, who lives in Tampa, came up for that. And they talked about movies.
And I said, look, you know, I see how the defense historians have used films, and I think films are important, and films illustrate
social practices of smoking. And I said to Howard Acosta, who is most interested in this, I said, Howard, you know, what would
be nice is a more extensive -- I mean, we're talking specifically about “From Here to Eternity” which has always been a favorite
film of mine. I said, you know, Howard, this -- I understand they've used that section on Frank Sinatra saying, give me a nail,
in reference to that slang term, coffin nail. But there's a lot more in that movie, and if somebody could edit it down to three
minutes of just scenes, typical scenes, that would be a nice thing to have.
And, at that time, my computer was an ancient piece of junk, to put it honestly, and I did not have the ability to do that. And Mr.
Acosta seemed to be what the electronics industry would call an early adopter. So he went and did that, and then we reviewed
it together at Christmas time, that December of 2002. Where I said, you know, this is exactly the kind of thing I was thinking
about. You know, we just take selected excerpts.
So that excerpt that I have on that CD, he actually -- and I believe he, himself, sat down and did the more time-consuming
excerpting work for that. So that -- that's how that one arrived at.
Q. That was something that Mr. Acosta created for you then?
A. Yes. At my suggestion and in consultation with me.
Q. Okay. He reviewed that movie and created the excerpt for you?
A. Well, I was very familiar with the movie and I said -- yes. You know, at my suggestion, you know, get this edited down.
Just open up -- there's quite a lot of smoking in that film. Not so much to highlight the use of the slang term for cigarette, coffin
nail, or in this case, nail, but to show, you know, the social practice of smoking for, you know, adults in, you know, the late
1940s and early 1950s, just what it was like.
And this was for a trial that was -- he was getting ready for, the Eastman v. Philip Morris trial, which the age would have been
particularly relevant. He was a particularly young man at the time. I do want to clarify on that particular one.
Q. Do the early films like that have any relevance in your mind to this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, I think they illustrate the social practice of smoking in the 1950s, just what people did, you know. It was once socially
acceptable to smoke in places where today it no longer is socially acceptable.
And that's -- that, to me, is the real value of the films. I can tell people, but my experience as a teacher has been that when I can
show a video clip or a picture of something, my undergraduate students respond to it much more than me simply describing it.
And I look at my testimony as teaching undergraduates, so I use the same, you know, method, if you will.
Q. You also testified about television. Have you conducted a systematic review of television shows or advertisements or things
like that?
A. Yes. As much as I can, I've been ordering from older television programs. There are these archiving companies that do -- that
collect cigarette commercials, all commercials, including cigarette commercials, and have acquired materials from those places.
There's also, for a later period, the late '60s, and especially the 1970s, an archive of television news at Vanderbilt University,
Vanderbilt TV archives, and I've reviewed materials there.
Q. You actually went down to Nashville and reviewed it?
A. Yes. I've used those archives a great deal. I went to graduate school there and go to Nashville all the time.
Q. Now, in terms of the archiving companies that collect commercials, from what time periods did you review or request
information?
A. '50s to early '70s. Early '50s to early '70s.
Q. And is that done by looking at a flier or listing that the archive company has and then ordering them or how do you go
about doing it?
A. Yes. Yes. I've ordered -- I've got about five hours of cigarette commercials and -- including some of the PSAs, the public
service announcements from the late 1960s, under the Fairness Doctrine period. And included in that, also, is -- you wouldn't
call it a commercial, but aspects from 1950s era TV shows in which they're basically advertising the cigarette in the context
of the program.
Q. Much like the way some of the Jerry Seinfeld episodes advertised Pepsi or something like that? They would have a Pepsi
can with Pepsi pointed out to the audience and drinking it, and setting it down while he and Kramer or somebody like that
was talking, is it similar to that?
A. A little bit more explicit. I didn't realize that was part of the Seinfeld show.
Q. The only reason I said that, I saw that the other night and it struck me.
A. Is that right? Yes. This is more along the lines of Jack Benny and -- what is the actor in “The Big Sleep”? You know who I'm
talking about. Lauren Bacall's foil, the male version of what she's up against. He plays Philip Marlow, “The Maltese Falcon.”
Q. Whatever. Jack Benny and whoever.
A. You know, literally, you know, pitching the cigarette as part of the program or doing a comedy routine where Fred, I believe
it was William Hailey, who played in the “I Love Lucy” show, he was a landlord, come in and he wants a Camel cigarette from
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
the top of the pile, and the comedy routine is they have to somehow get -- it's part of -- the '50s were particularly inelegant,
not nearly as subtle or sophisticated as the Jerry Seinfeld show.
Q. And in terms of placing those advertisements in context, if you will, have you ordered or reviewed television commercials
for other consumer products?
A. I've looked at other consumer products.
Q. Like what?
A. Well, on these tapes, they have other products. They have, you know, food, TV dinners, Swanson TV dinners, pitches for
automobiles, things like that.
Q. Okay.
A. I teach -- in my business history class, we deal with the rise of consumerism, and kind of the way that people forge their
identity as a component of a modern industrial economy. So I actually have this project where I ask them to go and look at all
forms of advertising, and I use some on-line resources that are very good at the Hartman Center for Advertising at Duke.
Q. In addition to ordering commercials from the archiving company and going to the Vanderbilt TV archives, have you received
any of the television information that you rely upon or that you use from any other sources?
A. Well, on that disk, I -- my copy of the Timothy Hartnett statement, and there's also an interview with Clarence Little, those
come from a film documentary that I have in my possession called “Smoke and Mirrors,” the American Cancer Society, and
they're taken from that. But I've checked those against the transcripts of the Murrow programs, which I do have, and have
authenticated them that way.
Q. Where did you obtain the “Smoke and Mirrors” documentary by the American Cancer Society?
A. Oh, I've had that for a few years.
Q. The reason I'm asking is, for example, we were talking about films, for example, where you said you got some material
from Mr. Acosta.
A. The movie I told you about.
Q. And when we were talking about some of these other sources, you indicated you got some documents from other plaintiffs'
counsel. And I'm just trying to figure out, other than the television materials that you ordered from the archives company and
that you obtained at the Vanderbilt TV archives, have you received any television information you relied upon or that you used
from any of the plaintiffs' counsel, whether it be from them or whether it be something that a defense historian utilized?
A. Yes. I have a collection of defense video exhibits that were sent to me by a New York attorney named Stuart Finn. They were
in an American Tobacco case. You know, people send me stuff. That was not part of any litigation. It was just sending it to me.
Q. It was part of the litigation in the sense that they were defense video exhibits, right?
A. Correct. Let me -- you are right. I was inaccurate. I was not involved in the case.
Q. Has Mr. Finn retained you in any of his cases?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. He has, but none of those have reached the level where there's depositions or anything like that. I supplied an expert report
for him last summer and that's the extent of it.
Q. How many cases have you been retained for by Stuart Finn, in terms of his smoking and health cases?
A. I sent him one expert report, which he submitted three times, so I think three times. But, again, nothing has come of those.
I don't know their status or --
Q. When he submits them in subsequent cases, does he call and get your approval or is that just understood that he can do that?
A. Well, they have to be signed by me. Typically, these things have to be signed by me. So he would have to call me to get
my approval.
Q. Okay.
A. I mean, I had to get them notarized.
Q. And I believe you indicated that on one of these disks is a media file containing news stories, I think you said Harry Reasoner
or things like that?
A. Yes. That's from the CBS smoking and health special, 1964. That's excerpts. That excerpt, I did get from a plaintiffs' attorney,
and I am trying to get my own full copy because although I've seen the entire program, I would like to get the entire program
in a DVD form. I'm working on that.
Q. That indicates to me that less than the entire program is on this disk; is that right?
A. Right, excerpts. But I've seen the entire program and the entire program is worth showing to a jury.
Q. What attorney did you get that from, the CBS excerpt?
A. I brought that back with me when I went down to Jacksonville. I might have gotten it from either Howard or Woody, one of
those guys. I'm really not that sure who had it. I asked for it. It's hard to get video things. Print evidence is just so much easier to
get than video because it is so ephemeral. And then radio, of course, is just gone into the ether. And the unfortunate thing is that
they're so influential. As a scholar, that's what you really want, is particularly by the '60s, when people are really watching TV.
Q. You also made reference to slang. You mentioned nails or coffin nails or things like that. Have you conducted a
comprehensive review of slang terms and how they were used and understood?
A. I have, yeah.
Q. And when did you do that?
A. Oh, it's been some time, some time ago; a year ago, at least. More than a year ago.
Q. And did you do that in connection with any particular case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. Just, in general, covering that area. It would seem to me that the way slang is used and, you know, there are slang
terms for cigarettes and other tobacco products, just as there's slang terms for other intoxicants, if you will. And so I wanted
to look into that.
Q. What was the method that you used to research the slang?
A. Well, you know, that's pretty straightforward. You know, you go first to the Random House Historical Dictionary of Slang.
I think that's the title. It's the standard source for slang. And they list a number of slang terms with a sense of the etymology.
And then the Oxford English Dictionary is good, also, for slang, slang terms, even though it's not a slang dictionary, it's well-
documented. That's the first place you go.
And then you say, all right, I have a sense of what these terms are. Let's see how they are actually used in context. Slang is
textual context whose meaning -- you don't really get the full meaning of slang from a dictionary, even a slang dictionary. You
get just the bare bones minimum. And so let's see how that's used in practice.
That's one of the great things about the films, is they show use of slang in full context. Print materials also do this, but especially
so in film.
Q. What slang terms have you come across that refer to cigarettes or smoking or to tobacco?
A. Well, of course, there's coffin nail.
Q. And that's c-o-f-f-i-n?
A. Yes. That's the one everyone's interested in. There's devil's tooth pick, St. Stick, dope stick, little white slaver, early '60s,
cancer stick emerges. Those are the most important.
Q. Did you find any films or press that would place in context the term “cancer stick”?
A. Not films, not “cancer stick.” Not yet. I'm looking still.
Q. How about in any newspapers or magazines?
A. You do see reference, a cancer stick -- not in anything in St. Louis that I looked at but in -- I've seen “cancer stick” in press
in the mid to late '60s being used.
Q. And what is the impression that you get from looking at that material as to the use and meaning of “cancer stick”?
A. Well, you know, my position on slang is that slang is contextual language, that a cancer stick is a slang term for cigarette,
as is all those other terms. The shading of the meaning, which is only indicated by context, is a bit more ambiguous.
I mean, and the question that we're really interested in is does the fact that people call something a coffin nail or cancer stick
mean that they actually believe that it will kill them. And my research has been that when you actually look at how these things
are used, they don't indicate that. They're often used in a humorous fashion, a way that makes it clear that any risk is minimized,
and that is -- that is the thing about slang. Slang often doesn't mean what it says on the surface. It has a subtextual, sometimes
a subversive meaning, particularly because slang is used disproportionately by young people.
I explained it to the jury in the Frankson case this way: Shaquil O'Neal is bad. That doesn't mean he can't play basketball. In
fact, it means the opposite. It means that he's good. Terms like cool, when spelled with a C --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. I would like to restrict this just to the cancer stick.
A. Okay.
Q. What have you found, if anything, with regard to the shading of the meaning or the context in which “cancer stick” was used?
A. I can't recall. I seem to have -- I think I've come across something from the mid to late '60s, but that is -- unlike “coffin
nail,” that is a slang term that has been much less widely used, in my research, compared to the term “coffin nail,” which is
more widely used.
Q. Okay. But as you've indicated, and I think you said your testimony in Frankson was that if you look at the context of the use
of “coffin nail” and the shading of the meaning, it really doesn't convey the sense of danger or that it can kill you.
My question is, what have you found with regard to how “cancer stick” is used that can convey some meaning other than, this
is going to give you cancer?
A. Yes. I have -- again, I've -- I've seen a reference to the term “cancer stick” but it was in something in passing and I don't
have that -- I don't have that. So I'm not able to say right now, in essence, because I just don't have the examples of the use of
“cancer stick” in the course of my research that I have for “coffin nail,” which is a much more commonly used slang term.
The etymology of “cancer stick,” according to the slang dictionary, as it emerges around '59 to '60, there are disputes. People
identify its use variously there, and emerging among young people, and it doesn't seem to have been widely adopted until much
later. As far as my -- you know, my research is concerned.
Q. In Exhibit Number 19, which were the e-mails, there is an e-mail here by you to Mr. Lubitino that says, “I got the copies
yesterday. I'm grateful for your good work. Let me look at those and get in touch with you tomorrow about a couple of other
things to look at. I forwarded your bill with the addition of the postage to Dowd & Dowd. Best, Louis.”
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recall what other things you were going to get to him about?
A. Yes. I've already mentioned those, some health textbooks. He's teaching classes at St. Louis University. He's busy. And I
also got very busy with my work at the university. I haven't been able to fully get back with him.
Q. So do I understand you that you've already made the request of him to look at the health textbooks?
A. No. He's busy. I'm going to get back with him.
Q. So you haven't gotten back to him. This says you were going to, but you haven't gotten back to him yet?
A. No. No. Too busy.
Q. Just so the record is clear, you indicated that you were going to get back to him, but you haven't done it yet?
A. No. No. This came --
Q. No, you haven't done it or, no, I'm wrong?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Okay. I'm sorry. I apologize. I haven't gotten back in touch with Paul. I've just been swamped and he's been busy too.
Q. Now, in Exhibit 14, you provided at least two pages of The Saturday Evening Post, and you indicated that these were around
the time of the Surgeon General's Report.
The first one is dated January 18th, 1964, and then the second one is dated January 4 to 11, 1964. Do you see that there?
A. Yes.
Q. That seems to indicate to me that there's an issue that's missing between January 11th and January 18th. Is that the way
you interpret that?
A. No.
Q. Okay. Why is it that you say that?
A. Because January 11th is seven days -- January 18th is seven days after January 18th. So --
Q. If you have one volume from -- or one issue from January 4 to 11, wouldn't it make sense that you would have another
volume from January 11 to 18? Is it accurate to say that you believe that the January 18th issue is that issue?
A. I'll check. You know, I was -- my interest really was in the 18th because I guess if there was going to be a story on the
Surgeon General's report in the magazine, it would have been covered in this particular issue.
Q. Do you know what the production schedule was for The Saturday Evening Post? In other words, could they be two issues
ahead or something like that?
A. That may be the case, or behind in that case.
Q. Behind is a better word. So did you look beyond January 18th for any issues on the Surgeon General's Report?
A. Yes. No. I don't recall them covering the story or at least making it a front page story.
Q. Did you look through these issues beyond the front page to see if it was in there?
A. Yes. I thought so, yes. It's been a while since I did that. I just pulled the volume off the shelf and began looking through it.
Q. Okay. Let me take a look at your pile.
A. Sure.
(Off the record.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, I want to direct your attention to one of The Argus articles which Mr. Lubitino has obtained for you. And this is
from The St. Louis Argus, dated February 14th, 1964.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yes.
Q. And this is -- the article is entitled, “Doctor's Diagnosis, Smoking and Cancer,” by R. Jerome Williams, M.D. Do you see
that there?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that a medical advice column that appeared in Argus?
A. I think this is just a story. I don't believe this was a regular column, but this is definitely a story that discusses smoking and
cancer and says that smoking is implicated in cancer as a cause.
Q. And, in fact, it set forth at least four points from the Surgeon General's Report, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. The article begins, “The recent facts publicized by the United States Public Health Service should convince everyone that
smoking is definitely harmful.” Do you see that's the leading sentence?
A. Yes. That's what it says.
Q. And then after it sets forth the points set forth in the Surgeon General's Report, it says, “A smoker pays for the privilege
of injuring himself,” doesn't it?
A. Yes. That's what it says.
Q. And then it says, a little bit later in this article, “In spite of these facts, people continue smoking at an unabated pace.
The burning of a cigarette produces a radioactive substance called polonium, which when inhaled, slowly but surely sets up
cancer-producing mechanisms. Still smoking? Press on, brother. Eternity awaits you.” What does that article convey to you,
as a historian?
A. This is an example of a newspaper story that says that smoking is dangerous, that it will cause cancer. I don't know how
scientifically accurate his explanation of the mechanism is, but that's not really relevant. It's the fact that it does say that.
Q. And this is in 1964?
A. Right. Yes.
Q. And there aren't any tobacco industry rebuttals to that article?
A. Not to this one, no.
Q. Are you aware of there being any tobacco industry rebuttals in any of The Argus publications that you've seen?
A. No. There are two things about The Argus. One, there are no industry rebuttals in their stories. The other is, there's very
little information on smoking in that newspaper.
Q. Now, this article is somewhat specific, as well, leaving aside, for now, the issue of whether it was scientifically accurate or
not. It actually refers to a specific substance, polonium, which at least, in that article, is one of the cancer-causing agents?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yes. He says it is. I agree. It doesn't matter whether it is accurate or not. The person reading is going to be an average person,
not a scientist, and that's -- this is conveying the idea, quite specifically, that it's deadly.
Q. Being that this is an African-American weekly publication which primarily is sent to African-American audiences, would
that have an impact on the African-American community in St. Louis's perception of the harmfulness of smoking?
A. Some. In no way do I ever maintain that there isn't information out there that cigarettes, it is deadly. There's a lot of
information. And that it increases at certain points, like in the wake of the Surgeon General's Report, when it is a major national
news issue.
The key point here is, that you have to look at it in the context of all of the information in the newspaper. You can't simply take
this one little story out of context and say, aha. What is the newspaper really about?
Well, for example, look at the extensiveness of the cigarette advertising. There are a lot of ads that appeared regularly in The
Argus. Yes. They do have an antismoking or a smoking and cancer story, which says explicitly and without reservation, it's
bad for you, but, you know, they also champion the fact that, you know, when an African-American executive is promoted in
the Philip Morris Company and alike, this is newsworthy. So you have to look at it in the context of what's the full expression
of the newspaper.
Q. And also included in the context would be the article that we referred to, would be the fact that that was written by a physician?
A. That gives it additional credibility, to be sure. Something coming from a physician would have a lot more credibility than
something coming from, say, Ann Landers or Dear Abby, for example.
Q. How about something coming from an advertiser? Would something coming from a physician have more credibility than
something coming from an advertiser?
A. It would, you know, when you compare one advertisement to one story. But as a practical matter, what you get are these
isolated stories, or periodically, you'll get a story on, say, don't smoke, it's absolutely deadly, it's going to kill you in these ways,
and, yet, there is -- that's a drop in a rain storm when you compare it to the full expanse of industry advertising as portraying
smoking that isn't saying that it's bad for you. While, in the '60s, they no longer explicitly state that it's not harmful for you, as
they did in the earlier period, they still portray it as something that does not have negative consequences, that is pleasurable,
desirable.
Q. Well, as a general nature, are people so controlled or manipulated by advertising that they buy products against their will?
A. No. Advertising shapes public persuasion and public views. As a historian, I'm looking at advertising as a historical source,
not as a marketing person or an advertising person. But the sheer volume of the information overwhelms, at least at this period
in time, the negative information.
Q. Well, let me ask you the same question specifically with regard to minorities. Are minorities so controlled or manipulated
by advertising that they buy products against their will?
A. Let me say to that, African-Americans, I -- they -- people are -- people have free will. I take that as a theological principle.
But -- and as a social scientist, people have options, and they choose and they make choices. But they make choices based on
information, and information is not simply an inert quality, in that it sits there in front of them, but rather, it is the environment
of understanding about things.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
And so, again, that's how -- that's how the cigarette advertising, as a historian, I see it working, is that it's overwhelming. It's
replacing a lack of credibility and a lack of specific argument with the sheer volume.
Q. Well, you would agree that over the last 40 years, consumption, in terms of the percentage of American adults who smoke,
has gone down?
A. So from 1960 -- you know, I need to -- I've got my prevalence graph amongst my papers and that has the specific. It's erratic.
It's rising in the '50s with some -- there's the occasional downward dip. And it peaks in the mid 1960s, declines. Now, this is per
capita cigarette consumption, which is one of a number of ways to measure this. Here's the Surgeon General's Report, it actually
increases a little bit, and then begins to decline. Most people associate that with The Fairness Doctrine which, of course, we
all know what that is. It recovers into the early '70s.
I date the free fall, to me, the trend becomes downward -- let's see. Around 1977, '78, you get -- if we can put a trend line
here, you know, statistical analysis, that's really where we get the initiation of the downward trend, and since that time, it has
been declining significantly.
Q. And we could argue about where the appropriate place would be to draw a trend line, whether it is from 1961 or 1975 or
whatever, but you would agree that, generally speaking, at the end of your graph, whether it begins in 1964, whether it begins
in 1975, there is a general and -- I don't want to say rather steep but --
A. No. I think that would be accurate.
Q. A steep reduction per capita consumption of cigarettes during that period of time?
A. Yes. And it -- the turn, to me, comes in the 1970s. That's where you get an unambiguous downward trend.
Q. And would you also agree, if you know, that during this same period of time, whether it be in 1964 or 1970 or 1975,
expenditures for the marketing and promotion of cigarettes has increased?
A. Well, here's -- you get some measurement troubles here because the industry, of course, withdraws from television and then
is banned from TV but they initially withdraw. So what you need to look at is not just advertising but overall marketing.
Q. That's why I said, expenditures for marketing and promotion.
A. Yes.
Q. And you would agree that marketing and promotion all has some relevance to this issue that we've been discussing?
A. I would agree, yes.
Q. So would you agree that during this downward trend, this steep downward trend that we've discussed before, the amount of
money that was being spent, the expenditures for marketing and promotion continued to increase?
A. Yes. And I would believe the increase -- I would have to double check my numbers -- is not just -- of course, if you look at
nominal dollars, of course, it's going to increase because that's a period of terrific inflation. You have to correct for inflation,
have real dollars. And I believe the expenditures increase that way, as well. Sure.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
But it's in a different environment. My position is that it's in the 1970s that the shift towards common knowledge really begins
in earnest, and that into the 1980s, that's when people not only are, of course, aware of the accusations that cigarettes are bad,
but even among smokers, the vast preponderance of them believe it.
Q. And you believe that was reached into the 1980s?
A. Yes. The '70s is the turning point and into the 1980s and the early 1990s, that's -- the common knowledge situation
dramatically increases, both not only awareness, which was always high, but also actual belief. And, you know, to me, the
markers of that, the persuasive markers are less. Polling data, which, again, is to me, highly ambiguous, but rather the historical
process which rendered smoking socially unacceptable. So taking cigarettes off the airplanes in '88 and in '90. To me, it's the
early '90s where people are really requested to stand outside, you know, at work, for example, you know, smoking under the
awning in the rain kind of environment, that social stigmatization of smoking is the marker that, you know, by the 1990s, the
public really appreciates that the cigarettes are dangerous.
Having said that, though, when you look at reports by, for example, the Surgeon General in 1989 and their discussion, they
still find, you know, large areas of ignorance.
Q. Do you believe that this social stigma that we talked about is necessary to have a common knowledge of the dangers of
smoking?
A. Well, I think in the late '80s and early '90s, it's indicative. It is a way of measuring this process. It's less a cause than it is
any consequence.
Q. Okay. And would you agree that it is common knowledge that excessive use of alcohol can create health problems?
A. Well, here's one of the problems with that statement, and this -- and this is a similar problem with the cigarette issue is how
excessive and how extensive a problem. And that's the problem with people, I think in the '50s, '60s and '70s, is that they didn't
fully appreciate how extensive the risk was. They tended to minimize the risk. And industry messages in advertising and then
outright industry denials of the causation link, you know, and alike, gave them enough reason to keep on smoking. I'll go to a
filter. I'll go to a low tar. These will help me, you know, be safe in smoking.
So that's how I see that. You know, we -- always, I think, both alcohol and cigarettes were viewed as vices, moral vices. You
know, it wasn't good to smoke. The Virginia Slims advertising played off of that, “You've come a long way, baby,” indicating
a history of scorn for women smoking, identifying with their liberation. Well, you know, there's a certain amount of truth to
that. So --
Q. Would you agree that chronic use of alcohol -- would you agree that it's common knowledge that chronic use of alcohol
can lead to health problems?
MS. LUMAGHI:
Objection; asked and answered. You can answer.
A. Yes. Well, let me -- yes. Drinking -- you know, coming home from work every day and drinking a 12-pack of beer or slapping
back, you know, six or seven big glasses of whiskey, yes, that's -- that's a bad thing to do. And people have known that.
MR. ERNY:
Q. And has there been this social stigma or ostracizing that you talked about with regard to cigarette smoking applied to alcohol?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, to excessive use of alcohol.
Q. In what way?
A. To be sure, to be -- to get overly drunk at a party, the tolerance for drinking and driving. Here's a perfect example. Back in
the early 1970s, Foster Brooks, who was a comedian, would appear on national television. They used to have a roast program.
And Foster Brooks would get up there, and he would act like a sloppy drunk and people thought that was funny.
And I don't think you could have a Foster Brooks today because there is an appreciation for the -- you know, the real pain and
ugliness that that kind of activity and life-style causes. So --
Q. Well, my point is, when you are talking about ostracizing and the social stigma, people outside in the rain smoking cigarettes
and people having to leave restaurants and things like that, we don't see that with regard to drinking, do we?
A. No. Because moderate drinking, responsible drinking is deemed okay. I happen to hold that view myself. But that's something,
you know, outside of those who hold a moral sanction against alcohol use, for religious reasons, for example, that's deemed
acceptable.
It's a very good example that you've raised because I think in the '50s, '60s and '70s, when you look at many statements about
the risks of smoking, often the modifying adjective of excessive smoking is listed, excessive smoking is bad for you. So that
implies, in many ways, that cigarettes and alcohol share a similar level of responsible use.
Take Walter Winchell's famous statement in the mid 1950s in response to, you know, the cigarette health scare. Cigarette on
trial, I believe is the -- and he does. He talks about the cigarettes implication. You know, it's up to the cigarette to prove itself
safe. The burden of proof is shifted.
But he also says, you know, I'm not talking about excessive smoking -- he said -- I misspoke.
He said, I'm talking about excessive smoking, not regular smoking. He concludes his talk saying, I smoke ten cigarettes a day.
Saying, in essence, this is moderate and responsible smoking. I don't over-smoke.
And you find that in the '50s and the '60s and into the '70s, part and parcel of the discussion of the health risks of smoking, it's
not the industry that is doing that only, although they are doing that, it's also public health people, medical people and the press.
The history of the stigmatization of cigarettes is really in the late '80s and early '90s is the story of the divergence of two products
that were once considered to be the same, alcohol and cigarettes.
Even when you go back to slang, coffin nail, that's a cigarette. Coffin varnish, that's alcohol.
So there's a divergence in the late 1980s and 1990s where people begin to understand that cigarettes are different than alcohol
in that regard.
Q. You would agree that even in popular culture there are movies today that would generally demonstrate, for example, frat
parties or parties of young children getting ridiculously drunk, falling down drunk?
A. Yes. And you take a movie like “Animal House” and it's celebrated in a kind of rebellious way.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. For example, like the movie with Tom Hanks in it, called “Bachelor Party,” where they all go to the hotel and get just
ridiculously drunk --
MS. LUMAGHI:
I'm going to object. I don't see how it's at all relevant to his expertise in this case.
MR. ERNY:
Make your objection. All objections except as to form are reserved until trial. You don't need to explain. Just --
MS. LUMAGHI:
We are wasting time here.
MR. ERNY:
Q. So we don't have a complete social stigma. The only thing I'm trying to suggest is, you had indicated that the social stigma
or ostracizing is a way of measuring it, and I'm merely suggesting to you that it may not be a very accurate way of measuring it.
A. I haven't seen “Bachelor Party,” but I can imagine. It's a “Porky's” style film. And this is an interesting line of discussion
and I'm enjoying it. I think it's one way to measure this.
You can go to polls, and polls will do this, and you need to consider polls and you need to have polls that deal with relative
risk and comparative risk, but I think there's also this cultural process going on. This has not been anything I don't believe
I've ever, you know, been given the opportunity to testify about, but in my research, this is something that's really struck me
as being important.
Q. Let me show you Exhibit 11. We talked about before the Advertising Age documents. Did you have those at the time that
you prepared the report for Ms. Lumaghi or was this something that you have obtained since that time?
A. No. I had these. This is part of my set of documents. As you know, the story describes the removal of Reader's Digest
placards from the New York City Subway system. This is indicative of efforts in New York City. I don't know if this came out
in the Frankson trial or not. I supplied it to the attorneys.
Q. Okay. Let me look over your shoulder, here. One of the things you've talked about, in terms of developing common
knowledge, is belief and the effective advertising of things, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And on Page 2, here, there is an article by William D. Tyler, and he talks about, I assume, advertising picks, his top ten picks
for December. And one of the articles refers to Parliament advertising, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And his article says, “Probably the most sensitive area in advertising lies in the creation of a successful cigarette campaign.
This is primarily so because the public has its guard up against tobacco advertising.” Do you see that there?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Do you believe that's accurate?
A. Sure. People -- yes. Advertising doesn't carry the same credibility as, say, for example, a statement by the Surgeon General.
He goes on to say, “You have to disarm people before you can sell them and the Parliament ad shown here seems to have some
of that quality.” You know, and he's correct. I mean, this is persuasion.
Q. And this is in nineteen --
A. It should be '59. I've got the citation handwritten here, so it's a little bit easier to read.
Q. So in 1959, even, Mr. Tyler and you agree that the public had its guard up against tobacco advertising?
A. Of course. And any advertising.
Q. Any advertising. And in -- there is an article in here, as well, about -- let me see if I can find it.
A. That doesn't mean the advertising can't be effective.
Q. I didn't mean to suggest it is. I'm just saying, in addition to there being advertising, people have their guard up against
advertising. Whether it's effective or not, people have their guard up against it.
And there is also an article from February 23rd, 1959, which appears to be an earlier edition of The Advertising Age. It talks
about the Reader's Digest omitting the American Medical Association's qualifier on cigarette advertising, I guess it is.
A. Yes.
Q. And if you look at the continuation of this article, which is on Page 189, I believe it is, the next page of the exhibit, after
talking about the AMA qualifier, there's a statement in the article. “The statement, however, Mr. Daschle adds, does not change
the fact that an overwhelming amount of evidence exists to support the belief that cigarette smoking is an important factor in
lung cancer.” Do you see that there?
A. Yes. I see that.
Q. That was not something that you put in your report, the belief that there were some people, even back in 1959, that were
talking about the overwhelming amount of evidence to support the belief that cigarette smoking is an important factor in lung
cancer.
A. Well, you know, there was overwhelming evidence that -- scientific evidence that cigarettes supported lung cancer earlier
than that. I think --
Q. Well, this doesn't refer to scientific evidence. It talks about evidence in general and it's in an advertising publication. You
wouldn't expect that to be restricted to just science, would you?
A. I believe that when this guy says evidence, he's talking about scientific evidence.
Q. What do you base that on?
A. The logic of the sentence.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Okay.
A. I mean, what -- what else could he be talking about? What he's saying is --
Q. Well, he could be talking about the belief in the common, everyday people, since one of his jobs in advertising is to reach
and convey messages to common, everyday people, couldn't it? Isn't that logical?
A. That doesn't seem to be the import of this story at all. No. I would have to disagree with your characterization of it in this case.
Q. Okay. Now, you had indicated in your materials there's some information about court cases. Did you conduct any systematic
review of court cases in Missouri or St. Louis?
A. No. I had -- that's a Supreme Court case, a very famous one, Austin v. Tennessee, which figures prominently in the cigarette
prohibition movement, and that's in there. That's the only Supreme Court case that I know of where the court, both in majority
and descent, discussed the suitability of cigarettes. There are other cases that relate to the structure of the industry, of course,
anti-trust and the break-up of the American Tobacco Company and other anti-trust actions in the late '30s and '40s. So that's
why I had that in there.
Q. Would it be important to look at court cases that were decided in St. Louis or Missouri to see what those officials had to say
with regard to common knowledge of the effects of cigarette smoking?
A. Well, I don't believe that Missouri had a cigarette prohibition movement like other states in the turn of the century, so I
don't see how that would be relevant.
Q. I'm not talking about --
A. I'm not sure what the legal issue -- cigarettes were a legal product, a legitimate item of commerce, as the Supreme Court
characterized them, so I don't -- I don't see the significance there.
Now, a court case in which, you know, the legal status of selling cigarettes is challenged, some states have that, that would be
important. But I don't believe Missouri was in that case or in that situation.
(Exhibit 27 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. I'll show you what I've marked as Exhibit 27. That's a Supreme Court of Missouri case. Do you see that? Ploch v. City
of St. Louis?
A. I see this.
Q. This is an action by Mr. Ploch to at least enjoin the enforcement of an ordinance taxing cigarette merchants.
A. Okay.
Q. And if you look at the upper -- or the last line on Page 1023, in the left-hand column, it says, “The sale or gift of a cigarette
is prohibited in some jurisdictions. It is not a useful commodity. Nicotine is harmful. There is no question of classification. The
harmful properties of the article due the classifying.” Do you see that there?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. I see that.
Q. This is the Supreme Court talking about that, correct?
A. State Supreme Court.
Q. State Supreme Court.
A. And that is the highest court in Missouri, as opposed to, like, in New York, the Supreme Court is the trial court, where it's,
oddly enough, the lowest court.
Q. And then if you look down two paragraphs, in the middle of that page, on the right-hand column, there's a paragraph that
begins, furthermore. “Furthermore, it is common knowledge that the size and mildness of the cigarette tempt the young to
indulgences which produce tobacco addicts.” Do you see that there?
A. I see that.
Q. Do you believe that the Supreme Court of Missouri would have a reasonable handle on what was common knowledge of
its people at that time?
A. Well, this is a decision where they're making this, I imagine, as a matter of law. My research tells me that while this probably
accepts more hope than a reality. 1940 case? No. You are coming off of a decade in which cigarette smoking has increased
expedientially, and many, many times more people are smoking in 1940 than they were in 1930 or in 1920.
So, no, I would -- I mean, as a matter of law, they're making that statement. Okay. Fair enough. But I would dispute it as a
matter of fact.
Q. Okay. Now, you've -- we've referred to, throughout the day, about some of the sources of material that you have reviewed,
and you indicated earlier that you didn't believe that there was a prohibition in Missouri on smoking; is that right?
A. On the sale of cigarettes, my understanding is that Missouri was not one of the states that passed the anticigarette or cigarette
prohibition ordinances that were popular between 1896 through the 1920s.
Q. Where did you get that information?
A. I relied upon a peer reviewed study on the cigarette prohibition movement. What is the title of the study? I should have
cited it. It was sitting on my desk. Maybe I did cite it. It is the standard history, titled something like, The Little White Slaver.
Cassandra Tait, “Cigarette Wars, the Triumph of the Little White Slaver.”
Q. That would be footnote Number 3?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that or at least the excerpt of that produced in your materials or on these disks here?
A. No. I just provided the footnote here. That book is widely available for purchase at any library. It's an Oxford University
Press, peer reviewed publication.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Did you conduct any review of materials that were provided by Missouri state or St. Louis city or county voluntary health
organizations, like St. Louis counties, American Cancer Society branch or an American Lung Association branch, anything
along those lines?
A. No. I'm generally familiar with the kinds of pamphlets and information that the national organization put out. Those are
important sources of information informing people of the dangers of smoking, particularly in the 1960s, when they certainly
step up that effort. That's certainly something to consider.
Q. Have you done any research inside of St. Louis or Missouri for any type of polling information over and above beyond what
you normally rely on, like the Gallup polls and the Wildrop polls?
A. I've relied on the national polls from the polling organizations in which I have confidence in their methodology and
procedures.
Q. Have you conducted a comprehensive and systematic review of Brown & Williamson documents?
A. Well, there's a lot of documents on the industry web site, and I've looked at a lot of them, and I've downloaded a lot of them,
and I've focused my energies on things relating to how I define the common knowledge issue, things that were dealing with the
way the Brown & Williamson envisioned its marketing environment, Brown & Williamson's participation in organizations like
the TIRC, and later TI and CTR, and along those lines, and that's the kind of material that's generally comprised of this stack here.
I have not looked at, you know, the medical side or, you know, the addiction side and there's -- you know, those kinds of
documents, many of which are initially outlined, for example, in the cigarette papers or what have you. But I'm familiar with
and I've read carefully but, you know, it's dealing with other issues than I'm interested in.
Q. When did you conduct this review of the B&W documents web site?
A. I've been -- I generally sit down, and the number of industry documents are so great, I have been looking at industry documents
since I started acquiring them in paper form in the spring of 1998, when I got documents from the Minnesota repository,
essentially the set of documents used -- that were used in the Mississippi Attorney General's case.
And then when the web sites went on -- I forget exactly when the web sites went up, but I know I was hitting web sites pretty
systematically by the summer of 2000, the industry web sites. And then when the TobbacoDocuments.Org web site went up,
that was later, I began using that one largely for ease of use. So I've been reading industry documents and collecting industry
documents for some time. The number is so great, you know, that it's a gargantuan task.
Q. Did the Brown & Williamson documents that you rely upon for your opinions in this case, have they been produced in this
stack of materials and in the disks in response to the subpoena?
A. Yes, they have. I brought everything that I've got in that area.
Q. When you say you brought everything you've got in that area, are you saying that you brought everything that you reviewed
or only things that you've reviewed and decided to rely upon?
A. I brought everything that I've got, pretty much. I've got some -- you know, the TI, CTR, Brown & Williamson related, and
I kept at home most of the Philip Morris, although there are some things in there from other companies.
MS. LUMAGHI:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
And just for the record, plaintiffs are going to reserve the right to provide additional documents in case a rebuttal expert report
is necessary after defendants have disclosed their export reports.
MR. ERNY:
Just so we're clear, we've had this issue with Dr. Grenburg and Dr. Feingold, and just so you know, I don't acquiesce in that
and I'm going to reserve my right to object to anything like that.
MS. LUMAGHI:
That's fine.
(Off the record.)
(Exhibit 28 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, you have in front of you what has been marked as Exhibit 28. This is an article from The St. Louis Post Dispatch in
1956. Actually, December 14th, 1956. This is an article entitled, “What Young People Think,” correct?
A. I see it, yes.
Q. And it notes that this is another in a series of surveys of young Americans on important topics of the day. Do you see that
at the beginning of the article?
A. Yes.
Q. And the topic, I guess, is why do teenagers smoke? That's the very first sentence of the article.
A. I see it.
Q. The article says it gives them a feeling of being grown up. Do you see that?
A. I see that.
Q. And if you look down four paragraphs --
A. You ought to read the next sentence after that.
Q. “And they aren't much phased by reports that there's a link between cigarettes and cancer.”
A. And you said four paragraphs down?
Q. Down there beginning “time after time.”
A. Yes.
Q. Can you read that into the record for me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. “Time after time, youngsters brought up the subject of cancer. About 94 percent of all the young people queried in this study
feel there must be a definite link between tobacco and lung cancer but most of them have not stopped smoking. But, yet, how
can it be that they aren't much phased by reports that there's a link between cigarettes and cancer?” Kind of contradictory there.
I wonder what he's basing this on.
Q. You would agree that people don't always act on the information they have and the beliefs that they have, do you?
A. No. What you get here is the tendency of young people -- this is kind of just common understanding of the adolescent mind.
You don't have to be a psychologist to make this judgment that young people downplay risk. They are particularly vulnerable
to the kind of social pressures to get them to engage in smoking, which this piece -- it's a very interesting piece. I'm delighted
to see this.
Q. Well, even today, at a time when you testified that it's common knowledge that cigarettes cause lung cancer, it's hazardous,
it causes all kinds of lung problems, people, even today, take up smoking, both young and old, don't they?
A. Well, I don't know about old people taking up smoking. My reading of the literature on the initiation of smoking tells me
that, almost exclusively, it's something that's taken up between the adolescent -- the adolescent ages of the early teens to the
very early 20s. That explains the vast preponderance of people who begin smoking.
Q. When you say “almost exclusively,” that suggests to me that there's still some people outside of that age range that take
up smoking, correct?
A. Yeah, a small number. What we might describe as a statistically insignificant number.
Q. But, as a matter of fact, there are people of the adult age, even today, who take up smoking, in spite of what you would
testify as a common knowledge that smoking causes cancer, numerous health problems and can kill you?
A. Yes. Small numbers take up smoking of cigarettes.
Q. That would be indicative of the sense that people don't always act on their own beliefs.
A. Sure. I mean, you know, to the degree we're all sinners. I mean --
Q. That's a good point.
A. Yes. I don't have a problem with that. You know, I'm dealing with social process and, you know, business, economic and
social and cultural history and how that affects the broad issue of common knowledge. There are plenty of people in their early
50s who think that cigarettes are absolutely deadly. There's always a number of people, particularly among the nonsmoking
population, that would give credence to that.
Q. Well, one way to explain the interesting aspect of the dichotomy, as you pointed out, is that the children, that the young
people in this study just may not be acting on the belief that was expressed in the article that 94 percent who felt there must
be a definite link between tobacco and lung cancer.
A. Well, you know, you've got to look at what -- let's deal with what this text says. There's a link between tobacco and lung
cancer.
Q. Actually, it says, must be a definite link.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. A definite link. So they're linked. I mean, part of the problem is, when you look at the relative risk and the comparative risk,
you know, it's not -- it's not the one cigarette that's going to kill you. It's the lifetime of smoking. And for teenagers, they don't
appreciate that what they're beginning is a lifetime of addiction to this.
Q. Does anybody appreciate, other than people involved in this litigation and scientists, relative risk and the comparative risks
of cigarettes? Does anybody in the public understand that?
A. No. Those are concepts that scholars have developed to understand social phenomenon. I mean, those concepts can be made
easily understandable because in many ways, they're common sensical. But, no, that's not something that would be widely
understood by the average person. That's technical language.
Q. So that technical language and those technical concepts wouldn't have any applicability to these youth in 1956, would they?
A. Well, I don't -- I -- I don't see how you can say that. You know, we have concepts that scholars use to understand a phenomenon
in social science. That doesn't mean that the people who are experiencing the phenomenon understand those concepts. That's
not the point. Those concepts are ideas we use to understand reality, to understand social processes and historical processes.
They're not part of the common parlance of everyday people. They're not meant to be. They're technical terms of ideas that
people have developed to understand reality.
Q. Are there statistical issues involved in interpreting polls and the reliability of polls, based on size?
A. Sure. You've got sampling issues. For most polls, that's one of the first things that I look at, is what's the sample that's being
drawn upon.
Q. Do you have training in the statistical issues as they relate to the reliability of polls?
A. I have training in statistics. You know, that's one of the things that makes me different, I guess. I understand the principles
of sampling. I've been trained in that and I deal with serving research in my scholarly work.
You know, sampling error is probably the biggest thing that historians confront when they're looking at polls, what is -- to whom
were these questions asked, are they representative. It's not a question of how many people. Sample is not a size question. It's
a procedural question and an a methodological question.
Q. Do you hold yourself out as an expert in the statistical issues involving interpreting polls relating to reliability based on,
for example, sampling size?
A. Yes. I understand the problems in sampling size and the -- you know, I can evaluate that method. I don't conduct the polls
myself.
Q. Okay.
A. I don't design them. But the two things, when I look at polls, is I look at the sample, is it a random sample, is it representative.
Of course, you know, when you are looking at historical polling material, sometimes you have to rely on the institution giving
the poll or the group giving the poll, say Gallup or New Harris and trust them.
There are some polls, like, for example, when students are asked to mail in a card indicating whether they think that cigarettes
cause cancer or not. And you might get something, like, 10,000 responses. Senior Scholastic Magazine is a good example. But
that's not a statistically representative random sample poll.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Do you see anything in that article, Exhibit 28, from which you can determine the reliability or anything that you can provide
the statistics on?
A. No. This, here, all we have is the reporting of the story, and that's -- you know, that's -- it says what it says and this is, again,
we, as historians, don't get the evidence in the form that we would love to get it in, and so that's why it's not such an easy,
straightforward process. But this is an interesting piece.
Q. Are there psychological dimensions to polling?
A. Well, you know, I'm not a psychologist and so I don't want to, you know, make any judgments about psychology that go
beyond what a historian would say about just what people are thinking, you know, as a historical process.
But, you know, there are issues in polling. You know, if you -- well, yes, I'm just not a psychologist, so I really ought not
to go there.
Q. Have you reviewed any employment records of Stella Hale?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you reviewed any of her educational records?
A. I have not reviewed any records relating to her, personally.
Q. Okay. Have you developed any knowledge about her smoking history?
A. Well, it's my understanding, when I first spoke with Mrs. Lumaghi about this case, I was really interested in when she started
smoking, and, you know, roughly what age she started smoking, and that's so I can place her as -- you know, in time as a cohort.
And, apparently, people -- Ms. Lumaghi mentioned that people testified that she started smoking in 1964 and that she had stated
that to people, and that was -- that's what I needed to know.
Q. Do you know when she was born?
A. No. I think she was born probably in the late '40s, I would guess.
Q. Do you know where she was born?
A. No. My understanding is she was raised in St. Louis, but she may have lived other places.
Q. Do you know if she had any siblings?
A. I know she had siblings, but I don't know how many or what gender they were.
Q. Do you know -- aside from the fact when she started smoking, do you know when she became a regular smoking?
A. I'm just interested in knowing when she began smoking and, apparently, she started doing that in 1964.
Q. Do you know why she started smoking?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No, I don't.
Q. Do you know whether she read the newspapers when she was a teenager?
A. It's my understanding that she would read Ebony, would read, you know, the black press in St. Louis, but that doesn't really,
you know, figure.
Again, I'm not a historian of Ms. Hale. I'm a historian of what the general level of public knowledge, and public understanding
and belief on these issues were at this time.
Q. And the understandings that you've developed, at least as to the extent of your knowledge of Ms. Hale, has come from Ms.
Lumaghi?
A. Yes. I've not reviewed depositions and that kind of material because I don't really need to know a great amount of detail.
I'm not a historian of Ms. Hale.
Q. Okay. We have talked -- touched upon polling and your report mentions polling. And I want to talk to you about some of
the polls which may, in fact, be in your reliance materials, but I've brought some with me.
Isn't it true that in 1964 -- I'm sorry. Isn't it true that in 1949, the Gallup poll reported, and this was before the statistical studies
in the 1950s, that the majority of the public had already believed that cigarette smoking was harmful to health?
A. You know, my late '40s polls begin with questions, is it okay for teachers to smoke if they do so after school, and you get
a solid majority saying that's okay.
(Exhibit 29 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Let me show you Exhibit 29. This shows on the first page, December 17th, cigarettes, notes the interviewing date was
November 1st to -- it looks like 3rd, 1949. Do you see, down at the bottom of that page, there's a question, “Do you think cigarette
smoking is harmful or not?” And 52 percent of the cigarette smokers said yes, and 66 percent of non-cigarette smokers said yes.
A. Yes. Sure. This is an example of a pretty meaningless poll question because, as I've mentioned earlier, there was a widespread
belief that cigarette smoking resulted in various symptomatic harms, coughing, smoked out feeling, cigarette hangover and
other things, and that cigarettes advertise themselves as correcting these problems.
So, you know --
Q. Your issue with this is the degree of harm; is that what you are saying?
A. Two issues, degree of harm, and, of course, you've got when you consider those are the people who say no or have no opinion
among smokers, you've got 48 percent of the respondents saying it's absolutely not harmful.
Q. Actually, that --
A. Or it's not harmful.
Q. Actually, I think it's 45 that say no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Well, but no opinion is -- if your question is people that think it's harmful, the people that have no opinion certainly don't
have the affirmative belief that it's harmful.
Q. In any event, the majority of the people in the public here believe that cigarette smoking was harmful, correct?
A. It says that, yes. Here's a question that I have included in my data set. It's reprinted here in your Gallup on Page 1247. “What
is your own opinion? Do you think cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer or not?” The polling for this was done
in the summer of 1954. I guess that's the dates -- it's a little bit hard for me to interpret. And, you know, so 41 percent believed
it did, 29 said no, 30 percent, undecided. Not sure. Waiting to find out.
Q. Okay. So --
A. You know, what would the industry say about this? What will other doctors say about this? I'm still making up my mind.
Q. Well, 41 percent in July or June of 1954 believed that smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer.
A. Yes. That's right.
Q. And that would be indicative of at least some people of the harm that smoking can cause.
A. Yes. We agree on that.
Q. And in 1966, after the release of the Surgeon General's report, approximately 85 percent of the public believed that cigarette
smoking was harmful to health?
A. I'll have to -- you know, I don't memorize these numbers. I have them in my files. You know, when I think of 1966, I think
of the HEW poll in which about two-thirds of women said that they'll believe it when the cigarette industry acknowledges the
danger. And that's also from --
(Exhibit 30 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. This is an HEW poll that we're talking about and I've provided an excerpt of it. It talks about cigarette smoking being harmful
to health. And you see there that of the total number of people that strongly agree or mildly agree, you have 83.4 percent of
the people believe that it's harmful to the health, correct?
A. Yes. Now, of course, if you mildly agree that it's harmful to health, what does that tell you? We don't really know. This is
a product that's, you know, the single leading cause of preventable death, and so, you know, there's a disconnect here between
the -- what the question is asking and the full extent of the risk.
Q. Well, doesn't “mildly agree” indicate more to you than “no opinion”?
A. It does.
Q. You are perfectly -- in prior testimony, you've indicated that “no opinion,” you factor into people who don't believe, and,
certainly, you would agree that “mildly agree” factors into people who agree and believe that smoking is harmful to health.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
94Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yeah. It's not so much that I lump “no opinion” into people that disagree. It's that when the question asks for someone to
make an affirmative answer, do you think it causes this problem, and you want to know in the question is, those who agree,
well, then the people who have no opinion and the people who outright deny it are in the disagreeing area. That might be a
distinction that is not meaningful to you, but to me, it's an important distinction.
Q. And you see there, for females, you add those up, you have 86.2 percent of females strongly or mildly agree that cigarette
smoking is harmful to health.
A. Yes. Help me with this in terms of -- the copy is bad and I'm --
Q. Let me tell you how I add it up. If you go to the far right-hand column, you have strongly agree, 45.7 percent of males; and
mildly agree, 37.7 percent. I added those to get 83.4 percent. Then for females, you have --
A. Yes. It's 54 --
Q. 54 and 32.2, for 86.2?
A. Yes. You could certainly interpret it that way.
Q. Is there anything wrong about interpreting it that way?
A. Not particularly. Again, it would be better to have a question that asked about cancer. And it's -- you know, to me, this is
not indicative of widespread common knowledge because a third of the respondents, roughly, only mildly agree with the not
particularly strong proposition that cigarette smoking is harmful to health. Again, it's the question of how harmful.
You know, this goes back to what we were talking about earlier, about the way that cigarettes and alcohol are considered to
be similar.
(Exhibit 31 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. I'll show you what I've got marked as Exhibit 31. This is a health -- or HEW teen survey, and it was conducted by the National
Clearinghouse For Smoking and Health that Daniel Horn was the director of, correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And there's a question in there about the perception of health threat. And this found that 92 percent of teenage boys and 93
percent of teenage girls believed that cigarette smoking was harmful to the health; isn't that right?
A. Oh, yes. That's what it says. You are on Page 5, right, the paragraph?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes.
Q. Even among teens who were smokers, 82 percent of the males and 86 percent of the females admitted that smoking was
harmful to the health.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
95Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. Yes. It says that.
Q. And by 1969, 71 percent of the public said that they believed smoking was a cause of lung cancer, didn't they?
A. I've seen 1971 or '72 polls that give a similar result.
(Exhibit 32 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Well, you have what's been marked as Exhibit Number 32 in front of you, and it's a Gallup poll. You see on the first page,
at least of the survey information, on the right-hand side, “All persons in the survey were then asked, what is your opinion? Do
you think cigarette smoking is or is not one of the causes of lung cancer?” 71 percent of the people said they believed smoking
was a cause of lung cancer.
A. Yes. I've got this in my data set in my -- I'm very familiar with this poll.
Q. Okay. And that would have affected the public's understanding about the link between smoking and lung cancer or it would
be a measure of it?
A. A measure of it, sure. You know, roughly -- I round off to make my calculations easier. There are roughly 200 million, just
under 200 million people in the country in 1970. So when we talk about the 29 percent that are not replying in the affirmative
that it is one cause, one of the causes of cancer of the lung, you know, we're talking about, you know, roughly 50 to 55 million
people, just so that we have an idea of what this -- you know, that that's the idea behind a statistically representative sample,
that we can, you know, generalize it to the whole population. Yes. I'm familiar with this one.
Q. Is that of some significance to you in terms of determining common knowledge?
A. Yes. It tells me that -- and I think it's true, over the course -- you know, over time, more and more people not only are aware
of the accusations that cigarettes might be harmful or they're aware of the debate, more and more people are aware of that, but
over time, more and more people actually believe it. That -- there's no question that it increases over time. I think the rate of
increase in the '70s is more rapid, and this is really kind of at the outset of that process.
Q. In terms of the raw numbers, how many people today smoke?
A. Well, it's roughly a quarter of the population. You break it down into subgroups, it's higher or lower, but ball park, the last
I checked, was a quarter.
Q. What's the population of the United States today?
A. Approximately 280 -- round up to about 290 million people.
Q. So you would have about 70 million people that continue to smoke today, even after it's common knowledge of -- that
smoking can cause lung cancer and heart disease and can kill you?
A. Uh-huh. Now, many of those people are older smokers who are trying to quit and can't, who picked up the habit at an earlier
time. So be careful, we're dealing with a dynamic process, here. We're dealing with age cohorts. Youth prevalence has been
falling, youth initiation of smoking. Again, that's the key common knowledge, age group, age cohort, based on what we know
about smoking initiation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
96Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. You are aware of the Adult Use of Tobacco Survey in 1975 by HEW?
A. Yes. That data is summarized in the Surgeon General's report in 1989.
Q. And in 1975, the federal government conducted this adult use of tobacco survey and indicated that 90 percent of Americans
believed that cigarette smoking was harmful to health, and 82 percent believed that smoking frequently caused disease and
death, correct?
A. And that fits the '70s as being a period of increasing credence for this, yes. That's why I've testified in the past that in the
'70s, you know, and into the '80s, the shift occurs, and then, you know, the issue then becomes for the industry, their pitching
their message to a smaller and smaller portion of the population.
Q. You would agree that part of the historical method is viewing information in context?
A. Yes. I would agree with that.
Q. And you do that to make sure that the information that you are looking at isn't given more or less importance than what it
should have been given during the time period in which it was originally available?
A. Yes. Where it fits into the broader picture of the historical fabric at the time.
Q. So, for example, that, perhaps, is why you asked your research assistant to pull articles relating to Kennedy's assassination
and then go onto the Surgeon General's Report; is that right?
A. Yes. Using that story as -- I was curious as to how that was covered in the paper. That's a major event.
Q. And so, for example, if you were looking at John F. Kennedy's assassination as a major event, to find out how people reacted
to it, you would want to look at more than one article in the newspaper; you would want to look at the entire newspaper to
see how people react?
A. Kennedy's assassination, you know, that day, the whole paper was consumed by that story.
But what -- that's not exactly how I used it. My thinking was, well, let's deal with important events. How does the paper report
events? How does it give weight to these events? The Kennedy assassination, you could use almost as a calibrating standard.
That was a time when the country just shut down over this issue, like September 11th.
Q. Truly national tragedies?
A. Yes. So that just becomes a standard by which you can, you know, compare.
Q. Would the same be true with regard to advertising? If you want to know what sort of impact advertising had, you would
want to view it in context?
A. Yes. Where it is in the paper, things like that, sure.
Q. And you mentioned advertising for cigarettes in your report.
A. I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
97Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. You've not mentioned advertising of other consumer products or things like that in your report.
A. No. The subject of this report is cigarettes.
Q. Okay. Did you, in reaching your opinions and in writing your report, did you consider the advertising in context with other
advertising that was going on?
A. Well, I teach the history of advertising in my business history course. I have my students do research projects on advertising
generally. I actually ask them to choose a particular product and then trace the history of its advertising over time, and they can
choose whatever product is available, in terms of the sources they have.
Cigarettes, along with automobiles, are one of the most heavily promoted products in America in the '50s, '60s, and '70s.
Q. So in addition to cigarettes and automobiles, alcoholic beverages were advertised in the newspapers and magazines.
A. Yes. Appliances, as well. In terms of prominence, when you look at what's really being pushed.
Q. So there were a number of people, a number of industries that were advertising in the newspapers and the magazines during
that period of time?
A. Absolutely.
Q. And all of these advertisements were competing for attention by the various readers?
A. That's right. And, you know, advertising space is allocated by the rates that the magazines would charge. You know, back
cover, full color was the most expensive, and you go inside front cover, and back cover and down from there. And you see a
great variety and diversity with cigarette advertising and other products. American Tobacco pretty much owns the back cover
of Life Magazine in the 1950s. Occasionally, Coke would be there.
Q. Who owns the back cover of Reader's Digest?
A. Well, again, Reader's Digest, for a while, I don't think they took any advertising, but they don't take cigarette advertising
Q. Isn't it also true that each of these advertisers used different methods to convey their message?
A. Yes.
Q. And each of them used a -- for lack of a better word, Hollywood celebrities?
A. Yes.
Q. Each of them used sports celebrities?
A. Beer companies, yes.
Q. So the tobacco industry wasn't the only one using Hollywood personalities or sports celebrities in their advertising?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
98Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
A. No. And I would never maintain -- the tobacco industry, what sets them apart are the amount of advertising they're doing. They
generally are the leading advertiser, in terms of expenditures; not always, but they are among the group of leading advertisers.
The other thing that sets them apart is their product is harmful, but their advertisements don't indicate that, and it's harmful in
some specific ways, obviously.
No. But, I mean, the industry is eagerly courted by advertising agencies, and to win a tobacco industry account was a truly
grand thing for an advertising agency to do. I've gone through the private records of advertising agencies, and when they win,
say, for example, as the DBBO, that's Bruce Barton's advertising agency in the late '40s, wins the Lucky Strike account, the
letters of congratulation pour in because it was such a lucrative account.
Q. And you say you've gone through these documents?
A. Yes. I've gone through the papers of -- Bruce Barton's personal papers, his business papers.
Q. Where are they located?
A. University of Wisconsin. They maintain an extensive archive relating to media, advertising and those related subjects.
Q. And that relates to American Tobacco?
A. Yes. He had the American Tobacco account. I believe it's '49 that they won it, and they kept it through the 1950s. At some
point in the early '60s, they lost it. And when I say “American Tobacco,” I should point out that it was the Lucky Strike brand
that they had.
Q. You would agree that alcohol advertisers don't advertise about the dangers of their product back in the '40s, '50s, and the '60s?
A. No.
Q. You would agree that the automobile manufacturers don't advertise about the dangers of their product back in the '40s, and
'50s and '60s?
A. Well, many of the automobile manufacturers would promote safety aspects of their cars, their car is safer.
Q. And after a certain period of time, all of the cigarette advertisements appeared with the Surgeon General's warnings?
A. That would be in the 1970s.
Q. Any other product have any warnings like that during that time period in their advertising?
A. In the 1970s?
Q. Yes.
A. Not in the advertising. There were product warnings on things like poisons and drugs.
Q. I'm specifically referring to in the advertising.
A. Not that I'm aware of.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
99Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. Have you conducted any empirical studies showing that statements by TI or TIRC or CTR impacted smoking initiation?
A. I have done an extensive review of those statements, you know, and their denials, and their extensive campaign.
Q. I'm referring to smoking initiation, the beginning of smoking. Have you done any studies, any empirical studies on statements
made by those organizations that impacted smoking initiation?
A. Well, as a historian, who has to deal with extant evidence, I don't know how one would go about that. I was once asked,
have I conducted any polls to test common knowledge in the past, in the 1950s, and my response was that it presented me with
a metaphysical problem. And I think the person asking the question, I don't think she really meant that, but -- you know, in this,
I'm not sure how one would design that kind of study on an empirical basis.
Q. Well, have you looked to see if any such studies exist?
A. No, I haven't. I haven't come across any studies that were conducted in the '50s or '60s that tested the relationship between
industry statements and youth initiation of smoking. You may present me with one in a moment.
Q. Have you conducted any empirical studies showing that cigarette advertising had any impact on smoking initiation?
A. No. And that's -- that's not my -- you know, my research question is not about that. You know, my -- I'm looking at
advertisements as a historical source. I'm not a marketing person. I don't conduct marketing campaigns. I don't design them.
You know, I used to call on advertising agencies when I worked for the Yellow Page Directory Company but, no, I never was
employed by advertising agencies. I'm looking at the way advertisements functioned as a historical source and as a way of
presenting information, a type of information about the product in shaping the average person's expectations as to what that
product would do.
Q. Okay. You have, in your materials, and you had mentioned it earlier this morning, the “Frank Statement”?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know if Stella Hale ever saw the “Frank Statement”?
A. I don't know if she saw that. She would have been quite young at that time. Of course, you know, your argument being that,
well, you know, information in that early period was important because it shaped the older people that influenced her. You
know, I would agree with that position. That was a good point.
Q. Do you know if any of the older people that may have influenced her ever saw the “Frank Statement”?
A. I don't. Again, I don't know. I'm not a historian of Ms. Hale.
Q. Or people close to her, correct?
A. Yes. Well, yes.
MR. ERNY:
We can take a five-minute break. Let me make sure I've got everything.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
100Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
(Off the record.)
(Exhibit 33 was marked.)
MR. ERNY:
Q. Doctor, I'm going to show you what I've marked as Exhibit 33, which is a Gallup poll from 1957. And, in particular, if you
would look at Page 1500, on the far right column, the last question down at the bottom, “What is your opinion? Do you think
cigarette smoking is one of the causes of cancer to the lung?”
A. Yes.
Q. 50 percent of that indicated the public believed that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer.
A. Yes. And 38 percent of smokers. I have this in my data set.
Q. And if you look at Page 1502, this refers to the previous question which asks whether people heard or read about the recent
report of the American Cancer Society, but in particular, this question, on Page 1502, asks the 82 percent who had heard or
read about the American Cancer Society report, it asks them why they have not quit smoking. Do you see that there?
A. I see that.
Q. And it indicates that only 15 percent of that original 82 percent stated that the reports were not proved.
A. Uh-huh. I see that. They have a whole choice of those. You know, contemporaneous surveys, one asked people, you know,
why have you quit. People have actually made the firm choice, and incredibly small numbers would cite cancer, between three
and eight percent, depending upon which survey one looks at. Yes. I see that.
Q. And these reports just basically -- and I know you are referring to other reports, not this particular one.
A. Yes.
Q. But those ones will take down the first thing the person says, correct?
A. That's right. An unprompted response.
Q. And that doesn't mean that another response might be lung cancer or another response might be harmful to health. It's just
that that wasn't the first response; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. We talked a little bit earlier today about your ... the book that you are writing. I just want to ask you a little bit about that. I
know that there was some discussion about that in the Rosol deposition, which happened a month or two ago. Has there been
any change in the status of the book since then?
A. I'm just working on it. Right now, I'm at the phase where I'm developing a table of contents and, basically, a book proposal,
and then I'll be going and seeking a publisher for it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
101Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
Q. When you do the table of contents, does that also include an outline of the book or are you really just talking about the
normal table of contents, the chapter ...
A. Well, no. In these situations, they call it an expanded table of contents, and for all practical purposes, it's an outline of the book.
Q. And you have not yet sought a publisher for it?
A. I've been talking to publishers. There's a lot of interest in it. I have not yet sat down and put together the book proposal.
Q. What publishers have you been talking to?
A. Well, most seriously with the University of North Carolina Press. They've published my other book and I'm considering
them. That's a very good press, a good scholarly press. They did a nice job on my other book. I'll likely go with them, but
I'm thinking, you know.
The last historical convention in May ... I'm sorry, November, this past November at -- one of the things you do when you go to
a history convention is you meet editors and I discussed it with a few presses, although this is the one I have a relationship with.
Q. I thought you said this morning that the historical convention was the first week in January, that was one of the reasons you
had trouble getting in touch with the research assistant and things like that.
A. That's the American Historical meeting. I'm also active in something called the Southern Historical Association. They met
in Houston, something like around the 6th of November, this past November. And I'm more active in the Southern Historical
Association than I am in the American Historical Association.
Q. Did you go down to that thing in November, that convention?
A. Yes. Oh, yeah. We call it the SHA. Yeah. I attended that.
Q. I thought you said you were testifying in the Hall case on November 6th and 7th.
A. I flew directly from Tampa to Houston. So I believe that it was a Friday that I finished my testimony in the Hall case, and
I flew that evening and did the Southern Historical Association meeting and then came home. In fact, I think I mentioned that
in the testimony, that from here, I'm going to --
Q. With the University of North Carolina Press or any of these others, do they give you advances on books?
A. They haven't in the past.
Q. And I take it you are not at that stage yet, if at all, with this book that you are writing now?
A. Scholarly publishing doesn't often involve a whole lot of money. It's --
Q. Have you applied for any financial assistance or received any financial assistance in writing this book?
A. Well, I will be applying for grants. I think this is a good research topic that will be of interest. My university has some
internal research grants. I'm not doing those this summer because I have a sabbatical coming up next year, but that will be part
of it. You know, cover expenses, travel expenses, things like that. There are small grants for -- what are called travel grants. The
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
102Tracey MASH and Anjanetta Lingard, Plaintiffs, v. BROWN..., 2004 WL 5580439...
New York Medical Association has a grant project, and so does the National Library of Medicine to defray just the expenses
to get there and spend a week. And those are two places that I've identified as being important for me to visit.
Q. You've not made those applications yet, but you are thinking about it?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. Okay. Other than the additional research which you might have your research assistant do with regard to the textbook at
issue, do you envision any further St. Louis or Missouri-based research in this case?
A. You know, the textbooks are the main thing that I've seen as a kind of a gap, educational materials. I think I could profit
from more newspaper work, but I think I'll probably just order the microfilm since the time is of the essence element of The
Argus, and look at -- I'm interesting in how the black paper handled these issues earlier in time, if not, you know, for example,
mid to late 1950s.
Q. When you are talking about more newspaper work, are you talking about the minority papers that you are looking at?
A. The Argus. But that's about it.
Q. So other than those two instances, you've completed your research for this particular case?
A. Yes. I feel confident.
MR. ERNY:
That's all I have. I appreciate it.
And I understand you are reserving signature. Thank you. Appreciate it very much.
(Deposition concluded at 5:05 p.m.)
ERRATA SHEET
I, LOUIS KYRIAKOUDES, do solemnly swear that I have read the foregoing 299 pages and that the same is a true and correct
transcript of the testimony given by me at the time and place hereinbefore set forth, with the following corrections:
Page: Line: Correction:
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
103
