Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
Original Image of 2005 WL 6512412 (PDF)
2005 WL 6512412 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
Circuit Court of Florida.
Hillsborough County
Matthew BUONOMO,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY.
No. 0819612CA19.
January 7, 2005.
Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Warranty/Breach of Warranty
Jurisdiction: Hillsborough County, Florida
Name of Expert: Louis Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Taken by Counsel for the Defendants
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Reported by: Stephanie Fischer
Court Reporter
Notary Public
State of North Carolina
kind of culture?
A. To put it simplistically.
Q. Is that a historical comment or just a personal view? I'm not sure I really see how that has any historical significance. That's
his personal view of whether it's a good thing or a bad thing that that's the way the American society developed. Unless I have
it wrong, but that's what I'm understanding from what you're telling me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
A. First, I would agree with you Secondly, there is a tendency -- you know, some historians, you know, have a particular,
you know, perspective. And when I say he doesn't like it, I'm probably being a little bit unfair to what is a very sophisticated
historian and a very good historian.
But to be more precise, he sees consumer culture as being something created by businesses, marketing firms, advertising, you
know, these powerful economic entities, and that they create a culture that absorbs people into it and undermines older forms
of cultural expression, folk culture for example.
And when I say he doesn't like it, really what I mean Is he's portraying it as kind of a top down process where consumer is
something that's created and almost imposed upon the nation really at the directives of the, you know, capital. That's why I
say he realty comes the left perspective.
Q. What was the statement that you put in this paper that addresses that debate?
A. I said that I will basically couch my study within this debate over the nature of consumer economy as -- I forget the exact
language I used but basically a few words summarizing what I just said, not so succinctly, the work of T.J. Jackson Lears versus
the work of -- I'm forgetting the name of the author that I cited in that particular phrase, but another author that is less critical
of consumerism and sees it as something that emerges really from the interactions of what people want, their emerging desires
and what industry is trying to produce to meet those wants.
And just so you know, the latter view is really what I subscribe to. I think that's a much more accurate characterization of
consumer culture. Its something that kind of emerges out of the dynamic of increasing prosperity in early 20th century America,
the ability of the economy to produce the goods that people want and the interaction between people's emerging wants and
desires and business and industry's ability to supply those.
Q. What I would like to do is maybe sort of trace some of your activities, both research-related and consulting-related, since
you and I were last together.
Since your deposition was taken in the Arnitz case at the end of August, have you looked at any brand-new sources of information
that might address what we have called the public's understanding or the public knowledge of the health risk of smoking? Brand-
new pieces of information I'm talking about.
A. Yeah. I'm trying to -- because this was a very busy semester. I've been looking more carefully at a set of marketing documents
that were created for Philip Morris and for R.J. Reynolds, Roper studies on consumer attitudes and the like. They're not brand-
new. I mean -- but I have been looking at them more carefully.
Q. When you say “a set of marketing documents,” • can you be more precise?
A. Yes. And I've Included those in the materials I brought.
Q. They are here today?
A. Yes.
Q. Are we talking about the 1959 Roper, that very lengthy document?
A Yes, there's the 1959 Roper which that one I was quite familiar with and included even in my standard expert disclosure. But
there are subsequent follow-up reports from particularly in the 1970s, 1970, I believe 1975 or 76, and then one from around
1980. I've been looking at those.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
Q. And those are here? So if I want to ask you some questions about them, we have those here?
A. Yes.
Q. What was the reason why you chose to focus specifically on these marketing documents prepared for PM and RJR?
A. Well, I think, you know, the internal documents -- we'll call these internal documents, but industry-generated materials I
think is a better way to describe it, are important from my perspective, understanding the public's understanding of the risk
of smoking for two reasons.
One, because the industry was deeply interested in how consumers perceived their products and therefore, they conducted or
had conducted for them, research. And so this is generally good survey data that they have to consider.
Of course, the other is related to the other issue of, you know, the kind of behind-the-scenes activities of the industry to kind
[Note: Pages 26-169 missing in original document]
A. Yeah. I wish I could, but I just don't remember what I was talking about there.
Q. Let's move on to the subject of advertising for just a moment I'm not going to repeat these questions because you've answered
them a number of times about the -- about your knowledge or level of expertise on the subject of advertising.
My question is simply: You haven't done anything since October of 2004 to try to improve or enhance your understanding of
advertising, have you?
A. No.
Q. You haven't taken any advertising courses or anything like that?
A. No courses.
Q. For example, you haven't read the articles cited in the bibliography that Dr. Pollay gave you, correct?
A. No. I haven't reviewed those.
Q. All right So you had told us earlier that you're not in a position to identify any literature that would support the proposition
that cigarette advertising and promotion caused people in the '50s and '60s to begin smoking, correct?
A. That's right. And I don't make that claim one way or the other In my testimony. I use advertising In a different way.
Q. Okay. Well, just refresh my recollection of how it is you think the advertising is relevant to the public's understanding of
the health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. Well, at certain periods of time, particularly through the 1950s, cigarette advertising has significant amount of health
Information, or makes explicit health claims in it; you know, various brands have various, different elements. So that's one
way to consider it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
Another is that cigarette advertising helps establish the Image towards the cigarette and helps establish -- you know, is part
of establishing a favorable attitude towards the cigarette in terms of its use in social situations. Again, here I'm dealing with
cigarette advertising, you know, at least through the 1960s, you know, showing the use of cigarettes in, for want of a better
term, I would call socially normative situations while doing activities and the like.
But I'D let a marketing expert make an opinion as to the influence of that on whether or not someone is going to begin smoking
or not I'm not going to make a statement about that one way or the other.
Q. Right. You wouldn't feel qualified to make such a statement right?
A. No. And it's not important to me in my historical analysis.
Q. You made a comment that there was advertising in the period of time in the 1950s that had what you called or characterized
as health claims?
A. Yes.
Q. What kinds of brands are you -- identify the brands where you've seen advertising that makes implicit or explicit health claims.
A. Okay, yeah. The Philip Morris brand, you know, the Philip Morris cigarette, that brand made many explicit claims in the
'40s and the '50s. Kent, you know, is an example of using the micronite filter, you know, using purported statements by the
American Medical Association as advertising.
Lucky Strike relied heavily on that Carlton, ad Gold. I'm trying to remember one of the minor brands. Chesterfield certainly
made explicit health claims persistently. Those are representative examples.
Q. Okay. You're not aware of any explicit or implicit health claims made in any Marlboro advertising, are you?
A. Marlboro took a different tactic. Of course, it's in the -- I mean, it's an old brand in terms of the name Marlboro, but it's
kind of repackaging and reformulation. You know, the first Marlboro Man and then the western theme would come after the
period where explicit health claims really are so frequent, that health claims become much more muted and particularly focused
around the low tar.
Q. I'm sorry. Could you speak up?
A. Yeah. Marlboro is not as explicit as or not as indicative of these explicit health claims like I described earlier. That's not
characteristic of the Marlboro advertising.
Q. In fact, there aren't any kind of claims at all made in the Marlboro advertising you're referring to, right?
A. That are explicit health claims, that's correct.
Q. Are there any implicit health claims made?
A. This is a dicier element here, and I try to stay away from this area.
You know, does the -- the question is, then: Does the association of smoking with vigorous healthful adults, is this, in essence,
an implicit.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
[Note: Pages 174-177 missing in original document]
Q. You don't know whether he saw them or not, right?
A. That's correct, yes, I don't know.
Q. When will the decision be made as to what ads you're actually going to discuss at trial?
A. Well, the practice has been in the three previous times that I've worked with Mr. Acosta, I come in the afternoon before
and we sit down and work it out.
Q. Okay.
A. Usually -- so, the night before. That's been what I've done the other times.
Q. Okay. So you don't think the decision as to what particular ads you'll show to the jury or you want to show to the jury will
be made until the night before your testimony?
A. That's right. I'm trying to remember in Arnitz if I got to show -- well, actually, I don't think I showed any non-Philip Morris
ads in the Arnitz trial. Sometimes I've done that just to give context and background.
Q. And you would agree that in terms of commenting on the ads themselves, whether they be print ads or television ads, you're
in no better position than any other person to comment on the significance of those ads, right?
A. Well, no. I mean, there are some things that I bring to this that my research gives context to.
Q. And what is that?
A. What I can do, what I can offer the jury, is to show them the ad, they can read the ad and understand what the ad says.
Q. They're in plain English, right?
A. They're in plain English, made to be seen and instantly perceived. That's the whole point What I add to it is not, say, for
example, what a marketing person might do, which is to decode the ad. Sometimes they do that. But, rather, to simply put the
ad in the context of what is happening in the historical development of the history of the cigarette market, you know, cigarettes
sales, other ads that I don't show to the jury, and relate that to, at that point in time, what the public's general understanding
about the risks of smoking were.
So those are the things. I can provide context, you know, and that puts the ad In a broader perspective, much more than simply
the ad of a marketing document.
Q. Let me focus my next couple of questions on the time period of the 1950s. You would agree that in the 1950s people
understood that cigarette advertisements were designed to sell them something, right?
A. Sure. Advertisements are there to inform them about a product that they might buy.
Q. Right. People understand that in 2005 and people understood that in 1955 as well, correct?
A. Yes. But that doesn't mean that advertisements don't have influence.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
Q. But you're not in a position to evaluate their influence because you're not an expert on advertising, right?
A. Well, I'm not going evaluate their influence the way you would run a post-marketing study, but I put them in the context of
how the cigarette develops over time and how people perceive the cigarette. Not whether how effective the particular ad was,
how many people it reached, or whether people's opinions changed after they went through the advertising campaign. Those
things, no, I don't do that.
Q. So what is the influence of the ad, then, in your opinion, or of ads in general?
A. Well, it depends on the ads. I'll give you an example that will maybe help you understand this.
When I talk about what people were concerned about, in terms of the risks of smoking in the 1930s, they were really concerned
about not lung cancer but the symptoms of smoking, cough, smoked-out feeling. Really into the '50s this is true. So the ads
kind of addressed this concern. It's a communication process that goes two ways.
And so, you know. “Toasted for your throat protection” or “You know you Inhale.” Philip Morris has scientifically proved to
be milder. Or when Lucy and Desi Arnez talk about Philip Morris is, you know, giving you a cigarette hangover.
So the ads are reflective of what the health concerns were at that time for this particular period.
Q. Wait a minute. You've thrown in two different periods. You said the '30s and then even on into the '50s.
A. Welt, I would put the '30s through the '50s as one period for this particular purpose. As I was answering the question, that
occurred to me.
Q. Well, are you suggesting that people in the '50s weren't concerned about lung cancer and its association with cigarette
smoking?
A. In the 1950s, they really become, for the first time, concerned about it, and they're concerned
[Note: Pages 182-241 missing in original document]
between cigarette smoking and lung cancer that were being made by the TRIC and the American Tobacco Company and other
industry organizations, right?
A. And I've included statements to that effect In the New York Times articles.
Q. Let's switch gears here. Dr. Kyriakoudes, again, I'm not going to repeat all of these questions, but you've acknowledged in
the past you're not an expert on consumer behavior.
My question simply is: You haven't done anything by way of reviewing literature, taking courses or anything that's designed
to give you some expertise in consumer behavior; is that correct?
A. I've done no additional work in that area, no.
Q. And you don't consider yourself qualified, for example, to Interpret the adequacy of a product hazard warning label, do you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
A. No. I can describe it, the historical warnings, but I don't make a statement as to whether they were adequate or not, particularly
from an objective risk position.
Q. Okay. You've never published any peer-reviewed articles on the subject of health warnings or the adequacy of health
warnings, right?
A. I have not.
Q. You've never been asked by a consumer products company to design a warning label, for example?
A. I have not.
Q. You have testified that the change in the content of the warning label that appears on cigarette packs from '66 to '69 and 70
to '85 reflects the fact that the earlier warnings were ineffective. If I've mischaracterized your testimony and you want to say
something differently, tell me. But Is that a fair characterization?
A. Yes. The public health community, In particular, felt the warnings were ineffective.
Q. When you say “the public health community,” who are you talking about?
A. Well, for the second go at it in 1969 was the agitation of the Federal Trade Commission and the wider public health
community. And the third go at It in the 1980s, you know, a broad array of people as early as the Carter administration under
Joseph Califano, who was the head of the HEW. As far as other, I think it's fair to say, anti-smoking activists or, you know,
called for stronger warnings.
So that's the basis of my statement Not because I have done an objective study as to whether the warnings were adequate or
not, but rather they were perceived as needing to be strengthened by those who were championing warnings and championing
anti-smoking.
Q. And where have you read those statements?
A. Oh, this is -- this is just from -- you know, I mink I've got some New York Times articles relevant to the warnings in there,
in that set, just from reading the testimony, the congressional hearings, which I believe I've -- I know I've included on the disk,
under the government document list. I haven't looked at this in a long time. But that's the basis of that statement.
Q. The New York Times articles?
A. Also the hearings, the cigarette label hearings.
Q. Are those part of the materials you've produced to us?
A. Yeah, they're on the disk.
Q. The hearings from the 1969 Labeling and Advertising Act?
A. I've got the '65 and the '69 and the '82 Federal Trade Commission report. There's a couple Federal Trade Commission reports
in there that discuss the warnings.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2005 WL 6512412...
Q. Okay. You would agree, would you not, that there were other people as equally or well-qualified people like Secretary
Califano who were saying in the '60s that there is no need to put a warning on cigarettes because you're not telling people
anything they don't already know, right?
A. Well, that's the position the American Medical Association took. I'm highly skeptical of their motives in that. I've testified
to this that, Paul Blasingame of the AMA did make the statement, we need to look at the context of what was going on in terms
of girthing themselves for a battle against Medicare and Medicaid in the Johnson administration, their acceptance of a rather
large gift for either the Education and Research Fund or the Research and Education Fund.
Q. ERF.
A. Thank you. I kind of get that confused. And given the demonstrable lack of public knowledge from other sources, from
polling sources, from, you know, other reports and other kinds of things we've been talking about over the course of today, it's
shocking. And then, finally, the 1995 -- I think it was June, summer of 1995 -- the AMA issue that discusses this as
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8
