Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Original Image of 2010 WL 6511228 (PDF)
2010 WL 6511228 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Expert Deposition)
Circuit Court of Florida,
Eighth Judicial Circuit, Civil Division.
Alachua County
Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the Estate of John Paul Alexander, Deceased, Plaintiff,
v.
PHILIP MORRIS, USA, A Virginia corporation, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,
A North Carolina corporation, Liggett Group, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability
Company, and Vector Group, Ltd., Inc., A Delaware corporation, Defendants.
No. 01-2008-CA-5067.
May 14, 2010.
Division: K
Deposition of Louis Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: Alachua County, Florida
Name of Expert: Louis Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Appearances.
Rod Smith, Esquire
Avera & Smith, LLP
2814 SW 13th Street
Gainesville, Florida 32608
Attorney for Plaintiff.
Christine Lawson, Esquire
Jones Day
1420 Peachtree Street, N.E.
Atlanta, Georgia 30309-3053
Attorney for R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Co.
Reported By:
Monica Schroeder, RPR, CRR, CSR #1285
Court Reporter & Notary Public.
Taken at the Holiday Inn Express, 300 West Beach Boulevard, Long Beach, Mississippi, on Friday, May 14, 2010, beginning
at 8:55 a.m.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Examination by:
Ms. Lawson ... 5
Mr. Smith ... 359
Ms. Lawson ... 363
Exhibits:
Exhibit 1, Defendant's Amended Notice of Taking Deposition Duces Tecum ... 11
Exhibit 2, Curriculum Vitae ... 12
Exhibit 3, Emails (Sealed - not attached - in custody of Mr. Smith) ... 15
Exhibit 4, Emails ... 16
Exhibit 5, Emails ... 17
Exhibit 6, Reliance Materials ... 64
Exhibit 7, Gallup Poll Public Opinion 1935 - 1971 (Volume Three 1959 - 1971) ... 109
Exhibit 8, Emails ... 135
Exhibit 9, Emails ... 167
Exhibit 10, Privilege Log ... 309
Exhibit 11, Email to Dr. Kyriakoudes, from Dr. Proctor, dated 5/23/08; Email to Dr. Proctor, from Dr. Kyriakoudes, dated
5/23/08 ... 344
Exhibit 12, Emails ... 354
STIPULATION
It is hereby stipulated and agreed by and between the parties hereto, through their respective attorneys of record, that this
deposition may be taken at the time and place hereinbefore set forth, by Monica Schroeder, Court Reporter and Notary Public,
pursuant to the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended;
That the formality of READING AND SIGNING is specifically NOT WAIVED.
DR. LOUIS KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D. having been first duly sworn, was examined and testified as follows:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
EXAMINATION
BY MS. LAWSON:
Q. Good morning. How are you?
A. I'm well. Good morning.
Q. Good. Would you mind stating your name for the record?
A. My name is Louis Michael Kyriakoudes.
Q. And you understand we're here about a case called Alexander today, Earline Alexander?
A. That's correct.
Q. And I know you've done a lot of depositions, but as we've done with prior depositions, if you don't understand any question
I ask, will you let me know?
A. I will.
Q. And I'll try to ask a better question so that you do understand it. And if you need a break at any time, please just let me
know. Okay?
A. Okay.
Q. And have you been paid a retainer by plaintiffs for this case, this Alexander case?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And how much is that retainer?
A. $3,500.
Q. And what do you expect that retainer to cover?
A. That's simply an advance on the time I spend preparing for the case.
Q. Okay. How much time have you spent on this case thus far?
A. Probably about six or seven hours.
Q. Okay. And what have you been doing in those six or seven hours?
A. I've spoken with Mr. Smith on the telephone and talked to him. I have prepared an exhibit list for this deposition, which I
submitted last week or so. I reviewed depositions.
Q. Okay. And is there any particular hourly rate that you are charging the plaintiffs at?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. The same rate that I charge everybody, $400 an hour.
Q. Okay. And to that end, a little earlier, I gave you a check, and I don't know if you've opened it to look at it yet, but you are
charging us $400 an hour for this deposition; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And do you have a minimum number of hours for the deposition that you charge for?
A. Minimum?
Q. Like, if we go three hours, would you charge a minimum of four?
A. Oh, you know, if we go after lunch, my practice has been, you know, you've taken my whole day, so I'm happy to stay with
you the whole day, but if you go for three hours, then that's fine. That would be three hours.
Q. Okay. I believe the check was actually assuming an eight-hour day, but --
A. Well, if it works out that it's less, I can give it back to you and you can refigure it.
Q. No. That's fine. I just wanted to see if you had a minimum. That's what I was trying to understand.
A. Okay.
Q. When were you first contacted about the Alexander case?
A. This case, back in February.
Q. In February of this year?
A. Yes, February of this year.
Q. And what, if anything, were you asked to do for this case?
A. Well, I explained my testimony. I reviewed some depositions, prepared exhibits.
Q. And has all that contact been with Mr. Smith, who is here today?
A. Well, sometimes, I've talked with Mr. Smith. Sometimes, I've spoken with Ms. Nichols, an attorney in that office, and
sometimes, I've dealt with a paralegal named Dawn.
Q. I think Dawn's actually a lawyer.
A. Dawn's a lawyer.
Q. A very fine lawyer.
A. It's Natalia, and I believe that's a mother/daughter team.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
It is.
A. But those would be the three people I've dealt with.
MR. SMITH:
For the record, I will tell Dawn you got her mixed up as the daughter. That will give her some credit.
A. They've always been the disembodied voice on the phone, so it's a little difficult. I've not met them in person.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Have you been provided any particular documents by plaintiff's counsel in this case for use in this case?
A. Yes. I was provided the interrogatories that were developed for this case, the deposition of the widow, Ms. Alexander, and
two of the daughters' depositions.
Q. Do you remember which daughters?
A. I'm not remembering their first names right now, and in my rush to get here this morning, I left that stack of paper depositions,
on which there are no notes, by the way, at home. So it's just two of the daughters.
Q. So you've read the widow's deposition and two of the daughters' depositions?
A. That's correct.
Q. Any other depositions you've read?
A. No.
MS. LAWSON:
We may ask later if we can identify which of the two daughters, if that would be okay.
MR. SMITH:
I will.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you know if there's been a defense historian named in this case?
A. I don't know.
Q. And since you told me you only read the depo of the widow and the daughters, you haven't read the depositions of any
experts in this case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I have not.
Q. Have you done all the research that you plan to do for the Alexander case?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. The only retainer we talked about just a minute ago, a $3,500 retainer, have you billed any additional amount to plaintiffs'
counsel for your work in this case?
A. No, I haven't.
Q. Have you seen a copy of the Notice of Deposition for the deposition here today?
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's go ahead and mark this, if we may.
(Exhibit 1 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Are there any documents that you've brought in response to Schedule A attached to this Notice of Deposition?
A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell me what you've brought?
A. I brought my curriculum vitae.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay. Do you know, Ron, if this is the same one that was provided to us?
MR. SMITH:
It should be. You haven't changed it since you provided it to me, have you?
THE WITNESS:
I went over it last night. I didn't make any changes of any substance. I fixed a typo.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Other than fixing the typo, when was the last time you updated your CV?
A. It would have been probably in December. It's been a while. It's been a few months.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
The answer is, I think that's the one that's been provided to you. I'm representing to you that if there's any changes, I have not
received the changes.
MS. LAWSON:
Can we mark this as the next exhibit?
(Exhibit 2 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. What else do you have for me?
A. You had asked for -- I forget which number it was, but you had asked for e-mails.
Q. Yes.
A. And I brought e-mails.
Q. Okay. And these are e-mails between you and who?
A. One of the items on the Schedule A asked for e-mails between me and Engle progeny attorneys and those are the ones that
I developed. I have one set that is privileged, this one.
MR. SMITH:
Yeah. This one. I would represent to you that he is claiming privilege, even though he did not do a privilege log, because he
found one, it is not related to tobacco litigation, it is not related to the Engle case. It is related to another kind of case entirely
and it is not -- and it is one that he has claimed privilege on behalf of that employer, which is another law firm. It's not us. And
he claims privilege in those communications and they've claimed work product in what they've communicated to him.
But I am representing to you it is not a tobacco case. It is not a tobacco litigation.
MS. LAWSON:
Would you be agreeable to just putting it under seal in the event we decide we need to have the judge look at it?
MR. SMITH:
Yes. It will be sealed. It will remain under seal.
I say that. Are you comfortable with that?
THE WITNESS:
Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
There's nothing in here that has anything to do with Engle, Engle progeny, tobacco, tobacco litigation. It is a different kind of
case entirely. And I think there is one -- I think there is -- there are some communications, also, in here with that same firm
reference to whether he would be retained -- questioning whether he would be retained in a tobacco case and it turned out the
case is not a tobacco case. So I would agree to that, put it under seal and if you guys want to take it up with the judge, you can.
MS. LAWSON:
I accept your representation.
MR. SMITH:
The original inquiry is on the tobacco case and what he ends up getting retained on is another kind of case, is not a tobacco
case, is entirely different and not even of the same kind of litigation.
MS. LAWSON:
Can we mark this and agree that it's under seal?
MR. SMITH:
Yes, mark it, and it's under seal and not to be disclosed without a court order.
MS. LAWSON:
That's fine. I will keep it next to you so it can't get mixed up.
MR. SMITH:
That's fine.
(Exhibit 3 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. The other e-mails that you just handed to me, are you not claiming any privilege at all with regard to these e-mails?
A. No. You can have those.
MS. LAWSON:
Can we mark these as the next exhibit?
(Exhibit 4 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you have any other documents for me?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes. I brought the e-mails between me and Mr. Smith's law firm related to this case. I guess those were asked for in the
Schedule A.
Q. Yes. Those would have been asked for. And you are not claiming -- before I look at these, you are not claiming any privilege
with regard to these e-mails between you and Mr. Smith's firm?
A. No.
MR. SMITH:
No.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay. Mark these as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 5 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. And just to be thorough, I'm going to go through the Schedule A and make sure there's nothing else that might be responsive
that you just forgot to bring. Do you have any medical records or other documents except the interrogatory responses and the
depositions that you told me that are related to this case?
A. No, I do not.
Q. Have you prepared any report for this case?
A. I have not.
Q. Have you taken any notes for this case?
A. I have not.
Q. And the reliance list that was provided to us by Mr. Smith, I'm going to say a week or so ago, would that be the list of all
the scientific or scholarly publications that you rely upon for forming your opinions related to this case?
A. Yes. As best as I can put together a list. I mean, accepting the reality that historians draw upon a wide variety of sources,
but those are -- I did my best to pull that together.
MR. SMITH:
I want to take a break real quickly. I want to correct something.
(Off the record.)
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
I want to go back to what's been marked as Exhibit 3. And I am going to -- I want to carve out -- because there is communication
in here that had to do with scheduling.
He's ultimately involved in a non-tobacco case, but it started out as a contact of tobacco with a firm, and I've reviewed these
documents, which are the ones that had to do with your availability for the tobacco litigation.
THE WITNESS:
Yes.
MR. SMITH:
Which obviously leads to a contact about a different kind of litigation and a different kind of case. These, I think, should be
revealed and would not be product. So I'm going to add this to the packet of those.
So I'm keeping out two pages dated Friday, September 11th, 2009 and dated September 13th, 2009, which relate to -- not to a
tobacco case. It identifies the kind of case in there. But those do relate to scheduling -- they are tobacco inquiries about are you
available, et cetera, so those should be disclosed as part of what's been introduced as Exhibit 2.
So what I'm taking out as Exhibit 3 would be documents related to a non-tobacco case and a non-tobacco opinion, but it arises
in the context of what was clearly -- his contact was to be retained in a tobacco case so that's why I don't want to be cued about
that. I want to be sure that we're keeping out the part that you think does not relate to tobacco.
But that contact scheduling was a tobacco contact.
THE WITNESS:
Right. It's just the part where he asks me about something else.
MS. LAWSON:
So we are going to add three pages to Exhibit 4. And they are, just for the record, they -- it starts out 3 of 5, 4 of 5, 5 of 5, all
dated 5/4/2010, 1:07 p.m., it looks like communications with Linnes Finney, Jr.; is that right?
A. Correct.
MS. LAWSON:
We'll add this to the back of Exhibit 4.
MR. SMITH:
I'm keeping under seal those pages which are marked 1 of 5 and 2 of 5. Actually, the way it works, they work backwards in
time, so these would be the latest.
MS. LAWSON:
The latest. Right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you know if there are any other depositions that have been taken in this case other than the widow and the two daughters
that you've reviewed?
A. I'm not aware of other depositions.
Q. If others are taken, is that something that you would want to see?
A. No. I have what I need to offer my opinions in this case.
Q. Okay.
MR. SMITH:
Counsel, the only thing I would advise is that there are two older sisters, and now that the brand usage has been finalized, I
may provide him with the earliest date for cigarette smoking purposes, which would be older than the daughters or the wife.
He began smoking much before them, as you are aware. They would have been born in the early '50s. They were married in
'57, '58. '57 or '58.
Consequently, I will be providing him the earliest date that is from the sisters, and I want to say that is from Ms. George. It may
be from Rosa Lee Foster, but I believe it's Ms. George. I will tell you, that will probably be something he will rely on only as
-- that will already be in evidence, but as a starting point of the time periods about which he will testify.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay. I'll ask him questions about that.
MR. SMITH:
It's basically going to say, let's assume he started smoking in the early 1940s and was born in -- there will be that history, which
has been shared with him, but it may actually be one of the sisters' testimony will be provided to him to that limited issue only.
He's not going to talk about specifically anything else about their testimony, but he will be talking about and we will have
narrowed down brands through the composite of all of these, which are the brands complained about.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay. I don't think that will be an issue. If, for some reason, it changed his opinions or changed things, we'll want to come
back and talk to him about that.
MR. SMITH:
The only thing that was holding me back before is we were trying to figure out which -- where we were going to be starting.
I think everybody is kind of clear now where I'm going to be starting.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Would it be fair to say you haven't had any correspondence or communications with any physician who ever treated Mr.
Alexander?
A. That's correct. I haven't had any correspondence like that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Any invoices that you submitted to Mr. Smith in this case?
A. No.
Q. Just the retainer that was the up-front payment?
A. That's right.
Q. And you provided me, I think, with -- before we began, a bill for your deposition in various cases from last fall. Since, I guess,
maybe the last half of last year, do you have any idea how much money you've made working as an expert in tobacco cases?
A. For the --
Q. Like, the last half of last year.
A. I haven't made any additional monies on tobacco cases since I testified, I think, sometime in the fall, that $75,000. I haven't
received anything since then.
And just to clarify, the retainer that I received from Mr. Smith's firm, I received prior to that, prior to the Hetzner deposition,
and I simply, you know, are kind of still working off of that one, so to speak.
Q. And when did you receive that retainer in the Hetzner case?
A. It would have been last year, but I can't remember exactly when.
Q. So you haven't received a retainer specific to the Alexander case then?
A. That's correct.
Q. All right. And the last case you testified in, I believe your last deposition was in Naugle, is that right, September of last year?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you remember the last trial you testified in?
A. The last trial I testified in was, I believe, the Leon Barbanell case.
Q. And that would have been July?
A. The end of July.
Q. Do you know if you've been disclosed in any additional tobacco cases in the last half of last year?
A. I don't. I just don't.
Q. Okay. Are you currently working on -- and, again, I don't want to -- if you have not been disclosed, don't tell me case names,
but are you working on any tobacco cases as an expert right now, other than this Alexander case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
12Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I got a request, an e-mail request for scheduling a deposition in June, which I believe is in your --
Q. In the e-mails we just discussed?
A. Yes. With the Uiterwyk law firm. And I haven't done any work on that case, but they were asking me to schedule a deposition.
Q. Do you know if you've been disclosed in that case?
A. I don't. And I don't remember the name of the case.
Q. Well, then you can't tell me. Do you know where it is? Refer to your notes or the e-mail.
THE WITNESS:
Maybe I should have read these more carefully. That's my private attorney.
MR. SMITH:
It doesn't disclose anything. It's just a phone call. Was it with Uiterwyk or Hammers or Biggers? Do you remember who it was?
A. Here it is. It's called Bronstein, Stanley, and the e-mail is from a paralegal. And it says, “Defense counsel would like to take
your deposition in the above referenced matter. Could you please provide me with availability for the same to occur during the
first three weeks of June?” So Bronstein. But I'm assuming they've disclosed me.
MS. LAWSON:
You have been disclosed in that one, although I can tell you that case, as of yesterday, has been transferred to Broward County,
so the current scheduling order that's in place in Levy County is no longer in effect.
A. I'll just make the observation that that happens so often that it's crazy for me to keep up with that kind of stuff.
MR. SMITH:
That was the Levy case?
MS. LAWSON:
That was the case in Levy County.
MR. SMITH:
I was probably going to come in on that. When they took it to Broward, I know I'm not coming in on it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. How much time do you think you've spent on the Bronstein case, if any?
A. No time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
13Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. No time?
A. Yes. As of yet.
Q. As of yet.
A. I haven't received any materials from them.
Q. Other than the Earline Alexander case and this Bronstein case, are you working on any other tobacco-related cases?
A. In the Engle?
Q. Well, let's start with Engle.
A. Right now, this is the only Engle case.
Q. How about other than Engle, any other tobacco cases you are working on now?
A. Well, there's one going on right now in Connecticut.
Q. Are you an expert in that particular case?
A. Yes. I was deposed in that case and have -- I don't know what the outcome of that is going to be, but I have worked on that.
Q. Do you know if you are going to be testifying at trial in that case?
A. I don't. It's uncertain. I mean, I don't know either way.
Q. Okay.
A. It's uncertain to me. It's not uncertain to the -- I don't know what the attorneys' thoughts are.
Q. They haven't told you?
A. Exactly.
Q. Other than the case in Connecticut, any other non-Engle tobacco cases you are working on?
A. In the United States?
MR. SMITH:
Have you been disclosed on?
A. That I've been disclosed on, none that I'm aware of.
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
14Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
For the record, I'll object to any cases that you are working on for which you haven't made a disclosure, but in federal court, if
you've written any reports counts as a disclosure, also, in the federal court system.
A. Yes. I understand that, and there's nothing relevant there.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So other than the case in Connecticut, the two Engle progeny cases we've talked about, you are not aware of you being
disclosed as an expert in any other tobacco-related litigation?
A. That's correct. And you guys have asked me this kind of question before, and my name may be attached to who knows what,
but in terms of what I understand what I'm working on, that's it. You've identified the set.
Q. All right. Fair enough. Number 13 on the Schedule A asked for correspondence and documents between you and other
experts in this case. And I'm not -- I don't have any intention of plowing old ground about things that we've had in the past, but
have you had any communications with Dr. Proctor in, say, the last half of last year?
A. We've had two short phone calls.
Q. Did those phone calls involve tobacco litigation at all?
A. No.
Q. Just personal stuff?
A. Professional research. I had to -- I had to beg out of a conference back in the fall, due to scheduling problems and some
budgetary issues at my university, so I telephoned him about that. And I spoke to him once this spring.
Q. Have you all talked about any research related to tobacco?
A. No.
Q. Or tobacco litigation?
A. No.
Q. Do you know Dr. Cummings?
A. I know who he is. I don't have a personal relationship with him.
Q. Have you had any communications with him about tobacco litigation?
A. No. I've never had any communications with him about anything.
Q. Do you know Dr. Henningfield?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you had any communications with him about tobacco litigation?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
15Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. No.
Q. How about Dr. Benowitz, do you know him?
A. No. I've never met him.
Q. I'm assuming no communications with him about tobacco litigation.
A. Or of any type.
Q. How about Dr. Burns, do you know him?
A. No.
Q. No communications with him?
A. No communications with him of any type.
Q. Do you know Dr. Goldberg?
A. Would that be Marvin Goldberg?
Q. Yes, in Pennsylvania.
A. I met him at a conference six or seven years ago, and that's the only communications I've ever had with him.
Q. Okay. Were any of those communications about tobacco litigation or tobacco research?
A. Well, it was a tobacco conference, so it was about tobacco research, but not litigation.
Q. How long ago was that, do you think?
A. I think that would have been in -- it was a conference in 2004. I had a -- you know, kind of passing exchange with him.
Q. Have you ever read any testimony that he's given?
A. No.
Q. In about the last half of last year, have you read any testimony that Dr. Proctor has given?
A. No.
Q. Do you know Dr. Feingold?
A. No. I don't -- I don't know him.
Q. Never had any communications with him?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
16Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Uh-uh. What's his first name?
Q. Alan.
A. No. I've never.
Q. Have you had any communications with any historians that you are aware of working for the defendants?
A. Not about tobacco matters.
Q. Do you know any of the defense historians, personally?
A. You mean people who have served as defense historians over the years?
Q. Yes. I'm sorry. I should have asked a better question. People who have served as defense historians in tobacco cases over
the years, are you familiar with any of them? Do you know them?
A. Yes.
Q. Who do you know?
A. I know Lacy Ford.
Q. How do you know him?
A. I first met Lacy Ford when I was an undergraduate student at the University of North Carolina and I've known him ever since.
Q. Did you ever have classes from him?
A. No. He wasn't teaching at my college. He was doing research in the Raleigh, Durham triangle area.
Q. Have you ever had any discussions with him about tobacco litigation?
A. No.
Q. Have you put together any materials that you might be presenting at trial yet in this case?
A. No. I haven't put together, like, an exhibit display yet. I haven't done that.
Q. Do you have any idea which documents you may be using to illustrate your testimony at trial?
A. Well, I haven't sat down and actually done that yet. I know some that I might use, but I couldn't give you all of them right
now, as I sit here.
Q. Can you give me sort of a general -- to the best that you can explain it, give me a general idea of what you are planning
to use at trial?
A. Yes. I'm happy to do that. Advertisements.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
17Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you know which ads yet?
A. I haven't sat down and chosen the ads yet, but, I mean, they'll be ads from the time and of the brands relevant to Mr.
Alexander's smoking history, you know, from the late '30s, things that shaped his pre-smoking understanding through his life.
MR. SMITH:
Counsel, I will make this easier. I've told him, and I've told Charlie Trippy and maybe others, my plan now is I had a disk
burned of all the ads I was going to use. Because of changes in this case in the last couple of days, what I'm doing now is, I'm
going to provide to the witness -- I'll probably get to Louis maybe by Monday or Tuesday, but on Tuesday, I plan to give a
burned disk of all of the ads that we're going to seek to put in.
They will be of three varieties: One, radio, and there's not a lot of that; television, it will be brand-specific to the brands that are
now continued in the case; and print billboard -- all the poster ads. Those are all going to be provided to you all at the pre-trial,
and those are -- and those will be the ads that I use in the case through Dr. Kyriakoudes.
I'm actually involved here, not him, and that is because I had gotten ready to send him something that had a bunch of brands
that are no longer relevant. In fact, we're redoing the ads. In fact, I was on the phone this morning doing that. But you will
have them Tuesday.
I also don't think there's going to be any surprise ads. These ads are on the standard list of ads.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you know when Mr. Alexander was born?
A. Yes.
Q. When was he born?
A. 1930.
Q. Do you know where he was born?
A. In Union County, Florida.
Q. Do you know where Union County, Florida is?
A. It's north of Gainesville, kind of in the central northern portion of the state.
Q. Okay. Do you know anything about what Union County was like in the 1930s?
A. Yes.
Q. Tell me what you know about it.
A. Well, it's a county with approximately 35, 40 percent African-American population, highly agricultural, mixed agriculture,
some cotton, some tobacco, mostly truck and citrus, truck crops and citrus. The home of the state prison. It was once a larger
county. Bradford and it were split at an earlier period. Poor. You know, the part of Florida that more resembles what we would
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
18Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
think of the deep south as opposed to south Florida. At least through the 1950s, no African-Americans of voting age were
registered to vote. It was actually zero, which is interesting. So it's -- those are some attributes to the place.
Q. Where did you get your information about Union County in the '30s, '40s, '50s?
A. Just general research. I reviewed some -- just on my own, some newspaper material, went to the census, the agricultural
census to look at the agricultural crops, looked at maps, things like that.
Q. Okay. Are any of those things on your reliance list that you gave us?
A. No. I didn't include the census on my reliance list. That's just -- you know, that's just general knowledge.
Q. Okay. How about you said some newspaper materials. What newspaper materials?
A. Oh, I was looking -- I was interested in learning about just if there was much civil rights activity there in the '50s. I was
curious. So I looked at some of the digital newspapers that are in digital form that can easily be searched.
Q. Do you remember which ones?
A. I believe I pulled up some stories from the St. Petersburg paper, Sarasota paper, New York Times, Christian Science Monitor,
just as, again, a general research.
Q. Any from the general area of Union County?
A. No.
Q. How would looking at the St. Petersburg papers, New York Times, give you information about Union County?
A. Well, a story about -- one story mentioned about black voting in 1957 and black voter registration, and it made mention that
no African-Americans were registered to vote in Union County, that kind of thing.
Q. Those newspaper materials, are they on your reliance list that you've given us?
A. No, they're not, actually. Again, I just did that as part of a general research, but I would be happy to provide them to you.
I apologize for not putting them on the list.
Q. That's all right.
A. Which I put together ten days ago, and this was something I did within that ten-day frame.
MS. LAWSON:
If you wouldn't mind, we'd like to see copies of whatever he looked at.
MR. SMITH:
Okay.
A. I can e-mail to Mr. Smith.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
19Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
I'll provide it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. We appreciate that. Anything else that you've looked at other than what we've just talked about that you used to get
information about Union County in the '30s, '40s, '50s?
A. That's it.
Q. Do you have any pictures of Union County during that time period that you would plan to use in this case?
A. I don't have any pictures right now.
Q. Do you plan on getting pictures?
A. I haven't, really. No. I hadn't planned on getting pictures.
Q. If you do get pictures, if you would, let Mr. Smith know, so Mr. Smith can let us know.
A. Yes.
MR. SMITH:
I would say that I have seen my favorite picture from the 1930s is Sheriff Whitehead, the old sheriff from the 1940s holding
up a nine-foot rattlesnake. It's at the sheriff's office.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Have you ever met Mrs. Alexander?
A. No, I have not.
Q. You've never talked to her?
A. No. I have never talked with her.
Q. Have you ever talked with the daughters of Mr. Alexander?
A. No.
Q. Other than Mr. Smith, have you ever met anyone connected with the Alexander case?
A. I have not.
Q. Do you know anything about Mr. Alexander's educational background?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
20Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, I read the depositions, which discuss that. So I do --
Q. Tell me what you know about that.
A. Well, he attended some school, the deposition reports to the fifth grade, at least his widow. And while there's been a
description of the school, itself, you know, what we know about the state of the segregated education in the south, you know,
we can look at that and understand that that was certainly an inferior school compared to the white schools.
Q. Do you know if Mr. Alexander could read?
A. It's difficult to tell. I mean, I think he was -- I mean, he worked and had a career as a -- in a variety of occupations. I mean,
in a way, what do you mean by “read”? There's a spectrum there. He certainly was possessed of some literacy skills.
Q. So you think he could read at least some?
A. Some, yes. But to the extent of that, it's difficult to tell.
Q. Well, let me ask it this way. Are you planning to come to trial and opine that Mr. Alexander was illiterate?
MR. SMITH:
Illiterate?
MS. LAWSON:
Illiterate.
A. No. I can't say that either.
Q. So you just don't know what his literacy skills were?
A. Right. I mean, his particular situation is very difficult to tell, from the evidence, but people like him, at that time, who
went through that similar experience, you know, had -- they may have had some literacy skills. But it's difficult to say how
extensive that was.
Q. Okay. So would it be fair to say, then, you just can't say how much he could read or how well he could read?
A. Well, I mean, he only had a fifth grade education in a segregated school in one of the most rural parts of the south. So you
have to keep that in mind.
Q. Okay. I want to go back to the question I asked before. You don't know and you don't have an opinion as to how literate
he was?
A. Well, let me say it this way: I mean, there's illiterate, as one polarity, and there's maybe full literacy of the full set of skills,
writing, reading. He probably had the skills that were typical of someone who, at best, made it to the fifth grade, at best, in a
deficient Union school, one-room school house.
So it's probably clear that he had modest skills. And that's about the best precision I can say. Or that's the most precise I can be.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
21Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. All right. Do you have an opinion as to whether he would have been able to read warning labels once they were put on
cigarette packages?
A. I can't say about his particular -- I'm not going to offer an opinion on that level of detail about him, as an individual.
Q. Okay. Do you know how long Mr. Alexander lived in Union County?
A. Well, I know he was born and raised there, and then later, moved to Gainesville and remained there for the rest of his life.
Q. Okay. Do you know if he ever grew tobacco?
A. I don't.
Q. Does it make any difference in your opinions whether he and his family grew tobacco?
A. Well, there was some tobacco cultivation in that county. Whether he grew it, himself, is interesting. But he certainly was
coming from an area where tobacco cultivation was part of the culture, part of the social and economic culture.
Q. Does that in any way change any opinions that you might offer?
A. Well, it makes him somebody that would -- you know, would have accepted tobacco as a normal and accepted part of life,
like many people who grow up in those kinds of rural, agricultural communities.
Q. Do you know when Mr. Alexander began smoking?
A. Again, you know, relying on the deposition, approximately 1941, but it may have been sooner. It's certainly, you know,
as a child, pre-teen.
Q. And are you taking that 1941 date from his wife's deposition?
A. That's right.
Q. Do you know what kind of cigarettes he first smoked?
A. I'm not recalling if there was a clear indication of his very first cigarette. I know there were a variety of brands that he did
smoke over the course of his smoking career.
Q. Do you know if he ever smoked roll-your-own cigarettes?
A. I'm not recollecting that. He may or may not have.
Q. What brands do you understand that he smoked?
A. Well, there's some indication of Chesterfield, Camel, Pall Mall, Lucky Strike, and then later, menthol brands.
Q. Such as?
A. Kool, Salem. I'm not recalling if there was -- I'm not recalling if there was a mention of Newport or not. I would have to
refresh my memory on that. And I believe there was a brief mention of Doral.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
22Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you know when he used Chesterfield?
A. I think the discussion of Chesterfield was earlier in his smoking career.
Q. Do you know how long he used it?
A. I don't. I couldn't give you a firm answer on that.
Q. Do you know when he used Camel?
A. Again, my recollection is that it was in the earlier portion of his smoking career.
Q. Do you know how long he used Camel?
A. No. I couldn't give you a specific time frame or time length.
Q. Do you know when he used Pall Mall?
A. I would give you the same answer as the other two.
Q. You don't know exactly when or how long; would that be fair?
A. Right. That's right. And that's just basing it on the deposition testimony.
Q. Okay. Would your answer be the same for Lucky Strike?
A. Yes.
Q. Would your answer be the same for Kool?
A. Well, those are a little bit -- it seems to me -- I'm going to sit here and recall what I read, that he moves to the menthols in
something like the '60s, maybe even the '70s. I'm not recollecting exactly when. You will have to refresh my memory on that.
Q. Do you know how long he smoked Kool?
A. I don't. I don't know the length.
Q. And you don't know when, exactly, he smoked Kool?
A. Just what I mentioned earlier.
Q. Other than you think it may have been in the '60s or '70s?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know when he smoked Salem?
A. The answer would be the same for Kool.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
23Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. As it is for Kool. I think you mentioned Newport to me. Do you have any idea when he might have smoked Newport?
A. No. I think there's just the briefest mention of that.
Q. Do you know if he smoked it very long?
A. I couldn't say either way.
Q. I think I forgot to ask you this. Do you know how long he smoked Salem?
A. I couldn't give you a specific time frame. I just know that he moved to the menthols in the -- I believe in the '60s, as I sit
here drawing upon my recollection.
Q. And I think the last brand you told me about was Doral. Do you know when he smoked Doral?
A. It would have been when Doral was introduced, so it would have been later in his smoking career.
Q. Do you know how long he smoked Doral?
A. I don't.
(Off the record.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. As you sit here today, are you aware of whether you plan to use any Chesterfield ads in your testimony?
MR. SMITH:
The answer is no. I will tell you that based on the stipulation that was entered yesterday, L&M, Chesterfield --
THE WITNESS:
Winston.
MR. SMITH:
Marlboro ads are being pulled out. I may be missing others. But there will be some ads in addition to brands he's named so far
because there are some other brand usages that will be R.J. I will not be producing non-R.J. ads, as I told you earlier. That's
what I'm in the process of pulling out.
A. And, again, to complete my answer about the brand history, there is some mention or evidence of use of Winston.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you know when he smoked Winston?
A. I don't know the exact times, no.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
24Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you know how long he smoked Winston?
A. I couldn't say.
Q. Now, at least as I understand it, there are going to be some ads that you plan to show at trial. Would that be correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And the ads that you are going to be showing at trial, are these ads that you provided to Mr. Smith or are these ads that
Mr. Smith is giving you?
A. Well, I sent Mr. Smith a large amount of material to work from, including some on-line archives of ads, which I disclosed
in my reliance. And I haven't talked with him about which particular ads that I plan to use yet. And as he's mentioned earlier,
the scope has changed because of the nature of the case.
Q. Well, let me ask, do you know if you plan to show Camel ads? Do you have an understanding as to whether you are going
to show Camel ads during your testimony?
A. I would like to show Camel ads, yes.
Q. How about Pall Mall ads?
A. Pall Mall, I would like to show, yes.
Q. How about Lucky Strike?
A. Yes. I would like to show some Luckys, yes.
Q. Kool?
A. Yes.
Q. Salem?
A. Yes.
Q. Newport?
A. They -- that's a Lorillard product.
MR. SMITH:
Newport is not going to be included. It's only going to be RJR ads.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Doral?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
25Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Sure, yes.
Q. Winston?
A. Yes.
Q. Let me go back to the top. As you sit here today, do you have any idea or could you generally describe the type of Camel
ads that you would plan to use at trial?
A. Well, I think at the trial, I'll probably choose from the ads that prevailed, the Camel ads that were published and put on
billboards or wherever from the '30s, the formative period of his use, to the '40s and '50s.
If you would like me to describe some of the themes or slogans, I would be happy to do that.
Q. That would be fine.
A. You know, “Camels don't get your wind,” that was a big theme in the '30s. “Camel's aid in digestion.” There's some interesting
Camel ads that feature wartime service or wartime themes during World War II. There are Camel advertisements in the late
'40s and '50s that feature kind of medical professionals in the ads. So those would be the set from which I would choose.
Q. Now, these Camel ads -- and I know you've told me you found ads and archives and things like that, you provided them to
Mr. Smith. Do you know where those ads came from, the ones that you found in the archives, where did they come from?
A. Yeah.
Q. Explain to me, if you would.
A. Sure. Magazines. These are magazines ads that would have appeared in magazines such as Life Magazine, Time Magazine,
Newsweek Magazine and magazines like that.
Q. Okay. Do you know if Mr. Alexander ever saw a Life Magazine?
A. No. I can't, you know, put the magazine in his hand, historically.
Q. That's what I'm asking.
A. No. I can't do that.
Q. Do you know if he ever saw a Time Magazine?
A. I don't know either way.
Q. Okay. How about Newsweek Magazine?
A. The same. It would be the same answer.
Q. Okay. Do you know if any of the ads that you are -- that -- let's limit it to the Camel ads for right now. Any of the Camel
ads that you plan on showing at trial ever made their way into Union County?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
26Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I can't say either way. I mean, they were examples of nationally advertised products on the back of magazines, which were
nationally distributed. But, you know, there's no evidence -- he's sitting at the barber shop, he picks up the magazine. You know,
I -- I don't have that picture, you know, that -- I mean, it's -- people like him, even in a rural place, would have encountered
things like this at least in a general way. But for him specifically, no.
Q. And would that be the same for the ads for any of the brands we've talked about that you would plan to use? You can't say
that Mr. Alexander ever saw any of those ads; would that be correct?
A. I can't say he saw them or I can't say he didn't see them.
Q. Can you say that any of those ads that you were planning to use at trial actually made their way into Union County during
the '30s, '40s, '50s or whenever those ads were current?
A. Again, my answer would be the same.
Q. That you can't say that they were there?
A. I can't say they were or I can't say they weren't. These were just nationally distributed magazines. But I don't have the
biographical information about him, individually. And this is true of all the cases that I've testified in, so I'm going to be
consistent with prior testimony as to the extent to where the evidence allows me to speak.
Q. And as we've already talked about, Mr. Alexander wasn't a particularly educated man, so it would be unlikely that he would
have access to these magazines where these ads would have run. Wouldn't that be correct?
A. Well, did he subscribe himself? There's no evidence that he had a subscription, himself. Did he go to the barber shop?
Probably. It's hard to say. I can't support the statement you said, you know, nor can I refute it. It's -- you simply have to kind of
-- at least for me, as a historian, the best I can do is to base my opinion on what I knew about the operation of the rural south.
You know, mass culture made it to the rural south. People had access to radios and things like that. So it's difficult to say, and
I won't go any farther than the evidence allows me to go.
Q. Let me rephrase it a little bit. Would it be fair to say that you don't have any evidence that Mr. Alexander would have seen
any of these ads that you plan to use at trial?
A. That's right. I can't put the ads in his hand, but I can't say that he didn't see them, either, you know. So I won't go any farther
than what the evidence will allow me to say.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you about the themes now. We talked about the Camel ads. Pall Mall ads, can you describe to me the
themes in the Pall Mall ads that you intend to use?
A. Sure. The Pall Mall ads, in the 1950s, we're moving later in his life, tobacco is its own best filter, ads that focused on the
length of the cigarette, the use of various images, sea boat captains, military people. There's a variety of interesting Pall Mall ads.
Q. How about Lucky Strike ads with themes that you would plan to use for that brand?
A. Sure. Lucky Strike advertisements, again, for that same period, going back to the '40s, “Toasted For Your Throat Protection.”
And then later, Lucky Strike stresses the LSMFT, the Lucky Strike Mighty Fine Tobacco Theme. There's an interesting ad
campaign in the '40s and early '50s that stresses the agricultural side of the production of cigarettes, featuring tobacco farmers
and things like that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
27Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
And then we may use television advertisements. You've got some interesting, your Lucky Strike Hit Parade, the use of football
stars, like Frank Gifford for Lucky Strike. This is in the 1950s, things like that.
Q. How about Kool? What themes would there be in the Kool brand ads you plan to use at trial?
A. Well, the Kool ads tend to stress the refreshing quality of the menthol, so we would look at some of those ads.
Q. Anything else?
A. That would -- that's what comes to mind.
Q. How about for Salem?
A. Salem also stresses fresh, particularly the 1960s advertisements. We might use some television commercials for that. I don't
know. I would have to consult -- put that together. Salem is, again, that fresh, fresh theme. That's a major theme.
Q. How about for Doral?
A. Doral, yes, I'm just trying to remember some Doral ads. That would be the low-tar type of ad, and fun. I mean, there's a lot
of -- these are '70s ads. I'm not remembering these as well as some of the older ones, so I would have to refresh my memory.
Q. How about Winston?
A. Winston tastes good, snap, snap, like a cigarette should.
Q. Anything else?
A. We might show some television commercials for Winston, things like that.
Q. Okay. Do you know if you plan to show any documents or statements from The Tobacco Institute?
A. We might. I mean, I have those on my reliance list. I just haven't sat down with Ron to put that together, but I have used
that in the past, and I anticipate my testimony to be, you know, similar.
Q. Would your answer be the same for CTR and TIRC?
A. Yes.
Q. You just haven't decided -- you may use them, but you haven't decided what, if any --
MR. SMITH:
Counsel, we're going to use them. I just haven't given him the actual -- as you know, our exhibit list is large. I've cut it down
by about 90 yesterday. I'm going to cut it down again. And I'm going to go through the process, with him, of cutting it down.
I will tell you there will be Tobacco Institute, CTR, TIRC and subcommittees of those groups. But some of those materials
will have already been covered by Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor, so what I haven't decided yet is what's going to be left. I know
he's not appearing before Dr. Burns, who is going to be our first witness, because it's in the can, and those exhibits are already
agreed upon.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
28Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
So what I am saying is, there won't be anything I haven't disclosed, and -- but I have also not made a final decision of who
various documents are going in through except that I know that he will be talking about the advertising and some cultural issues,
and he'll be talking about some issues in terms of how those messages were translated and how people were communicated
to and what people in the culture knew.
So to the degree they go to that, yes, but a final number of documents, I have not made up my witness list specific to him,
finalized it yet. In fact, I would have had it finalized, but I've changed it.
MS. LAWSON:
Because of our late-breaking development.
MR. SMITH:
Actually, I was on the phone further this morning, saying, send me these. But I plan to have that done by Tuesday.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Do you know if you plan to use any internal company documents of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in your
testimony?
A. I do, yes.
Q. Do you know which documents those are?
A. Well, for example, there's a -- I believe it's 1978 marketing study on menthols that deals with African-Americans' perceptions
of the menthol cigarette. I would imagine I would use that one.
Q. What are your opinions related to that document?
A. Well, it's a document that shows both -- offers both a window onto the beliefs and values of African-American smokers, on
one hand; and then on the other hand, it also shows -- or it also is an example of Reynolds' ongoing effort to market menthols
to African-American smokers.
Q. And what do you plan to say about Reynolds and marketing to African-American smokers?
A. Or African-Americans, generally, to be more precise, that they did it and that it worked.
Q. Anything other than they marketed to African-Americans?
A. Well, I mean, it's the nature of the menthol cigarette. It's clear, from this source that I mentioned, but also other research I've
done that people that smoke menthols generally, and particularly African-American smokers, tend to think of the menthol as a
safer or healthier cigarette that has certain refreshing and clean properties that are a function of the menthol.
Q. And upon what do you base your opinion that African-Americans would have viewed menthol cigarettes as safer or healthier?
A. Well, I would represent that as the belief of the R.J. Reynolds company.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
29Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. So you are saying that -- let me make sure I understand. Your opinion is that R.J. Reynolds believed that African-Americans
perceived menthol as safer or healthier?
A. Yes. And I also agree with that position, as a historical judgment, so --
Q. Well, let me ask you then, upon what do you base your opinion that African-Americans would have viewed menthol as
safer or healthier?
A. There's a large literature on this. There have been studies by -- from the tobacco control field on this. Gosh, there are articles
in journals like Tobacco Control, the American Journal of Public Health and others, looking at menthol, internal company
studies, as I've just mentioned an example, polling data, Surgeon General's reports. So there's a broad array of sources that
indicate that, generally, people perceive menthol as fresher, safer, cleaner, and that, in particular, African-American smokers.
Q. We got a copy of your reliance list. Can you point me to any document on your reliance list that would substantiate your
opinion that African-Americans perceive menthol as safer or healthier?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Let's do that then.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's mark this as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 6 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'm going to ask you, is that a copy of your reliance list in this case?
A. Yes.
Q. All right. Can you take that and show me the documents that would -- that you are using to rely upon for your opinion that
African-Americans would have perceived menthol as safer or healthier?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. What page are you on?
A. For example, on Page 33, and I apologize for the excessive underlining, violating the good standards of bibliography
production. Towards the bottom, it says, Esty Company, William. It should be the William Esty Company, as one phrase, but
be that what it may. “The Black Menthol Cigarette Market, 1979.” Then there's a typo.
Q. Let me ask, the William Esty Company, that was a marketing company, wasn't it, or an advertising company?
A. That's right.
Q. And so this was a marketing report that they did for tobacco companies; is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
30Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. For R.J. Reynolds.
Q. For R.J. Reynolds?
A. Specifically for R.J. Reynolds.
Q. Did they come to a conclusion in that report that African-Americans perceived menthol as healthier or safer?
A. They discuss it in the report.
Q. Was that a conclusion that they drew?
A. They discuss it. Whether they use the word “conclusion” or not, I would have to refresh myself on the document.
Q. Did they cite information in their discussion of African-Americans and their views of menthol?
A. Well, it's a document summarizing a large body of survey research, so that's where they get it from.
Q. And have you reviewed the survey research that was discussed in that report?
A. I have that document. I'm not sure if I've looked at the underlying survey research. Sometimes they draw upon common
earlier research and I just don't recall.
Q. So you've looked at the marketing reports. You haven't looked at what I think you've described as the large body of survey
research that's cited in the marketing report; is that right?
A. I may or may not have. I'm just not remembering. It's a large amount of material.
Q. Any other document on your reliance list that you are using to substantiate your opinion that African-Americans viewed
menthol as safer or healthier?
A. In one of the Surgeon General's reports on African-Americans smoking -- and, again, I'm not remembering the exact date
of that particular report, but one of them where this issue was discussed. And that draws upon a body of studies that are cited
in this bibliography.
Q. Okay. And you said it draws on a body of studies cited in this bibliography. What do you mean by that?
A. Well, Surgeon General's reports are summaries or syntheses of large amounts of research. That's all.
Q. So it's not -- when you say “this bibliography,” you don't mean your reliance list, do you?
A. That's correct.
Q. You mean the Surgeon General's bibliography?
A. I see what you are asking, yes.
Q. I was confused, there. I wanted to make sure I got that right. And you don't remember which Surgeon General's Report
that was?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
31Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I would have to look at the list and remind myself of the date. When I typed up this list, I was under time pressure, end of
the semester, so I just put them all in there because I've read some of all of the reports, so I just -- to be comprehensive.
Q. Well, let me ask you, whichever Surgeon General report it was, did you just read the Surgeon General's Report or did you
actually read the studies discussed in the Surgeon General's Report?
A. I have read some of the studies that are supported, that support the Surgeon General's conclusions.
Q. Okay. Sitting here today, can you name any of those studies for me?
A. I can't. The literature is so large. I mean, it's so many. I just can't keep it all in my head.
Q. Other than the Esty Company marketing report and the Surgeon General's Report of some year, any other item on your
reliance list substantiates your opinion that African-Americans viewed menthol cigarettes as safer or healthier?
A. It's mentioned in other sources. I'm pretty sure -- I mean, I would have to double-check, but places I would go to remind
myself of this -- of the citations would be the 1964 and 1966 Clearinghouse For Smoking and Health Use of Tobacco Poll
conducted by the Health, Education and Welfare Department; the staff report of the cigarette advertising investigation. This is
a 1981 report prepared that looked at -- I'm sorry, that looked at attitudes and beliefs.
You know, there are a series of Roper polls that are conducted, some on black smokers, specifically, for the Philip Morris
company, but still illustrate the kind of attitudes and beliefs of the African-American smokers conducted in the '60s and '70s.
Those are cited in here. Then The Tobacco Institute, itself, had a series of commissioned Roper reports, as well.
So there's a large body of survey data from which I draw this. And I don't have all of the -- you know, the page numbers exactly
memorized, but that's where I get that opinion and review those type of documents.
Q. So let me make sure I understand the body of the documents that you are talking about. We've talked about the Surgeon
General's Report of some year. We've talked about the William Esty report, marketing report.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. I think you said a 1964 Clearinghouse For Smoking and Health Use of Tobacco done by the Health, Education and Welfare
Department?
A. Yes. It's a use of tobacco.
Q. Is that on your reliance list?
A. Yes. Let me find that one for you.
MR. SMITH:
That's the FTC staff report.
MS. LAWSON:
That's a different one.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
32Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Because you gave him '81. I know both of those documents are going to be used.
A. I was just looking at it. It's a 1969 publication, dated -- okay. Go to Page 23.
Q. Okay.
A. Halfway down the page, it says, Clearinghouse For Smoking and Health, National.
Q. And do you remember what it said about menthol cigarettes and African-Americans?
A. Not particularly. I mean, that's a massive study. But I seem to recall there's some good material in there on black smoking
and menthol smoking.
There's a couple of other documents in here, too, that deal with black smoking, generally, from which I draw some of these
opinions. There should be the one on -- there should be an American Tobacco document on Pall Mall for the southern urban
Negro. That's somewhere in here. I'm recalling that one. And, again, the things that I mentioned earlier, these Roper studies
and alike.
Q. You also mentioned a 1981 FTC staff report?
A. Yes.
Q. And do you remember what it said about African-Americans and menthol cigarettes?
A. I would have to refresh my recollection on that one.
MR. SMITH:
Counsel, I want to be clear. I wasn't suggesting that -- I just want to make sure that when you said “staff report,” because that's
used a couple of times, the staff report may also go to broader issues about which he will testify. I wanted to make sure we
weren't confusing two different reports.
MS. LAWSON:
No. I understand. I was actually taking that document and going through my questions.
Q. And then you mentioned Roper polls, I think you said from the '60s and '70s. Is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. And what's your recollection of Roper polls and what they said about African-Americans and menthol cigarettes?
A. Identifying African-Americans as an important market segment, generally, and in particular, a group that has a higher
propensity of menthol use, and therefore, offers a market opportunity.
Q. Do you remember what the questions were on those polls?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
33Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I would have to -- I have looked at so much material. I mean, this bibliography, itself, is 34 pages and, as you know, you
asked me to put together a list, which is fine, but in the past, I've given you actually just the computer files and it's a large
amount of material. And so I have to go back through it and find the specifics.
Q. Okay. The Roper polls, you are talking about they are on this reliance list you've given me?
A. Yes, they are.
Q. Other than the Esty Company marketing report, the Surgeon General's Report from some year, the -- I think it turned out
to be a '69 Clearinghouse For Smoking and Health Use of Tobacco, the 1981 FTC report, the Roper polls we've discussed,
anything else on your reliance list that you would use to substantiate your opinion that African-Americans viewed menthol
cigarettes as safer or healthier?
MR. SMITH:
Beyond the internal documents he's earlier testified to?
MS. LAWSON:
I don't think he testified to any --
MR. SMITH:
He identified an internal document, Reynolds. That's what started this.
MS. LAWSON:
He did. Other than that, also.
A. Well, and for -- for precision sake, many of these Roper polls are internal documents that I refer to that were produced by
Philip Morris, The Tobacco Institute, for the use of -- for the internal use of the industry as they sought to understand their
market and accomplish other things. That's what I can recall, from my very long list, as I sit here.
Q. Okay. And counsel did remind me of a 1978 marketing study on menthols from Reynolds. Can you show me where it is
on this list?
A. Well, I was thinking of the one that I mentioned earlier. I mean, all of these touch on African-Americans smoking, all of
these studies of the smoking habits. You know, the Liggett and Myers “In-Depth Exploratory Study on Cigarette Smoking
Habits and Attitudes.” That's on Page 21.
There is a Philip Morris document in here that I'm just having trouble finding that deals with this. There's -- on Page 18, Holland,
Gehrmann marketing report, “A Study of Ethnic Markets.” It's on Page 18. It's about the -- five down. The C.E. Hooper report,
right after it, is very good.
Q. We can let you look on a break and see if you can find that particular document. I want to ask a question about the two that
you just identified on Page 18. Is it Gehrmann Holland; is that right?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
34Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. “A Study of Ethnic Markets.” Does it say anything about menthol cigarette use among African-Americans?
A. I believe so. That's my recollection. I'd have to double-check. I don't have the document in front of me.
Q. What do you believe it says?
A. Again, I think it's another example of identifying African-Americans as the -- as an important market for menthol cigarettes.
Q. Does it say anything about why African-Americans would be an important part of the menthol smoking group?
A. I would have to refresh my memory on this one to answer that accurately.
Q. Okay. How about the C.E. Hooper marketing report, the “Smoking Attitudes Study: Marketing Research Report,” does it
say anything about the use of menthol cigarettes by African-Americans?
A. That one asks some questions about attitudes towards health, generally, which help us understand the thinking of smokers
at that time in history. But I'd have to refresh my memory again with that document to see if it specifically says menthol.
Q. Okay. Other than the various documents we've talked about, anything else you would be planning to rely upon to substantiate
your opinion that menthol cigarettes were viewed as safer or healthier by African-Americans?
A. That's what comes to mind as I sit here.
Q. Are you aware of any peer-reviewed articles that opine that African-Americans of, say, the '30s, '40s, '50s on up until maybe
the '90s would have viewed menthol cigarettes as safer or healthier?
A. Yes. There's at least one article in the Journal of Tobacco Control. I cannot remember the author's name and it's not on this
list. But there are peer-reviewed articles that make that claim.
Q. Other than the one you don't remember the name or the author but it was in the Journal of Tobacco Control, any other article
that comes to mind?
A. That's the only one that comes to mind, right now.
Q. Do you know about when that article was published?
A. I'm thinking it came out in the -- sometime around '93, '94, '95, but I would have to double-check. Tobacco Control was
started around '93. That's when the journal began.
Q. Okay.
A. Approximately.
Q. Okay. Other than advertisements, which we've already talked about, do you know if Mr. Alexander ever heard any statement
by any tobacco company?
A. He, as an individual?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
35Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Yes.
A. So my answer would be similar to the one that I gave about the print advertisements. I can't make firm statements about what
he, himself, knew and understood or saw. Just people like him, his time, his context, his time and place is the best I can do.
Q. Would it be fair to say that you don't have any evidence, as you sit here today, that Mr. Alexander -- again, we're not talking
about advertisements. We're talking about other things. Ever heard any statement from any tobacco company?
A. Yes. I don't have any evidence that he either heard the statement or didn't hear the statement. And I've been consistent in
not offering these kinds of opinions for the particular individual.
Q. And just like in other cases, you've said, I think one of your phrases is, you are not the biographer of the plaintiff or the
smoker and you can't say what they saw or read or heard specifically, unless there's something in a deposition that says that.
And would your opinions here be the same?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Would it also be fair to say you don't have any evidence that Mr. Alexander ever tried any particular brand of cigarette
because of an ad that he may have seen?
A. Correct. My answer would be the same as the one I just gave.
Q. And if I change the question to say, would it be correct to say that you don't have any evidence that Mr. Alexander ever used
any particular brand of cigarette because of an ad he may have seen, would that be true?
A. That's correct. I can't get to that level of detail.
Q. Would it also be true that you wouldn't have any evidence that Mr. Alexander ever heard any statement from a group like
The Tobacco Institute or TIRC or CTR?
A. That's right. I can't place him as having heard it or not heard it.
Q. Do you know -- and I know you've talked about this before -- The Frank Statement, do you remember when that was
published?
A. Yes.
Q. And when was that?
A. January 4th, 1954.
Q. Okay. Do you know if The Frank Statement was ever published in the newspapers in and around Gainesville, Florida?
A. I haven't looked that up.
Q. So you don't know?
A. I don't know.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
36Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Would it be fair to say you have no evidence that Mr. Alexander ever heard or saw The Frank Statement?
A. I have no evidence either way, that he heard it or he didn't hear it or see it. Because, of course, it was discussed on TV
and the news and alike.
Q. But you also don't have any evidence that he may have heard it discussed on television or radio or in any way?
A. That's right. Just, again, keeping consistent with what I've said about the advertisements and other statements, I don't know
yes, I don't know no. I just don't have any evidence.
Q. I know we've talked about this before, but you are a professional historian; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. In this case, you are not planning to offer any opinion about whether Mr. Alexander was addicted to cigarettes?
A. I'm not going to offer that testimony.
Q. And, likewise, you wouldn't plan to offer any testimony that he suffered from any particular kind of disease? By “he,” I
mean Mr. Alexander.
A. I'm not going to offer any medical testimony.
Q. Okay. Do you know what the newspaper was in the Gainesville area in, say, the '50s and '60s?
A. I'm forgetting the name of it. Gainesville has a paper, but I'm not remembering the name of it right now.
Q. Okay. And you haven't looked at that paper, specifically, have you?
A. No. No. I haven't done that.
Q. Do you know if there was a paper in the area in Union County, where Mr. Alexander was growing up?
A. I haven't researched that.
Q. Do you know what radio stations there might have been, let's start with Union County, in Union County when Mr. Alexander
was growing up?
A. You know, at night, Clear Channel stations, you would have been able to pick up WLAC out of Nashville, which at that time,
had a -- kind of a blues, rhythm and blues programming. He might have listened to WSM. These are Clear Channel stations.
The local stations, though, I'm not aware of what the specific radio stations were then.
Q. Do you know if Mr. Alexander's family had a radio when he was growing up?
A. I don't know if he had a radio or not.
Q. And you don't know if he listened to the radio when he was growing up then; would that be fair to say?
A. Yes. I have no evidence either way.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
37Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you know when Mr. Alexander first had a television in his home?
A. Yes. I'm not -- I'm not recalling that right now.
Q. Okay. Do you have any knowledge about what the local TV stations were in the various places that he lived?
A. Well, I did look into that a little bit. I believe, in the '50s, you know, the beginning of TV, there was an ABC affiliate in
Gainesville and in surrounding cities, cities like Jacksonville and Orlando, the other major networks, CBS and NBC.
Q. Okay. Do you plan to offer any opinions in this case that any particular cigarette advertisements were shown on, I guess,
the ABC affiliate or other TV stations that Mr. Alexander saw?
A. No. I'm just going to present the material that was, you know, part of the culture of the time, but I'm not going to, again,
draw the line to him as an individual because I don't have that evidence.
MR. SMITH:
I want to correct one thing. There will be evidence introduced as to what ABC, CBS and NBC programs. It's a chart that I know
is -- it's on my exhibit list. It's been provided to you.
THE WITNESS:
Sponsorship chart.
MR. SMITH:
Sponsorship chart. So if your question is what was shown in Gainesville or Jacksonville or Orlando, in the sense that those
specific channels, no, but there will be a discussion of and presentation of what shows were sponsored on prime time by tobacco
companies and which companies -- which companies sponsored those shows. And that's a document that's been provided to
you all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you have any information or any evidence of the various television shows that Mr. Alexander watched during his lifetime?
A. He, as an individual?
Q. Yes, sir.
A. No. I don't have any evidence on that. And just to echo what he said, you know, I'm understanding your line of questioning
to mean things that tie Mr. Alexander, as an individual, to these things.
Q. Uh-huh. And that's what I'm asking. I'm asking any particular television shows you are going to come to court and say, this
is something Mr. Alexander watched.
A. The best I can say is it was something that was broadcast.
Q. Do you have any evidence as to whether Mr. Alexander watched television?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
38Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Again, not him individually. I mean, just identification of the fact that most people did watch TV, but not affirmatively
placing him in front of the set at a certain time, in front of a particular program.
Q. Okay. Do you plan to offer any opinions as to why Mr. Alexander began to smoke?
A. No, I'm not. No. I don't plan to offer any opinions on that.
Q. Okay. And I think you told me it was your understanding that Mr. Alexander began smoking about 1941? Does that sound
right?
A. Yes, approximately. Maybe a little bit sooner. There's some ambiguity in the testimony.
Q. Do you plan to offer any opinions as to whether Reynolds knew or should have known in 1941 that cigarette smoking could
cause lung cancer?
A. Are you going to ask me those kinds of questions? I can answer those.
MR. SMITH:
First of all --
MS. LAWSON:
I'd like to hear --
MR. SMITH:
Lung cancer will not be a major part of our presentation of this case. So I just say that because I know there will be some 1953
general health things, so I don't need -- but those will not be through him.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, let me ask a different question, then. Do you plan to opine at trial that in 1941, Reynolds knew or should have known
that cigarette smoking could cause any serious disease?
A. Well, I mean, I do hold that opinion, but I don't anticipate making that part of my testimony in this case.
Q. Do you plan to opine that when Mr. Alexander -- I think, as you put it, you think he began smoking in about 1941, if in
1941, R.J. Reynolds should have provided any particular warning to Mr. Alexander.
A. I hadn't anticipated making that particular point in the testimony.
Q. Okay. So that's not something you plan to do?
A. No. I don't plan to make that point.
Q. Do you plan to opine that in 1941 Reynolds should have warned Mr. Alexander that smoking could be addictive or hard
to quit or however you want to describe it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
39Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I don't plan to offer that opinion. I mean, if I'm asked that question, I'll answer it, but that's not something I anticipate
including in my opinions.
Q. Do you know if Mr. Alexander's parents smoked?
A. You know, there's -- I think there's a mention of that, but I'm not recollecting the mentioning. So right now, I'm not sure.
Q. I know you've told me you read his wife's deposition. Do you know if he was married to anyone other than the plaintiff
in this case?
A. Yes.
Q. How many times was he married?
A. He had a wife prior to the one -- Mrs. Alexander.
Q. Mrs. Earline Alexander?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know if either of Mr. Alexander's wives smoked?
A. I don't. I don't know what their smoking history is.
Q. Do you know if he had any siblings?
A. I'm not sure. I would have to refresh my memory.
Q. Do you know what Mr. Alexander did for a living?
A. Yes.
Q. Tell me what your understanding is.
A. He worked in a hotel for a period of time, and then worked as a mechanic, automobile service station repair work.
Q. Does his -- the different jobs he held, do those have any impact on any of your opinions in this case?
A. He's just a hard-working, you know, average person in that regard. Just a -- you know, that's it. He was just a hard-working
person, worked with his hands.
Q. Do you know if he was allowed to smoke while he was working at the hotel?
A. I'm not sure.
Q. When he was working as a mechanic, do you know if he was allowed to smoke then?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
40Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I imagine he probably would have been allowed to smoke, but from what I know about mechanics, but his specific situation,
I'm not recollecting.
MR. SMITH:
I have not provided him the employer histories.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay.
MR. SMITH:
Can we back up to something, though? I want to make sure that we don't leave something that was earlier asked by you.
MS. LAWSON:
Do we need to go off the record?
MR. SMITH:
No. I want to put this on the record. You were talking about internal documents. There are certain internal documents that I
have listed that are not necessarily on his reliance materials that I will be introducing, and I wanted to go ahead and identify
those, and I will be introducing them through him.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay. If you would, go ahead and tell me what those are.
MR. SMITH:
Yeah, and as they relate to one of your earlier questions about marketing to African-Americans.
MS. LAWSON:
Okay.
MR. SMITH:
There is a document that's identified as Document 487. I'm giving you the numbers as they are --
MS. LAWSON:
Can you give me a time?
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
41Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Yes. That's a memorandum from R.L. Johnson, that is Brown & Williamson, to R.A. Pittman, Brown & Williamson, entitled,
Kool, K-o-o-l, Conclusions of Wave 13 and Black Studies. As you know, B&W was the original -- it's RJR now, but at the
time, it was issued, it was a B&W. That's what I'm trying to say.
There is an RJR memorandum of 1975, Domestic Operating Goals, which is a listing of breaking down marketing -- not so much
marketing, but what the goals of the company would be for the marketing they're trying to do and how they're going to do that.
There is a document marked 599, which is entitled, RJR Marketing Plan, quote, “Total Salem Brand Marketing Plan.” While
I won't be asking him about marketing plans, the document breaks down the sales results from African-Americans of menthol
cigarettes, and there is a discussion of that.
And there's a document marked 674, which is strategic planning memorandum from B&W, 1979 through 1985, and it's entitled,
“Kool Family Utopian Objectives.” It is a document which discusses the strategy of Kool -- the strategy for Kool marketing to
-- and there's a discussion of the percentage of -- of the percentage of Kool users who are African-American and the percentage
of menthol users who are African-American.
I do reserve the right to introduce -- those documents have been disclosed. Those documents are in the document set that I do
intend to introduce, in all likelihood, through Dr. Kyriakoudes because they will tie to his issues of menthol cigarettes being
used by African-Americans and the knowledge.
Now, they don't necessarily discuss your question earlier, which was they don't specifically -- they may or may not specifically
address health.
MS. LAWSON:
My question, yes.
MR. SMITH:
But I didn't also want to not disclose to you, those documents are in my materials that I have there in even my amended exhibit
list. It is likely that those documents will come up. If they haven't come up earlier, they will come up through Dr. Kyriakoudes.
MS. LAWSON:
If you don't mind, I'm going to ask him about them now.
MR. SMITH:
You can.
MS. LAWSON:
And after that, why don't we take a break.
MR. SMITH:
I didn't want to leave something -- they don't address health but they do address menthol usage by African-Americans and the
company's knowledge of it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
42Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let me ask you about the documents you just identified for me. This first document, it was a memo from R.L. Johnson to
R.A. Pittman, Kool conclusions of Wave; is that right?
MR. SMITH:
Conclusions of Wave 13 and Black Study.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Are you familiar with that document?
A. I've seen that document, yes.
Q. What do you understand that document to say?
A. It's a market share appraisal, as I recall. Kool was in an intense competition with Salem, and there was a sense that Salem
was out -- that Kool was losing its predominant position among the black menthol market, and as I recall, they were addressing
that problem, that competitive issue, and it discussed black smokers.
Q. What does it discuss about black smokers?
A. Their predominant position in the Kool franchise, Kool and Kool Filter Kings. I mean, those are -- that's the backbone of
the particular brand, in terms of its market usage.
Q. So it said something to the effect of the predominant users of Kool were African-Americans; is that right?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Does it give any rationale as to why African-Americans are the predominant market for Kool?
A. I'm not recalling that particular part of it.
Q. Okay. Do you plan to opine that it says anything about Kool cigarettes being perceived as healthier or safer by African-
Americans?
A. No. No. I've already given you the answers on that particular issue.
Q. Okay. I believe the second document he referenced was a 1975 RJR Domestic Operating Goals document. And what's your
understanding of what's in that document regarding African-Americans and menthol?
A. Just, you know, Salem's position in -- among African-American smokers and improving its competitive position against Kool.
Q. Does it offer any method of doing that?
A. I'm trying to remember if this is the document that says that they should rely on out-of-home advertising. I may be getting
these -- they're all kind of together. But a strong reliance on what they call out-of-home advertising, which means point of
purchase billboards. It's also, in those documents, there's a discussion of where people buy the cigarettes, particularly where
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
43Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
African-Americans buy their cigarettes and the propensity to buy individual packs as opposed to whole cartons. So kind of
marketing behavior in the sense that marketing is the distribution of the good.
Q. Do you plan to opine that anything in that document suggests that African-Americans would perceive menthol cigarettes
as safer or healthier?
A. No. I've given you those sources earlier.
Q. Okay. And would that -- the answer to my question be the same for all of these documents you just told us about?
MR. SMITH:
I will represent to you, these documents which you have, none of which really address the health issue. I just wanted you to
know they do discuss black usage and smoking of menthol cigarettes and marketing plans and percentages, but none of those,
I don't believe any of them address -- I know because I'm looking at them and I've looked at them. They do break down, it's
mostly the Kool, Salem's respective strategies as it relates to the sale of menthol cigarettes. And I just didn't want to leave you
with a misimpression.
MS. LAWSON:
No. I just wanted a statement for the record that he's not going to come in and opine that any of these suggest that menthol
cigarettes are perceived in African-Americans as healthier or safer.
MR. SMITH:
They are what they are, but they are really marketing plans and marketing discussions and market share analysis.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I think the third document he mentioned was an RJR marketing or Salem brand marketing, Number 599?
MR. SMITH:
Correct.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you have any recollection of that document?
A. I've looked at it. I can't remember exactly what it says. I would have to remind myself.
Q. And I think the last one he mentioned was a 1979 to '85 strategy planning memo for Kool, Family Utopian --
MR. SMITH: 674.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Number 674. What's your recollection of that document?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
44Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. That's a marketing plan designed to protect the Kool franchise from Salem, basically. And that one talks about distribution,
buying habits and things like that.
Q. Okay. Do you plan to opine at trial that -- I guess that either Reynolds or B&W made statements in their marketing to suggest
to African-Americans that menthol cigarettes were safer or healthier?
A. Well, there aren't explicit statements, the way they are in the advertising of the 1950s. I mean, by now, we're talking the
1970s and even the 1980s, and so to the extent that -- the only extent that I can do -- and, again, I'm not in any way engaging
in the psychology of this, as that is not my field, it's just to identify the statements that deal with the themes of fresh and kind
of vitality, alive, coolness, freshness and alike.
Q. But would it be fair to say that none of those ads say that menthol cigarettes are safer?
A. Not using that language. That would be fair to say.
Q. And, also, would it be fair to say that none of those ads say that menthol cigarettes are healthier?
A. That's right. The appeal is more subtle and implied than it is explicitly stated.
Q. Do you think there is an implicit statement in Kool or Salem advertisements that they're healthier or safer?
A. Well, I think, you know, alive with -- the use of words like “alive,” words like “fresh,” certainly don't tell you that regular
users of this product have a 50 percent chance of premature death through some serious disease. So that's -- that would be
my opinion on that.
Q. But nor do they say that smoking those menthol cigarettes are safe, do they?
A. Not explicitly, no.
Q. And by the time you get to the '70s and '80s, those advertisements would also have the Surgeon General's warning on them,
wouldn't they?
A. That's right, from 1971 onward, correct.
MS. LAWSON:
Can we take a break?
(Off the record.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Are you familiar with the 1967 FTC Staff Report?
A. I have looked at that, yes. That's not on my list, though.
Q. Right. It's not on your reliance list. Do you know if it says anything about African-Americans and the use of menthol
cigarettes?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
45Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I'm recollecting, yeah, there's a discussion of that, and market share and propensity to use the product.
Q. Do you have any recollection as to what it says?
A. I'd have to refresh my memory.
Q. Do you know generally what else is in that FTC Staff Report?
A. That's a larger report that deals with the issues of public knowledge, and the risks of smoking, and a policy document that
was kind of a predecessor to the revision of the warning system that would come two years later.
Q. Okay. Do you have any recollection as to whether there were new or different warning labels proposed in that document?
A. I know there were -- yeah, there were a series of warning labels proposed right after the Surgeon General's Report by the
FTC, and I'm not recalling if they brought those forward and discussed those in that report or not. I would have to -- I'd have
to remind myself.
Q. Okay. I want to ask you something about Exhibit 5. And I think these are e-mails between you and Ms. Vallejos-Nichols?
A. Yes.
Q. Does that sound right?
A. Yes. It does.
Q. And I want to refer you specifically -- they're asking you about scheduling your deposition in this case, although it says
Herle too. Herle is gone.
A. Yeah. They told me that that one was somehow dispensed with.
Q. Right. It says, “Please inform the defense...” and this is an e-mail date, it looks like April 15th, at 10:19 a.m. It says, “Please
inform the defense that I now require payment at the time of deposition.” Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. What made you decide to start requiring payment at the time of deposition?
A. It may not seem like a big deal to you, who -- as someone who works with a lot of paper all the time, but, you know, earlier,
I handed you a list of cases that I just -- I hadn't gotten around to billing. It's simply a convenience for me. That's all. It's just
-- it's easier -- it's one less thing that I have to go home and fill out and mail out.
Q. Did anyone recommend to you that you do that?
A. No.
Q. It's just something you decided?
A. Yes. And just so you are clear, it's in no way a statement on --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
46Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Are you suggesting we don't pay you, is the question.
A. No. It simply saves me some trouble. And, again, just for background, the Shook, Hardy people used to come, and they
would bring, like, checks in the hourly amount. So, like, if the depo went three hours, they gave me three and then he took the
other ones home. And he always had one half check.
There's a guy named Terry Sexton that has done this more than once. And I fell so far behind on paperwork and, you know,
it's a convenience for me. And I hope it's not an inconvenience for you.
Q. I'm not complaining about it. I was just trying to figure out why you made that change.
A. That's the only reason.
Q. I think we were talking a little earlier, your last deposition was in September of last year. Does that sound right?
A. It was actually October.
Q. October. I guess it was October. And that was the Naugle case; is that right?
A. That's right.
Q. Since that time, have you done any further research in newspapers in Florida?
A. Well, I mentioned a few citations that I'll get to you. That being excepted, no.
Q. Have you done any research on -- I think we've touched on this a little bit, but have you done any specific research about
the schools available to African-American children in Union County, where Mr. Alexander grew up?
A. I haven't done any work specifically on that county, as a practical matter. I know about the history of African-American
education in the south at this time from my normal specialty as a historian.
Q. Do you have any evidence that there were not schools available to African-American children in Union County?
A. Oh, no schools available?
Q. Right. I'm asking if you -- I'm sorry. It had a double negative in there. Do you have evidence that there were not schools
available to African-American children in Union County when Mr. Alexander were growing up?
A. No. And it -- his education is discussed by his wife.
MR. SMITH:
I don't need to raise an objection to it but I want to be clear. Are you suggesting that by the term “schools” that there were
more than one schools in Union County?
MS. LAWSON:
I'm asking if he has any evidence, other than what his wife said.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
47Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Are you aware of any surveys from, like, the '50s or the '60s that would relate to the issue of whether people were paying
attention to statements made by tobacco companies or industry groups for tobacco companies?
A. Well, the Gallup poll had a series of questions in 1954 if people had heard the accusation that cigarettes may be harmful to
health. Actually, I think it -- the phrasing was, have you heard that cigarettes may or may not be a cause of cancer, as I recall.
That would be an example of that.
Q. Okay. And the percentage who had heard that, that was a pretty high percentage, wasn't it?
A. 80 or 90 percent.
Q. Are you familiar with any polling from the '40s or '50s on whether people perceived commercials as truthful or untruthful?
A. From the '40s?
Q. Let's say from the '50s or '60s.
A. Okay. I'm not aware of anything in the '40s. There's some material in the '50s and '60s, general -- kind of general survey
questions. I don't think they're geared towards cigarettes, specifically, but you might have that in front of you and could refresh
my memory.
Q. Do you have any recollection -- and this isn't related to cigarettes specifically, but to advertisements. Are you familiar with
a 1959 poll that asks people whether they feel that television commercials use untruthful arguments? Are you familiar with
that one?
A. I don't know if I've seen that one. I would happily look at it, though.
Q. Okay. I'll show it to you.
(Exhibit 7 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'll let you take a look at that.
A. Okay.
Q. Did you get a chance to look at it?
A. Yes.
Q. Were you familiar with that particular poll?
A. I have not seen that particular page, no.
Q. And I think the question I was referring to, I believe was the first question, up here. It was a -- it was from November
12th through 17th of 1959. The question is, “How do you feel about television commercials? Do you think they use untruthful
arguments or not?” And in that particular case, 67 percent of the people polled stated, yes, they do.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
48Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Is that correct?
A. You read that correctly.
Q. Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you plan to offer any opinions in this case as to whether the general public would actually believe anything said in
cigarette commercials?
A. Well, I mean, this is a -- it's a problematic question. I mean, this is one of those questions that's going to elicit the response
that it elicited. And, of course, it's broken down by education, and as you look at the breakdown by education, not surprisingly,
those with grade school basically report the commercials are more credible than those with college education.
So, I mean, this is interesting. It doesn't really tell me very much. It's interesting to know, but it doesn't really influence my
opinions.
Q. Okay. If I can see it again. And I want to go back to the question I asked. Do you plan to offer opinions at trial as to whether
people in the general public would believe statements made in cigarette advertisements?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I've never put it that way in my testimony. I mean, the power of cigarette advertising as a historical phenomenon in the
culture lies in its -- in the way that it shapes the culture. It's not really true or not. It's more along the lines of LSMFT becomes
a national catch phrase, something that enters the popular consciousness and then becomes something that people can play off
of or make jokes about and interact with. The same way with “Winston Tastes Good.” These images, the songs, the sounds,
the words, the images of the advertising operate in a different way. I mean, they -- I mean, they shape the culture. So whether
people believe any particular statement or not is not particularly important for my testimony.
Q. Okay. Would it be fair to say, then, that you are not going to opine that people believe statements made in cigarette
advertisements?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I think some industry statements, a portion of the population did believe them. Not everybody, but a portion of the population
did. Like a lot of these things, it's never everybody and nobody, but, you know, degrees of population.
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
49Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you plan to opine that more than 19 percent of the population -- and I'm pulling my 19 percent from the question we
looked at -- would have believed statements made in cigarette advertisements?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. You can't -- I mean, the way I interpret this is, first of all, it's -- 67 percent say that they think they're untruthful. Well, I
mean, that's the kind of question that suggests the response is in the question. That's my interpretation. I think the more relevant
interpretation of this for this case is to look at the last category. I'm going to hand this back to you so that you can respond to
what I say effectively. That of those who said yes, most television commercials use untruthful arguments, only 21 percent of
those said that applied to most of the commercials.
And so there's a degree of credibility, you know, or an exhibit of a degree of credibility, particularly among the less well
educated portions of this particular sample.
I mean, it -- nobody's going to say, yes, I believe everything on commercials.
Q. And that's because people understand that commercials have the intent of selling a product; is that right?
A. Right. But the commercials also have the intent of persuading and they do persuade. I mean, it's the age of persuasion, you
know, this period of kind of emergence of modern mass market advertising through electronic media, particularly visual media,
like television. So they do persuade.
Q. And what exactly are you going to opine that they persuade; to try the product, or what is actually being said about the
product is correct?
A. Well, it depends on the particular advertisement. So at the time that that poll was taken, you know, the persuasion for tobacco
advertising was to try the product, that it was fun, it was exciting, it was macho for some brands. It was associated with freedom
and independence, that it tasted good, like a cigarette should. So that's what they're trying to persuade people to do, particularly
in 1959.
Q. Okay. Let's talk specifically, because you pointed down here to the grade school breakout, as we talked about. Those
responding to the question, I think 67 percent said that commercials do use untruthful arguments; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And of those that responded, that 67 percent that responded that there were untruthful statements made in advertisements,
they broke it down by educational level. And you had been referring to the folks in grade school. And then among the different
educational levels, they further broke it down into, I guess, percentages of advertisements, which percentages, how many do
you believe contain untruthful statements; is that correct?
A. Well, they give them the option of --
Q. Let's do the options, for the record. They used most, some, few, none and no opinion; is that right?
A. Right.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
50Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. So among the folks with grade school educations who said that commercials contained untruthful arguments, the ones
responding most, 21 percent said most commercials contain untruthful arguments.
A. That's correct.
Q. And 27 percent said some commercials contain untruthful arguments; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. And then 12 percent said few commercials contain untruthful arguments; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And then only 16 percent said no commercials contain untruthful arguments which would, in and of itself, be odd because
these are people that have already responded that commercials contain untruthful arguments; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And then 24 percent had no opinion; is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you seen -- did you see this poll before today? Had you seen it before today?
A. No. That -- this is the first time I've seen that particular poll in question.
Q. Okay.
A. Unless -- and, I mean, maybe ten years ago, someone showed it to me in a deposition, but it's not something that I've used
as part of my work.
Q. Are you familiar with the fact that Gallup would often repeat questions over different time periods, repeat the same set of
questions?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know if this particular question was ever repeated any other times?
A. Again, that's not a question I researched. So, no, I don't know.
Q. Would questions and polling information like this be relevant to the opinions that you plan to offer in this case?
A. No. And, in fact, you, I think, identified very persuasively the reasons why that is not a particularly useful piece of
information, because of the internal contradictions and the difficult to explain results, the way that breaks down. You know,
not every polling question is a good question. But, no, that's not -- and for the reasons I identified even before that, where the
advertising is something that operates almost on a cultural level, so -- it's interesting to know, but that's not important for me
and my opinions.
Q. So it's not important to your opinions whether people perceive advertising to contain untruthful arguments?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
51Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, that particular poll is not important to me.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. This particular poll, but not the issue, itself?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. That's -- I mean, I think you are misconceiving the way that advertising works, as a historical phenomena and the way in
which people that were active in the industry at this time understood advertising to work.
You know, they're building image. They're building a kind of cultural connection with the various products they're advertising,
cigarettes being one of them, but other products, as well. They are building emotional connections and they're building
aspirational identity connections. They're giving people an image of not so much what they are but what they might want to
be and then associating that with the product.
And it's -- I mean, how can that be true or not true? I mean, the question is not really suited to understanding the way advertising
works. So it -- that's not -- that question and that line of questioning is interesting, and I appreciate you showing it to me, but
it's not important for my opinions.
Q. Okay. So let me see if I can sort of recap. Is it your statement, then, that polling data showing that two-thirds or a little bit
better than two-thirds of people polled, at least in 1959, who were asked this question as to whether commercials contained
untruthful arguments, that's not important to your testimony and your opinions regarding cigarette advertising that you are
going to offer in this case?
A. That's correct. And just to stress the fact that out of those that said they thought they used untruthful arguments for -- you
know, 40 percent of them said either they didn't use untruthful statements or they didn't have an opinion. So within the results
of the -- this particular poll, there are indicators that it's not really an effective instrument of measurement of opinion.
Q. Have you ever looked for polling questions of this sort in your research, about how people would perceive advertising?
A. Again, no, for the reasons I identified earlier because it's not really how advertising is intended to work.
Q. Have you done any study or research on how people perceive advertisements?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. No. I don't -- I mean, aside from the -- I, myself, have not done an independent assessment of the perceptions of
advertising. I have looked at historical studies of how people perceive advertisements, but not whether they perceive them as
true, recognition, top of mind awareness, issues like that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
52Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you intend to offer opinions at trial in this case as to how consumers perceive advertisements?
A. Not an individual consumer and not on a psychological level. I'll stick to what I've said in the past, which is what I said a
moment ago, in the way the advertisements operate in kind of shaping the culture, on a level above what you are identifying, a
level of obstruction above that, the individual social psychological perception, if you will.
Q. Well, don't consumer perceptions of advertisements certainly impact, I guess, the larger cultural umbrella that you are trying
to put together?
A. Yes.
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Yes. There's some overlap there. But historians use advertising, when we look at the ads themselves, as examples of the kinds
of messages that the advertiser was communicating to the public. And advertising is a form of communication in that regard.
And then, as a historian, the other thing I do is I look at the way within the advertising entities, the organization, the advertising
agency or the manufacturer, whomever is behind the advertising, the market research company, what their assessments are and
I evaluate their assessments of it.
And so that's -- I mean, that might not be a satisfying answer to you, you know, but I deal with the role of advertising on kind
of groups of people, broad -- I mean, broad populations, if you will, and on a cultural level.
Q. Do you consider yourself an expert in how consumers perceive advertisements?
A. No. I mean, that's why I'm giving you this answer because there are people who will testify that -- you know, that this has a
psychological impact on people. And I have not testified on that in the past and don't intend to in the future.
Q. Okay. Are you aware of any polling data about what sort of groups or organizations people would be most likely to believe
on the issue of smoking and health?
A. Yes. There's some -- there's stuff like that. There's -- I mean, if you look at the Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health,
the 1969 document we reported, there's a 1959 Philip Morris polling document that has a number of important questions on
smoking and health perceptions, you know, what people's attitudes, values and beliefs. The 1986 Surgeon General's Report
has a whole chapter on assessing public knowledge on health. R.J. Reynolds has -- is it Reynolds or it might be The Tobacco
Institute has a '81 or '82 poll that asks people about their understanding of addiction. There's a lot of material about this. The
Gallup poll asked questions. So there's a lot of material on that.
Q. Have you seen any polling data as to how likely people would be to believe tobacco companies or tobacco company industry
groups and things they might have said about smoking and health?
A. Yes. There's -- yes. There's polls on that, too. I've seen that.
Q. And what's your recollection of that polling?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
53Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I think there's -- gosh, there's questions like, you know, to whom do you turn for your health information, things like that,
from various times in the late '50s, '60s and '70s, and a variety of survey research contexts.
Q. And in those various polls, isn't it true that the tobacco companies and tobacco company industry groups score very low
on the believability with consumers?
A. Well, it depends on which poll you are talking about.
Q. Are you familiar with the 1959 Roper poll which asked people, who would you be most apt to believe if one of these
organizations said there was no connection between lung cancer and cigarette smoking? Do you remember that question?
A. That would be the one commissioned by Philip Morris. Am I correct on that? Which I believe I have here on my list.
Q. If you can refer to your list.
A. I don't have that document with me.
Q. I don't have the document with me. I just have information from it.
A. I'd have to remind myself of the details of that. But I'm generally familiar with that.
Q. Let me give you a little more recollection about the details. The question, it's from a 1959 Roper survey. The question is, who
would you be most apt to believe if one of these organizations said there was no connection, whatsoever, between lung cancer
and cigarette smoking? And they were given the options of the American Cancer Society, the American Medical Association,
the U.S. Department of Health and the Tobacco Industry Research Council. And, again, the question is, who would you be
most apt to believe?
For the American Cancer Society, 39 percent said they would be most apt to believe the American Cancer Society. 20 percent
said the American Medical Association. 20 percent said the U.S. Health Department. And three percent chose the Tobacco
Industry Research Council.
Would you agree that that seems to show a fairly healthy skepticism about statements that might be made by the Tobacco
Industry Research Council?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Again, that's another example of the same family as the previous question we looked at. That's not actually how it operates in
-- as it unfolds in historical time, because what happens is, that the tobacco industry puts together this research program. People
praise the industry for being responsible. This is a time when people were more likely to believe established centers of authority.
It's before the '60s and '70s disillusionment in a lot of American institutions, which is a well-documented phenomenon.
So when you ask it that way, I'm not sure what that poll tells you. I'm not sure that that's that good of a question.
Q. Let me ask you, do you plan to offer opinions at trial that -- let's start with the Tobacco Industry Research Council was a
credible source of information for the American population?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
54Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, see, the issue is, is that, you know, there's conflicting -- there's conflicting evidence that supports the other side, in the
late '60s. They polled people and they said, well, you know -- and the question is something along the lines of -- and I'm, again,
relying on memory. People will believe that cigarettes cause cancer when the tobacco industry admits it or explains it. I forget
exactly how the question is worded. And you get a significant number of people responding to that, a little bit over half.
And then if you look at not whether the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, itself, was credible, look at the public's
willingness to believe the criticisms against the science that the Tobacco Industry Research Committee was putting forth,
statistical and those kinds of things, well, then you do find an impact on the public's attitudes and beliefs.
And the reality is, based on the series of questions that the Gallup poll asks, which you identified a few moments ago, the
percentage of those who agree with the proposition that cigarettes are a cause of lung cancer actually declines over the course
of the 1950s.
So the survey data is not as unambiguous as you've portrayed it just now.
Q. I want to go back to my question. I want to expand it out to the other industry organizations. Do you plan to come to trial
and opine that TIRC, CTR or TI were viewed by people as credible sources of information on smoking and health?
A. If asked, I will reply that some people did see them as credible and listen to them, and that, more importantly, that their
campaign to sew doubt as to the truth that cigarettes were harmful to health, particularly on the cancer issue, did have an effect
on the general public's understanding of this issue, particularly at this time.
Q. Do you plan to opine that the majority of people, say, in the '50s, '60s, '70s, would have viewed TI, TIRC or CTR as a
credible source of information on smoking and health?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I've never put it that way. I've put it the way I've explained it. So I would explain it the way I just did.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Well, I'm trying to get a -- you said some people. How many is some, is the question.
A. Well, it changes over time. I mean, you don't get a majority of smokers agreeing with the proposition that cigarettes are a
cause of lung cancer until the Surgeon General's Report comes out in 1964. Until 1964. So it takes a good bit of time for you
to cross the halfway threshold.
Now, and smokers, in this case, are the relevant population, from my analysis, you know, even into the 1970s, there's a significant
portion of the smoking population that still does not hold as credible the accusation that cigarettes are a cause of lung cancer.
So what the industry is doing is they're -- as they say, we manufacture doubt. We're giving people a psychological reason to
smoke. We are working that aspect of the public's uncertainty. Is it everybody? No. Is it a smaller population over time? Yes.
Q. Do you plan to opine at trial that there was ever a time when a majority of the people would have viewed TI, TIRC, CTR
as a credible source of information on smoking and health?
A. You know, I wouldn't put it that way.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
55Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Well, that's the question I'm asking. I get to ask the questions, so --
A. Fair enough. I'm not going to offer that opinion.
Q. Do you plan to come to trial and offer an opinion that there was ever a time when the majority of people would have viewed
any of the tobacco companies, and that would include Reynolds or B&W, as a credible source of information on smoking and
health?
A. Not when you put it simply that way. I mean, the influence was -- I mean, the public accepts -- a significant portion of the
smoking public accepts the criticisms and accepts the doubt, so to speak. But when you put it in the simplistic way that you
do, I'm not going to give that testimony.
Q. Are you planning to come to trial and offer the opinion that Reynolds or any of the other companies whose brands Reynolds
now has, like B&W or American, ever issued a statement to consumers that any specific brand of cigarettes was safe?
A. Well, again, I mean, from the behavior of smokers and from the survey research of their attitudes, I mean, we know that
they changed what they smoked because they thought it would be safe. So, I mean, that's been my testimony on that. You
know, they adopt filters. They moved quickly to filters in the 1950s because the industry is telling them that filters are safe,
and the public accepts that.
Then in the 1960s and the 1970s, they turn to light, low-tar, it's called high-fi and the various types of cigarettes for the same
reason, they think those are safe cigarettes.
Q. Can you identify for me any statement made by Reynolds or any of its predecessor companies, including B&W and American,
that any specific brand of cigarettes was safe?
A. It was always by -- they're too smart for that. You know, when you feature doctors in your advertisements, and you exalt the
increasing life-span of Americans as part of your advertising, when you advertise in medical journals and the like, again, you
are implying that the product is not going to harm you, that it's safe. And that's how it worked.
“Will not harm nose, throat or accessory organs,” the Chesterfield advertisement, that's an example of a very explicit statement.
But the implicit connection of health, of vitality, all of these things are the ways in which this operated.
MS. LAWSON:
Move to strike that as nonresponsive. Could you read back my last question?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. And I would ask you if you would direct your answer toward the question that I asked.
A. Okay. “Toasted For Your Throat Protection.”
Q. Okay. Anything else?
A. “More doctors smoke Camels.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
56Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Anything else?
A. They sold Chesterfield to Philip Morris, didn't they?
Q. To Philip Morris, yes.
A. So we won't put that one in there. Those are two examples.
Q. Do either of those say that that particular brand of cigarettes is safe?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form. You can answer.
A. They don't use that language.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Can you identify for me any specific statement made by Reynolds or any of its predecessor companies, such as American
and B&W, that any specific brand of cigarettes was not addictive?
A. I mean, an explicit statement that it is not addictive?
Q. Not addictive or not hard to quit or any of the ways you might describe it.
MR. SMITH:
Object to form. And I take it you are not -- that question was not meant to encompass the Waxman hearings?
MS. LAWSON:
No.
MR. SMITH:
You are talking about blanket statements from the company as opposed to their executives --
MS. LAWSON:
In ads or --
MR. SMITH:
Okay. I just wanted to be clear.
A. Philip Morris says it's non-addictive in their newspaper ads. There are a series of advertisements by Reynolds in the mid
'80s, let's have an open debate. I can't recall if the issue of addiction came up in those ads or not, so I'm just unsure.
Prior to that, you know, the issue of addiction just wasn't one that was discussed much. So I don't have anything before that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
57Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Let's mark this as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 8 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
These are some e-mails that were just obtained from Dr. Proctor and they contain some e-mails from the professor, and I was
going to ask him a couple of questions about that.
MR. SMITH:
Sure.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. You can take a minute and look through that, if you'd like. And I will direct you to specific ones after you've had a chance
to sort of look through it.
A. Okay. Sure.
Q. What we've marked as Exhibit 8 are some e-mails that we just recently received from a subpoena on Stanford and they were
from Dr. Proctor. And it looks like it is a series of e-mail exchanges between you and Dr. Proctor. Does that look right to you?
A. Well, it's --
Q. With some documents that were attached to it?
A. Yes. It looks like my standard polling exhibits. So I see one e-mail at the front.
Q. There's some e-mails at the back, if you will look specifically at that.
A. Okay. I'm getting to the end of the e-mails.
Q. They're the last six or seven pages.
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have a recollection of this e-mail exchange with Dr. Proctor?
A. It's hard to make out what this is.
Q. Let me point you to -- let me point you to one. There's one dated Wednesday, February 18th, 2009.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. It says, “Verdict, $8 million.” Do you see that?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
58Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes. I recollect that, yes.
Q. Okay. What was the $8 million you were talking about there?
A. I believe that was the judgment in that first tobacco trial.
Q. You mean the Martin case or the Hess case?
A. The first one in -- it's the Fort Lauderdale. Is that right? Broward County?
Q. Yes. Was that Hess?
A. Hess, yes.
Q. That's what I thought.
A. I just didn't remember the name of it.
Q. Were you keeping track of the progress of the tobacco litigation in Florida?
A. I had testified in that case. And then I read -- I believe this is a newspaper, if I recall, this is a newspaper story discussing
the outcome of the case.
Q. Okay. Why did you send this e-mail to Dr. Proctor?
A. I thought it was an item in the press that he might be interested in.
Q. Had you and he discussed that case, the Hess case?
A. No, we had not.
Q. Okay. Are you aware that he also testified in that case?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. Have you and he ever discussed his testimony in that case?
A. No, we haven't, I don't think, except just in some general ways. I mean, I gave you guys an e-mail that had an annotated
testimony where I gave my -- you know, my opinions on certain exhibits that had often come up in my testimony, but I ended
up not mailing that to him.
Q. Okay. We'll get to that. The body of the e-mail says, “Okay, 8000 cases, at $8 million, equals $64 billion, nine zeros. That
would be twice the $32 billion market capitalization of the company.” And then you sign your name to it. Is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you have a personal opinion that the tobacco companies ought to be put out of business?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
59Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. No. I don't have an opinion on that issue. And that e-mail doesn't indicate that.
Q. Okay. What did you mean to say in this e-mail?
A. Well, just what it says, that the tobacco industry was facing a very serious course of litigation. I mean, this is stuff that's in
the newspaper. I mean, there's nothing in this e-mail that isn't in the newspaper.
Q. Okay. Is it your goal to put the tobacco companies out of business?
A. No.
Q. I think I asked you specifically about the Hess case. Have you and Dr. Proctor ever discussed the respective testimony that
you two give in tobacco trials?
A. We have talked about the history of tobacco, and I've always thought that -- we've talked about the history of tobacco.
Q. Have you talked about the testimony that the two of you were giving?
A. There are a couple of e-mails that I sent him, which I think I gave to you, where I made some mentions of deposition testimony.
Q. And why were the two of you discussing your testimony?
A. He's the only other historian that has gone through a similar experience. It's a very stressful activity, and you blow off steam.
Q. Okay. Has anyone ever suggested to you that the two of you should not discuss your testimony?
A. Well, we haven't --
MR. SMITH:
I want to --
MS. LAWSON:
I'm not asking anything about what any lawyer of yours may have told you --
MR. SMITH:
That was going to be my objection.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm sorry. I anticipated that.
A. First, I just want to clarify, I mean, we don't discuss our respective testimonies. Like I said, a couple of times, blown off
steam. But one time, somebody did say, it's not a good idea to talk to experts.
Q. Have you ceased talking to Dr. Proctor about testimony?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
60Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I would put it this way: I don't talk to him about these litigation matters. And I took the advice of the person that gave
me that advice, and that was Jeffrey Streitfield who gave me that advice.
Q. Judge Streitfield?
A. Yes, Judge Streitfield.
Q. Just Streitfield, from the Hess case?
A. Well, he was the judge in the Hess case, but that wasn't when he offered that advice.
Q. When did Judge Streitfield say that to you?
A. I was deposed in the Naugle case in the middle of the week, and then I think at the end of the week, there was a hearing
where I'm not sure -- they heard a bunch of motions, and I attended that hearing, and it came up in a formal court proceeding.
And I took that to heart.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you to go onto the next page. It looks like a continuation of an e-mail string between you and Dr. Proctor.
MR. SMITH:
144 is the bottom. SU000144 is at the bottom? Because they're both marked Page 1.
MS. LAWSON:
No. I'm sorry. This --
MR. SMITH:
Did I get on the wrong page?
MS. LAWSON:
You are on the right page. That's the page.
MR. SMITH:
Down in the right-hand column, the very far bottom. That seems to be the way they're numbered because the other number
is misleading. But we're on 144 now.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. This appears to be a continuation of e-mails between you and Dr. Proctor about the -- where it says, verdict, $8 million.
A. I see it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
61Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. And it looks like Dr. Proctor is writing to you, “Yes, I think that's an appropriate amount. Much harder to overturn than a
figure, say, ten times that, and not so small as to discourage other suits. Pretty fair, all around.” Is that what it says?
A. Yes. You read that correctly.
Q. Why were you and Dr. Proctor discussing the amount of the verdict?
A. Well, I had sent him a newspaper story, and then it's pretty clear, he replied to my newspaper story.
Q. Okay. Is it your intention to encourage other suits against the tobacco companies?
A. I have no ability to do that. I'm not an attorney. I mean, that's not even anything I could even imagine doing. Why would
I have an intention or not an intention?
Q. Okay. If you will look at this one. I think we have the same one here.
MR. SMITH:
145. You don't have a number. Now I see the problem. All of them are Page 1s.
MS. LAWSON:
Yes. This is a March 16th, 2009 e-mail.
MR. SMITH:
We've got it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. It looks like from you to Dr. Proctor. It says, “Hi, Robert. This is what happens when the state becomes too dependent upon
the industry for funds.” And it looks like --
MR. SMITH:
I'm sorry. There's a skip.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I think I went two pages. And it looks like there's a news story attached. What did you mean by that statement?
A. I can't remember what the news story said. Do you have that news story?
Q. I don't have it here with me. Just to the best of your recollection, what was the point of that e-mail?
A. Again, it might have dealt with -- again, I'm just supposing. I don't remember what the newspaper story said, so I really
can't say.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
62Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. Do you believe that -- it looks -- it says Bradenton, so I'm going to guess at Florida being the state. Do you have an
opinion that the State of Florida is too dependent upon the industry -- and by that, I'm assuming tobacco industry -- for funds?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I don't have -- that's -- I don't have an opinion on that, either way.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Then why did you write this?
A. I think to understand that, I'd have to understand what that story was about.
Q. Okay.
A. And I don't remember what that story was. I mean, we could look it up on the internet, I guess. It's a URL.
Q. Well, let me ask you this: Do you think it's wrong for the state to take money from tobacco companies in the form of, we'll
say taxes, for example? Is that wrong?
A. No. I don't have that opinion.
Q. Okay. I think the next one is a March 25th, 2009 e-mail from you to Dr. Proctor.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And it also includes a document link. And it says, “I'm listing this in Sherman.” Were you and he sharing research? What
was the point of this e-mail?
A. Oh, this one, I know, because this is an extended film about the physical manufacture of cigarettes. It's really of strictly
historical interest. It shows the process of manufacturing, from the stemming, application of casings, you know, the heat
applications, so-called toasting. And then great shots of the actual rolling machines and the women stacking the cigarettes. So
it's from a kind of business history standpoint and the history of industrialization. It's a neat document that I found.
Q. Is that something that you and he do, you find things and you give them to him? Does he do the same for you?
A. On occasion. We've -- because we share a common academic research interest in the history of the cigarette, we have --
you know, when we find a document, a historical artifact, a piece of evidence that might be interesting, we have, on occasion,
shared that. That's what scholars do.
Q. I think the next e-mail is a March 27, 2009, about the Alan Landers obit in The Economist. Do you see that one?
A. Yes.
Q. And it looks like it was from you to Dr. Proctor?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
63Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. You talk about his trip to India, and then in the second line down, it says, “Here's an obit in The Economist for Alan Landers/
Levine. I was deposed for his case last September. I hope one of his survivors keeps it going.” Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Why do you hope that one of Mr. Landers' survivors keeps his case going?
A. That's a statement about Mr. Landers, who I never met personally, but as you probably are well aware, took a very public
stance with his -- you know, his kind of post Winston man career. And, hence, you know, an obituary in The Economist. Michael
Schwalbe, a sociologist at North Carolina State University, you know, featured Alan in a kind of interview book as people
struggling with the fallouts from tobacco-caused -- tobacco-induced disease. So my intention behind that was to honor Alan,
who had made this an important part of his public life. I don't know his family, if he had survivors or not, but I had expressed
the thought that, well, you know, maybe they'll keep on pursuing that. I don't know if that's possible or if that's happened.
Q. What do you think could have been gained by continuing to pursue the lawsuit that he hadn't already been able to do, and
I think what you pointed out, his very public statements on smoking?
A. Well, it would have been -- it would have been something to honor him and to complete his work. So it's more about him.
That's what that means.
Q. So you weren't doing this to help encourage lawsuits against the tobacco companies?
A. Well, again, how could I encourage a lawsuit against the tobacco companies? Don't you need a plaintiff? Don't you need
a lawyer? I don't fall into either of those two categories.
Q. Do you have a personal opinion that you would like to see more lawsuits against tobacco companies?
MR. SMITH:
Objection, but go ahead and answer.
A. There's no question that the products that your client has produced over the years has caused grievous harm to the health
of millions of people globally. Whether lawsuits are a way to address that -- I mean, there is no question that there are lots of
individuals who have been harmed by your company's products. Whether lawsuits is the answer, I don't know.
It would have been better if it had stayed one lawsuit, that is, the original Engle case. That would have been, I think, more fair,
but it didn't work out that way. So I really can't answer that question.
Q. Do you consider yourself to be an antismoking activist?
A. I believe that people shouldn't smoke cigarettes.
Q. Okay.
A. And that your company -- that your client sells a product that will -- you know, will cause the premature death of
approximately half of its regular users over time.
Q. Would you like to see cigarettes banned?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
64Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I've been asked this before. As a practical matter, I don't -- I don't think there will be an effective tobacco control policy.
And one time, I did speak at great length about this, in the -- a deposition called Reller, so you could defer to my answer there
because I haven't changed my opinion. And I spoke about controls on marketing and things like that. So --
Q. Do you think adults should be allowed to decide if they want to smoke?
A. Well, that's another way of saying should we ban cigarettes.
Q. I agree, but it's a slightly different question.
A. I think that -- I mean, adults are adults. As long as they do it in a manner that does not harm anyone else. Again, I don't think
it would be an effective public health policy to ban them, as you suggested. That's my own personal opinion. This is not a --
I mean, I'm not an expert on contemporary tobacco control.
MS. LAWSON:
It's noon now. Do you want to take a lunch break?
(Off the record.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Before we move on, I had a couple of questions about your reliance list.
A. Okay.
Q. On Page 14, it looks like the third entry from the bottom, it's Givelber, Daniel and Lori Strickler. Do you see that entry,
“Junking Good Science”?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. What is this article about?
A. Yes. This is a piece that deals with, if I recall correctly, a short example of how public health scientists have handled
themselves on the stand.
Q. Why do you include it on your reliance list?
A. I don't know. I mean, it's not really relevant to this issue. I have a little program that keeps bibliography materials, and I
-- pretty much, just anything I find relevant to tobacco, I throw in there, and then when you guys ask for a list, I give you
everything. Although everything that I give you that used to be when I would give you the documents, the files, has not been
entered into the bibliography.
So I think it's probably just a citation that I came across. It's not a big deal.
Q. Okay.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
65Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. But it's an example. I mean, the field of public health, you know, deals with these litigation matters, much like the data
project, you know, dealt with what you can learn from the information that's generated through the legal process from an
objective scientific view.
Q. Did you use this article in any way to sort of form your thinking about how you would go about testifying?
A. No. I'm having trouble remembering exactly what it says. That's just a citation that's on my list.
Q. Okay. Page 21, the second item from the bottom, it's Bruce W. McCalley, and then the title is, “Model T Ford: The Car
That Changed the World.”
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Why did you include this on your reliance list?
A. Oh, the history of the ashtray.
Q. The history of the ashtray in cars?
A. Yes. Simply that.
Q. That ashtrays -- well, instead of me -- what did it say in there about ashtrays?
A. Again, that's another citation. I probably have a few references in here to the material culture of smoking. That's what
historians call it. And the Model T did not actually come with an ashtray standard, but people added it. So it's an early example
of the incorporation of the ashtray into the automobile. That's all.
Q. Do you know why there was no ashtray in the original Model T Ford?
A. Because there was virtually no options of any type, any luxury type items in the Model T Ford. Plus the Model T Ford is
introduced in around 1908. It's a stripped-down automobile, you know, came in your favorite color, as long as your favorite
color was black. And that was its purpose.
The Ford does later add, as standard equipment, the -- in '32, they began adding an ashtray and lighter as standard equipment.
But people would add it as an after-market process, after-market industry to add what they called an ash catcher back then and
a cigarette torch or sometimes cigar torch.
Q. On Page 24, not quite halfway down, there's an article by Kathy Peiss, called, “Making Up, Making Over: Cosmetics,
Consumer Culture and Women's Identity.”
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Why did you include this in your reliance list in this case?
A. This deals with the theory of material culture and changing women's roles. This is a piece of historical scholarship. Women's
role changes in the early 20th Century. I've discussed this in my presentations and stuff like that. And this is one of the citations
that informs that changing women's role.
Q. Does it have any relevance to Mr. Alexander?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
66Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. No. Again, that's just part of my general kind of bibliography on -- more of kind of a historical scholarship.
Q. On that same page, down towards the bottom, there is an article by Richard Peterson called, “Creating Country Music:
Fabricating Authenticity.”
A. Yes.
Q. Why did you include that article in your list?
A. Probably because I cited that in my essay on R.J. Reynolds and the Grand ‘Ole Opry scripts. It doesn't have the -- I mean,
it's -- it doesn't deal with smoking and it only deals with the history of country music. So that's how that got on there.
Q. How about the Kathy Peiss?
A. Peiss.
Q. Does that have anything to do with smoking?
A. There is some mention of the rise of women smoking in that essay, just as kind of a -- not as a central focus of the essay,
but as I mentioned, in the 1920s.
Q. On Page 25, there is an article that's towards the bottom, I guess in the bottom quarter, by Londa Schiebinger and Dr. Proctor.
A. Yes.
Q. Called Agnotology, or correct me if I'm saying that wrong.
A. You said it correctly.
Q. Agnotology. What's that article about?
A. It's actually an edited collection of articles that's -- somehow my lines got messed up, so it's kind of reversed.
Q. I understand the underlining got reversed.
A. So that is a collection of essays that came out a couple of years ago about knowing and not knowing in history. That's the
best way --
Q. Say that one more time.
A. Knowing and not knowing in history.
Q. Does it say anything about smoking?
A. Proctor has an essay in there, as well.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
67Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. On Page 26, not quite halfway down, trade catalog, Rothchild's & Sons Company, The Largest Manufacturers of Saloon
Fixtures, Billiard Tables. What's that and why is it on the list?
A. That deals with the material culture of the ashtray.
Q. Say that one more time.
A. The material culture of the ashtray. That's what historians use to describe the way things change over time and the meanings
and functions that people assign to those things.
Q. What does it say about ashtrays in here?
A. Well, that is a primary source. That, as you imagine, has lots of different ashtrays and ash-catching devices. And I never
really testified -- it's not really part of my testimony, but it's part of my historical analysis, is that one of the ways you could
chart the social acceptance of smoking is by charting the change in the equipment.
And so this would be an example of when the ashtray was being formatted to catch the ashes of the cigar, kind of pre-women's
smoking, although you could always find women smoking, but in terms of the mainstream acceptance, which doesn't happen
until the 20s and '30s.
Q. Are ash catchers or ashtrays common in 1890?
A. In bars and saloons, yes. And this is a -- it's actually -- this is a trade catalog. The original is in the University of California,
Santa Barbara, some research.
Well, no, I guess not. I got this one from the Benson Ford Research Center. I take that back. And, you know, it's what you
would go to if you were going to open up a saloon. So there's lots of this kind of male-oriented smoking accessories. It's the
spittoon, the ash catcher for the cars, but then in the '20s and '30s, it becomes the ash tray for cigarettes in the home. That's
part of my academic investigation of this.
Q. On Page 27, not quite halfway down, there's an article by Charles Rhyne called, Mechanical Amusement Devices. What's
that?
A. Okay. That's another one of these trade catalogs. Essentially, the same thing that applied to the previous document that
applies to this one.
Q. Okay. So this is about ash catchers or ashtrays?
A. Yes. It's an incomplete citation, but I'm pretty sure that's what I looked at, either at the Henry Ford or at U.C. Santa Barbara.
I was in haste putting this together. I can assure you, you don't need to worry about that one.
Q. You are not planning to use that one at trial?
A. No. I'm not going to use that one at trial. So that's just a primary source that forms the history of devices for catching ashes.
Q. Also on that page, go a little further down, you have references to the Trade Catalog Collection.
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
68Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. There's one for automobiles and one for china and pottery.
A. Yes.
Q. Is the automobile one, does it have to do with ashtrays in automobiles?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. How about the china and pottery?
A. The same thing. You know, these are trade catalogs that would circulate among retailers stocking their wares, so it's a good
way to measure the changing shape and design of these devices.
Q. What's the time period, if you recall?
A. This is just the way that I put the citation into my notes. It actually covers a long period of time. It refers to the -- literally,
the box in the archive at the library. So, obviously, the automobile is early 20th Century. I think the china pottery is late 19th
and 20th Century.
Q. On Page 28, towards the bottom, there are -- let's start with four from the bottom. There's an article by several people and
somebody named Smith, and that's the easiest name there to pronounce, called “Contemporary Smoking Habits Among Nurses
in Mainland China.” It looks like a publication from December of 2005.
A. Yes. And the next one too. I gave a talk -- I've disclosed this to you guys, the PowerPoint slides. I gave a talk at a conference
where it was comparing the American south to China on health problems. I did some research on China. And that's how these
got into my citation.
Q. Anything here relevant to any opinions that you plan to offer in this case?
A. No, nothing in this case.
Q. Okay. Do you see any similarities between smoking in the south and smoking in China?
A. Yes. And in that presentation, they're in there both -- my take on that talk is in many ways, China is recapitulating the
experience of the American south in an earlier period in the 20th Century. China is the leading tobacco growing nation in the
world. We are number two, but China is three times the amount we produce. So they have a huge tobacco-growing industry,
and that affects policy.
It's also like the American south, a place where you have a large poor rural population that's being incorporated into a consumer
culture. And that's what happened in the 20th Century south. It is interesting to note that while southerners grew the cigarette
tobacco, rural southerners were -- and particularly rural African-American southerners were among people least likely to smoke,
say, up until the 1930s, even the 1940s and '50s.
And much of the story of southern smoking is -- the reasons for that are multiple, including just outright poverty and the like,
lack of marketing access. You know, a share cropper tended to be outside of the cash economy, buying things on credit. And
the incorporation of these people into a modern consumer economy, which happens in the '50s and '60s, the post World War II
prosperity that changes the south, there's some parallels with what's going on in China.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
69Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. On Page 31, there is an article there, it's towards the bottom, by Nancy Tomes, called, “The Gospel of Germs, Men, Women
and Microbe in American Life.”
A. Yes.
Q. Why is this one on your reliance list?
A. This is a well-regarded history of the acceptance of the disease theory in American medicine. Just kind of background
medical history.
Q. Okay. Have any relevance to any opinions you are going to give in this case?
A. No.
Q. The very last page, Page 34, and it's the last entry. It's an article by Jonathan Zimmerman, called, “Distilling Democracy:
Alcohol Education in America's Public Schools.”
A. Yes.
Q. Why did you include that on your reliance list?
A. Well, it's actually a book. Again, I apologize for the underlining. Understanding elements of alcohol prohibition is essential
for understanding the cigarette prohibition history because the cigarette prohibition pretty much piggybacked and was an
outgrowth of the movement to ban alcohol.
And this is a pretty good book because it deals with the way in which the prohibition movement influenced alcohol education,
and, you know, the issue of health education on things like tobacco and other public health issues is -- this is the context.
Q. Do you believe that the cigarette prohibition movement influenced education for students on smoking and health?
A. Briefly and not very deeply.
Q. And explain what you mean.
A. You can find Anticigarette League informed education materials, particularly active, particularly numerous, late 1880s,
1890s and the first decade of the 20th Century.
By the 1920s, the number and influence of those wanes dramatically as the cigarette moves into the mainstream of American life.
Q. You are aware of the fact that there was a time when Florida did ban the sale of cigarettes, aren't you?
A. Yes. I mean, the -- 15 or 16 states, I forget the exact number, had some form of restrictive legislation on cigarettes, and
that was a brief moment in time.
Q. Since that time period, isn't it true that Florida has required health education, and specifically health education on smoking
in its schools?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
70Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. You know, they do that now. You find some older documents where they -- I don't know the exact nature of that rule. The
relevance for this case is difficult to ascertain, in the sense that we're dealing with someone who had a very limited opportunity
to get an education, a segregated school system. But, yes, that's -- Florida had some things like that. I'm aware of those.
Q. Do you know when Florida started requiring health education on the topic of tobacco use?
A. I don't know an exact year, as I'm sitting here.
Q. Do you know if there were laws in Florida that required that kind of teaching to students when Mr. Alexander would have
been of school age?
A. As I sit here, I'm not exactly sure.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's mark this as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 9 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. This is a set of e-mails that I think you produced at your last deposition. Actually, it's an e-mail with an attached transcript.
A. Okay.
Q. This appears to me to be an e-mail that you sent to Dr. Proctor or that is addressed to Dr. Proctor, dated February 7, 2009,
1:35 p.m., and attached to it is a copy of testimony that Dr. Proctor gave, I believe in the Hess case, although you can correct
me if I'm wrong.
A. No. I believe it's the Hess case. I think you are right on that.
Q. And in the context of this particular transcript, it looks like you made commentary; is that a fair characterization?
A. That's right.
Q. Okay. Let me ask you, first of all, where did you get Dr. Proctor's trial testimony from the Hess case? Who gave it to you?
A. One of the attorneys in the Hess case sent it to me with the request that I help him prepare for the cross-examination of
the defense historian.
Q. Okay. Which lawyer was that?
A. I can't remember who sent it to me, but I know who I spoke with on the phone when I --
Q. Who did you talk to?
A. Gary Paige.
Q. And what instructions did he give you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
71Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. He wanted me to read it. He was -- I don't know if I'm violating any confidential --
MS. LAWSON:
Well, to the extent it's work product, this case has been tried already.
MR. SMITH:
Yes. The case has been tried. The transcript is of record. It's actually a case on appeal.
A. I mean, I don't have a problem saying it.
MR. SMITH:
I don't know of anything Mr. Paige would have to object to your transmitting --
A. He was unfamiliar with the exhibits that were produced on Dr. Proctor's cross, and he wanted my evaluation of that to help
him prepare for the next phase of his trial. And I gave him that advantage.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Did you send to Mr. Paige your commentary?
A. We talked on the phone about it.
Q. Okay. But you didn't e-mail it to him, like you -- you obviously had addressed an e-mail to Dr. Proctor with it.
A. No. I didn't do that. This, I did later, which was after I talked to Mr. Paige.
Q. The first page of the exhibit is actually an e-mail. It's from you, addressed to Dr. Proctor. And I think I stated, it's dated
February the 7th, 2009.
Why did you write this e-mail to Dr. Proctor?
A. Well, I had read this thing, as part of the charge that I described a moment ago, and I thought -- I thought he would appreciate
my opinion, my -- you know, I just was simply offering my -- you know, my opinions.
Q. Did anyone ask you to do that, to send to Dr. Proctor?
A. No. That was something I did on my own.
Q. Did you talk with Dr. Proctor about the opinions that he offered in the Hess case?
A. No. And, in fact, as you can tell from the attachment, I didn't attach the actual attachment that is here, you can tell, because
it's the -- the file name has a tilde in front of it and it's only 1K in size. So this particular document never made it through the
e-mail world due to my attaching the wrong file. But when you asked for it, I gave it to you last October.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
72Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. No. I understand that. At the time that you sent this e-mail, though, you intended to attach this file with your comments on
his testimony and to send it to him; is that correct?
A. That is correct, yes.
Q. Let me go back up to the body of the e-mail. It says, “Basically, as you recall, Reilly's strategy was to mix popular publications
with scientific ones, building their common knowledge of addiction case and undermining your state-of-the-art testimony and
concealment testimony.” What did you mean to say by that?
A. Well, this is a common trick. I think it confuses the jury. Just that, you mix scientific, peer-reviewed publications, which
are one kind of publication, with popular stuff, as you mixed in here, Reader's Digest and the like, and conflating the two as if
they were the same, when they're not. They reach different audiences.
Q. Did you believe that Mr. Reilly's cross-examination of Dr. Proctor was effective?
A. I don't know if it was effective or not. That, I can't say. I don't have an opinion. I just -- I think that's an accurate description
of what he was doing.
Q. Do you believe that Mr. Reilly's cross-examination undermined Dr. Proctor's testimony?
A. No. I think his strategy was to undermine Dr. Proctor's testimony. That's what I actually said. That was his strategy, as I
gathered from reading the testimony.
Q. Okay. Well, do you think his strategy, then, undermined Dr. Proctor's testimony?
A. No. That just is an observation.
Q. Then why did you write, “undermining your state-of-the-art testimony in addiction and concealment testimony”?
A. Because I was describing his strategy. You've got to read the whole sentence.
Q. No. I'm reading the whole sentence, but I'm asking you -- I asked you, first of all, did you believe it undermined his testimony,
and I think you said no, and then I said, then why did you say “and undermining your state-of-the-art testimony and concealment
testimony”?
A. Well, that was his strategy. I mean, that was his goal, and that's what I meant by that sentence.
Q. Let's go down to the next paragraph. It says, “I think it is okay to say that you've not looked at certain documents or classes
of documents. Give a reason; i.e., I was looking at what the scientists were writing in peer-reviewed journals, not what was in
the public realm.” What did you mean to say by that?
A. Well, if you will recall, from reading the testimony, I actually make a comment, there's a long discussion -- actually, it doesn't
involve Mr. Proctor. It involves the attorneys and the judge about, you know, whether the doctor, in this case, Mr. Proctor, is
familiar with the document. That's all.
You know, there was a long debate in the trial, I guess probably, you know, as a motion or something like that, as you often have
when you are having these trials. And it's simply just that. It's an accurate statement. You know, if you haven't seen something,
it's not a memory test, nor is it a Ph.D. comp.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
73Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Were you counseling Dr. Proctor to say he didn't remember or hadn't looked at a particular document so that the attorneys
couldn't use it to get it into evidence?
A. No. No. And, again, if you look at the testimony that I notated, and I'm relying on memory here, one attorney is saying,
Your Honor, the doctor has testified he hasn't seen this, and there's a long debate about that. It's simply saying, if you haven't
seen it, you haven't seen it.
Q. Yeah. Well, wasn't the point of the testimony that you highlighted that if he hadn't seen it, they weren't going to be allowed
to get it into evidence? So weren't you then counseling Dr. Proctor to say he hadn't seen something to prevent the defendants
from getting it into evidence?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. My comment was driven by the fact that if you haven't seen it, if you really haven't seen the document, it's okay to
say “I don't know.” That's all. I mean, if you don't know, it's okay to say, “I don't know.” That's all it is. You are adding a
spin to it that's not true.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let me ask you to look at Page 17 of the transcript. It goes from Page 17 to Page 18.
A. Uh-huh.
Q. There was a portion there that you had, it looked like highlighted. It starts at the bottom -- do you see what I'm talking about?
A. Yes.
Q. And isn't it here, talking about documents that Proctor says he's not familiar with?
A. That's right. And that's exactly what I was talking about.
Q. Okay. So this particular passage is what you were talking about here in your e-mail; is that right?
A. Right. And if you see, I have a note, here. “Robert, this is a good point by Gary. It's okay to say ‘I don't know, I haven't
seen this.’ ” If you haven't seen it -- I didn't write that part, but that was my meaning. If you haven't seen it, you haven't seen
it. If you have seen it, you have.
Q. All right. Look right above your comment. There's a statement by the Court where it starts, “He did that on the last one, and
if he would have objected, I would have sustained it because once someone says, I don't know this document, for you to publish
it is inappropriate. It's not in evidence and it's not appropriate to publish it.”
Wasn't the judge there saying, if Proctor says that he's not familiar with the document, then the defense attorney here would
not be allowed to publish it to the jury?
A. Well, again, right. And you have that rule, so that if you pop stuff that someone is not familiar with, and they're not familiar
with it, I mean, that's the rule.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
74Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. And directly in response to that statement by the Court, you are telling Dr. Proctor to say, I'm not familiar with that
document, aren't you?
A. Well, I'm saying, as I say here, it's -- if you don't -- it's okay to say you don't know if you don't know. I mean, if you haven't
seen the document, if it's not one you are familiar with, just -- then say that. If it's one you are familiar with, of course, you
say you are familiar with it.
Q. Well, let's read the comment that you wrote there. The comment, it's on Page 18, it says, “Robert: This is a good point by
Gary. It is to say, ‘I don't know.’ ‘I haven't seen this.’ They are building a common knowledge of addiction testimony on the
cross here.”
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Gary, who is Mr. Paige, his objection was, they're showing Dr. Proctor documents that are not on his reliance list and he's
not familiar with. Isn't that correct?
A. That's right. So he's not familiar with the document. And this was typed in haste, but it's okay -- my comment is clearly
missing the word “okay.” It is to say -- it should say, it is okay to say, I don't know, I haven't seen this. And then what I meant
there was, if you haven't seen it, it's okay to say you haven't seen it. It's just that simple.
Q. Well, what you did actually type is that Gary Paige made a good point that Dr. Proctor is not familiar with this, and in
response, the Court said, if he's not familiar, I'm not going to let it be published to the jury. And you, in response, are telling
Dr. Proctor to say, I'm not familiar with that, are you?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Because, as Gary said, that he -- he says, are you familiar with this? And he says no. So they're presenting him with documents
he's not familiar with. And it's very simple. If you are not familiar with it, just -- you are not familiar with it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. But aren't you telling Dr. Proctor to say he's not familiar with it in order to prevent a document from being published to
the jury?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. That's not what you mean there?
A. No.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
75Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Even though your statement is to tell Dr. Proctor to say I don't know or I'm not familiar with it right after the Court says,
if he's not familiar with it, I'm not going to let it in?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I mean, that's a rule of the court. If you are not familiar with it, it's okay to say you are not familiar with it. That's all that means.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. But that's not what you say, is it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. That is what I say.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. No. What you say is, Gary Paige is making a good point, that by objecting to a document that Dr. Proctor says he's not
familiar with, and the Court has said, if he's not familiar with it, it's not coming in. You say, this is a good point by Gary. It is
to say, I don't know. I haven't seen this. It doesn't mean it's okay to say I know. That's not what you said, is it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form. Asked and answered.
A. Again, what Gary says, on Page 17, is -- they're introducing documents through Professor Proctor. They're not on his reliance
material. They ask him, are you familiar with this? And he says no. That's all. That's -- they're throwing stuff -- you know,
you can't be familiar with every document. There's so many. It's not a memory test. It's not Ph.D. comps. There's so many
documents, and that's all I meant by that, was if you don't know, you don't know.
Q. Well, directly after Mr. Paige said that, the Court said, because once someone says, I don't know this document, for you
to publish it is inappropriate. It's right after that statement by the Court that you have a comment to Dr. Proctor to say, I don't
know. I haven't seen this. Isn't that correct?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form. Asked and answered.
A. Well, if located there. But you are completely misconstruing the meaning, which is very clear and obvious, that as I said
-- and I'm going to answer it one more time, if it's something you are not familiar with, you haven't seen it, it's not on your
reliance list, it's not one of your documents that you've studied, had a chance to study, you are not familiar with it. You don't
know it, you don't know it. That's all that is. That's all that means.
Q. So you think that my interpretation is completely wrong?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
76Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I do, yes.
Q. You don't think there's any way that anyone could reasonably walk away from that with some interpretation other than the
one I expressed to you?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I've told you what my purpose and meaning was. I think it's clear.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. As you sit here reading it today, do you have any possible explanation for it, other than the one you've just given me?
A. No.
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I've explained it to you.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you feel like you are qualified to coach Dr. Proctor in how to answer questions?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I'm not coaching him on how to answer questions. I simply offered him my opinions. He's free to take them or ignore
them.
(Off the record.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let's go to Page 13 of the transcript. There are several -- there are a couple of comments from you on here, but just to sort of
put it in context, I think Dr. Proctor is asked, “But what's reported, is that Christopher Columbus's sailors who weren't smoking
cigarettes, their use of tobacco caused them to become addicted, right?”
And then Dr. Proctor gave a response, “Certainly, the report that we have, which is almost one sentence, is that they did not
like to give it up.” Did I read that right?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you have a comment there that said, “I would disagree. How do we know that Columbus knew they were addicted?
I would think they did not want to give up the taking a break from work.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
77Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes, you did.
Q. Okay. Why were you telling Dr. Proctor to answer differently than he did?
A. I didn't tell him to answer differently than he did.
Q. Why are you telling him you would answer differently than he did?
A. Well, I told him my opinion on that. I offered my view.
Q. Why did you make that comment?
A. Because I have a different view. I've seen that same document. I disagreed with him. That's all.
Q. So it's your testimony you were not suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he answer differently than he did?
A. No. I was offering my opinion.
Q. The second part of your comment there, it says, “I would think they didn't want to give up the taking a break from work.”
Do you have any reason to believe that the sailors got to stop working while they smoked?
A. Again, it's just one sentence. That is certainly an alternative interpretation of that -- of that piece of evidence, which I think
is just as valid as the one that's given in the trial transcript. That's why I said I would disagree.
Q. Have you read the Diario De Abordo?
A. I've seen translated excerpts of this particular phrase.
Q. And what does it say?
A. Something about a fondness. It's been a long time since I've looked at that. But it's something like, oh, they took the tobacco,
had a fondness for it, something along those lines.
Q. Do you read Spanish?
A. Yes. I took a lot of Spanish and passed Spanish.
(Off the record.)
A. I might be wrong on that. And that's okay. I was just offering my opinion.
Q. Okay. That's fine.
MR. SMITH:
But I will stipulate that I am confident that Mr. Alexander did not read the Spanish --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
78Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
I'm not suggesting that Mr. Alexander read the Diario De Abordo. That was not my suggestion at all.
Q. Just continuing on, there's another question here. And just to give it the context, there's a question that says, “Am I correct
in saying that your method of doing research is not to do a complete review of any given publication? For example, you haven't
done a complete review of all The New York Times articles for a given time frame, say the '30s through the '60s, regarding
the topic of smoking.'' That was the question from Mr. Reilly.
And Dr. Proctor responded, “Right. I don't take any one type of source and read it from beginning to end. I'll take a topic,
like lung cancer and nicotine, and probe that in many sources because the point is to understand as many diverse sources as
possible, and not just one type of evidence.”
And then you have a comment here, and your comment says, “Don't give ground here. Use their words against them. You do a
systematic review. You devise a system and then review. They won't be able to argue with this, as it is one of their pet phrases.”
Did I read all that correctly?
A. Yes, you did.
Q. What did you mean when you told Dr. Proctor, “don't give ground here”?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, one of the clever -- I mean, my experience has been one of the clever tricks that is on display here is the ability to
twist the normal process of research.
So all I was saying was, you know, that they -- that defense attorneys have a fondness for the term “systematic review.” And
what does that mean? It means to systematically review something, and that doesn't mean reading it from beginning to end,
necessarily. It means what Dr. Proctor does. So I was essentially agreeing with him.
Q. Did Mr. Reilly anywhere in his question use the term “systematic review”?
A. No, but I've heard that term. I mean, that term has been -- my experience has been, I've heard that term many times. So
that's why I put it there.
Q. But that was not the question that was actually asked of Dr. Proctor, was it?
A. He doesn't use that exact phrase. That's true.
Q. He asked, did you look at all The New York Times articles from the '30s through the '60s; isn't that right?
A. Yes.
Q. And Dr. Proctor said, no, I don't do it that way, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
79Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. That's correct.
Q. And, yet, you tell Dr. Proctor, don't give ground here. He was asked if he does a complete review, and he says, no, I don't
do it that way. What ground is he giving?
A. Well, you are right. He's not giving ground. I just -- you know, I put in my observation. This is really maybe more of a
reflection of my own experience in cross-examination.
MR. SMITH:
I have a page in here. Is it just a mistake, is this just a blank page?
MS. LAWSON:
Yes. I think I took it out of mine.
MR. SMITH:
That doesn't matter. I just want to make sure I wasn't missing some things.
MS. LAWSON:
No. We had printer problems.
MR. SMITH:
No problem. I'm on Page 14.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'm on Page 14, also. Okay. There's a question about Reader's Digest, and the question posed by Mr. Reilly is, “Have you
done a complete review of the articles that appeared in Reader's Digest on the topic of tobacco cigarettes?”
And Dr. Proctor's response is, “I'm sure I haven't looked at every one, but I've certainly looked at the most important ones.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. And then there is a comment from you that says, “There's only 36 articles on S&H...” which I take to mean smoking and
health, “... 1920s through 1964 or three percent of all the stories published in the magazine during this period.” Did I read
that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you personally gone back and counted all the times stories on smoking and health were printed in Reader's Digest
from the 1920s through 1964?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
80Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes. And, also, on the eve of the release of the Surgeon General's Report, I think on the reprinting of one of the stories, they
say, we have run 36 stories on this subject. And that's where I got that from.
Q. Isn't it true that some of those stories were run multiple times, though?
A. Some were reprinted.
Q. Do you have any idea how many times stories were reprinted?
A. Some from the '40s were reprinted again on the eve of the Surgeon General's Report, so somewhere on the second time.
Q. If you included the reprintings, do you know how many articles there would have been on smoking and health in Reader's
Digest from the '20s through 1964?
A. If you count repeats, maybe 40 instances. I don't know. I would have to double-check. You know, that's just a guess.
Q. So you don't know then offhand?
A. No. I don't have a precise figure for you.
Q. Why were you making this comment here to Dr. Proctor?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. You mean the one about the Reader's Digest?
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Right, yes.
A. Oh, I was just offering my opinion. That's been part of my sworn testimony many times. I've made that point. It caught my
eye, and I have a different view, so I put my view.
Q. On that same page, a little further down, I think it's on Line 15, there is a question posed by Mr. Reilly that says, “And, in
fact, have you done a review of what the American Presidents said about the use of tobacco?”
Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And Dr. Proctor's response is, “I haven't looked specifically at what Presidents thought about tobacco, no.” Did I read that
correctly?
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
81Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. And then you have a comment right below it that says, “A better answer, ‘I know that FDR, who saved the nation from
depression and fascism and who was President when Stewart Hess was born smoked all the time. The cigarette was part of his
public image.’ ” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes, you did.
Q. Why did you suggest, quote, “a better answer,” unquote, to Dr. Proctor?
A. That's how I would have answered the question. That would have been my opinion, much like the Columbus section, that
would have been my interpretation of that particular question.
Q. Do you have any opinion as to whether it's appropriate for you to be offering better answers to Dr. Proctor for his questions?
A. Well, I think there's nothing wrong with me offering my views on these objective issues on the history of smoking.
Q. So you see nothing wrong in suggesting a better answer to Dr. Proctor for a question that he was asked in trial?
A. No. I mean, that would have been how I would have answered it. That's really what I --
Q. I understand you are saying that's how you would have answered it, but do you think that it is appropriate for you to suggest
to someone else that they testify in a manner different than the way they testified?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I was simply offering Dr. Proctor my opinion. He could have gone and read my testimony, which is available on the internet.
I was simply responding and offering my own -- my own professional opinion, which he's free to accept or reject.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you believe the better answer that you offered to Dr. Proctor is actually responsive to the question? You know, have you
done a review of what the American Presidents said about the use of tobacco?
A. Well, I believe, if I recall, that he's setting up for the John Quincy Adams letter. I mean, the relevance of that to the issue,
you know, that's -- the attorney is free to ask whatever he wants, but I thought my answer was better. So I said a better answer.
My opinion -- I mean, and by that, simply, I meant, this is how I would have -- this is my professional opinion of this issue on
what the Presidents thought and believed about smoking. That's all.
Q. But it doesn't say, “this is my opinion.” It says, “a better answer,” doesn't it?
A. That's what it says, but, I mean, I was writing it. I was offering my opinions, and I think that's assumed, that these are my
opinions.
Q. Well, I'm not assuming anything. I'm just reading what you wrote. It looks, to me, like you are suggesting that he answer
differently than he did.
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
82Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Object to form.
A. Well, I was offering how I would have answered the question.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Were you suggesting that he answer it that way?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form, asked and answered.
A. It's up to him to decide whether he was persuaded, if he agrees with me, yes or no. I had a different interpretation of that
question.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Over on Page 16, you have a comment in here, it's sort of towards the middle of the page. There's a question by Mr. Reilly,
“So here's the President of the United States saying, hey, I was addicted to tobacco in two forms, smoking pipes -- and that
would have been smoking pipes back then, right?”
And then you have a comment, “He wasn't President at the time, 1825-29. He was a well-known supporter of temperance, and
this was a priv,” whatever you meant by that. Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. What's the point here? What point are you trying to make, that he wasn't President at the time, and he, I guess being John
Quincy Adams, he wasn't president at the time he said it? What's the point in that?
A. Just what it says. Just that.
Q. So he was a private citizen at that time, right?
A. I believe the letter was in the 1840s. He would have been in the House of Representatives.
Q. So he was a representative then?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Congressman. Does it make any difference to you whether it's a president saying that he was addicted to tobacco versus a
Congressman saying he was addicted to tobacco, when we're talking about the 1840s?
A. I just made that observation that at the time --
Q. Does it make any difference?
A. It's not a big deal. It's just an observation.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
83Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. You also say he, and, again, John Quincy Adams, was a well-known supporter of temperance. What temperance
movement was John Quincy Adams involved in?
A. The temperance movement.
Q. And by “temperance,” what do you mean? Was it alcohol? Was it tobacco?
A. Alcohol. Temperance is the anti-alcohol movement, yes.
Q. And what group was he involved with?
A. I'm not sure what groups he was involved with. He was an outspoken opponent of the use of alcohol. So he was a supporter
of temperance. He may have been involved in some of the organized manifestations of that, but I'm just not sure.
Q. Okay. What was it he said or did to become a well-known supporter of temperance?
A. I believe he railed against the evils of alcohol. That's my understanding.
Q. Okay. Did he write on it, speak on it? What?
A. I'd have to go look that up to give you a full answer.
Q. Okay. Did you look it up before you wrote that down?
A. No. I just was giving my opinions, my response.
Q. And the last part of it, this was a p-r-i-v, what did you mean by that?
A. Well, I think what I most certainly meant by that was -- and I just somehow didn't type it, was a private letter.
Q. And, in your mind, anyway, what's the significance of it being a private letter?
A. Well, at the time that I wrote this, my thinking was -- I mean, it made -- you know, he had been publicly opposed to alcohol.
I was less persuaded by the public stance against tobacco. That's all. Just giving my kind of response.
Q. Okay. But you agree, this was an individual in the 1840s describing tobacco use as addictive. Isn't that right?
A. Yes. I mean, yes, the letter itself, yes, that's a fair characterization.
Q. Let's go to Page 17. Now, part of this, we've already talked about, but you do have a comment on here that I will read, for
the record, and it's right below Line 15. It says, “Sweet! Blow him another asshole!!” To whom were you referring?
A. Oh, the Judge seemed to be -- I guess, technically, I would be referring to the Court, who was addressing Mr. Reilly.
Q. Do you dislike Mr. Reilly?
A. I don't know him.
Q. Well, why did you make this comment?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
84Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, it's -- as you read it, it's -- there's some drama involved. I mean, I don't want to take a trial transcript too far, but it's
somewhat dramatic. As I was reading, I was just kind of having fun and made kind of a humorous comment on what was a
dramatic part of the transcript.
Q. Have you ever been cross-examined by Mr. Reilly?
A. I have.
Q. So you know who Mr. Reilly is?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you dislike him?
A. I don't know him. I can't dislike him or like him.
Q. Your comment would seem to indicate you enjoyed seeing the Court fuss at Mr. Reilly. Would that be a correct
characterization?
A. Well, like I said, it was dramatic and it's -- and so I responded that way.
Q. Okay. Did you enjoy seeing the court fuss at Mr. Reilly?
A. I thought it was kind of funny. It just -- it's dramatic, a little bit of humor there. That's all. Speaking frankly.
Q. We talked about this, but there's then an exchange between the lawyers and the Court about the use of documents, and then
you highlighted that portion. Why did you highlight what you did?
A. Well, because Mr. Paige was speaking, and I was referring to Mr. Paige's comments. I imagine I didn't want to get confused
because I said -- I had used colorful language, and that's all.
Q. Okay.
A. Just precision.
Q. Well, you actually highlighted not just comments from Mr. Paige. You highlighted an exchange between Mr. Paige, the
Court and Mr. Reilly; is that right?
A. Well, yes. That's true. Yes.
Q. And that particular exchange was about whether documents were going to be permitted in evidence; isn't that right?
A. Yes. Although what I took away from that was more the issue of whether Dr. Proctor had, in fact, recognized or understood
or encountered documents or not. That was really my point on that, was, like I say, if you haven't seen it, it's okay to say you
haven't seen it.
Q. That's not what you said there, is it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
85Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Objection, asked and answered.
Object to form.
A. No. That's what I said.
MS. LAWSON:
Can you read back that last part of what he said?
Q. I think the last thing you said, “I say, if you haven't seen it, it's okay to say you haven't seen it.” Is that what you just told me?
A. Yes.
Q. That's not what you wrote here on Page 18, though, is it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form, asked and answered.
A. If you go back and look at the front page of the e-mail, where I say, it's okay -- if you haven't seen it, it's okay to say you
haven't seen it. Or as I actually put it, I say it's okay to say you haven't looked at certain documents or classes of documents. It
isn't a memory test, nor is it our Ph.D. comps. If you haven't seen it, you haven't seen it. That's all I meant.
Q. I understand. But that's not what you wrote on Page 18?
MR. SMITH:
Objection, asked and answered.
A. Well, it is. I mean, it's pretty clear that in my haste to type that the word “okay” is missing. And that is supported by the
fact that I write essentially the same thing on the e-mail. That was my meaning. If you haven't seen it, it's okay to say, I haven't
seen it. It's not a memory test. It's not your Ph.D. comps.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I apologize for asking the question again --
MR. SMITH:
I'm going to instruct the witness not to answer the question anymore. You can bring that one up with the judge. You've asked
this one 50 times.
MS. LAWSON:
We can do that then.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
86Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Page 25. It starts over on Page 24. On the bottom of Page 24, there's a question that is, “Can you tell the jury what Good
Health is?”
And then there's an answer, “It's a sort of popular health magazine, sort of a natural health movement by John Harvey Kellogg,
and published here, we know, in the 1940s.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. So there was a question from Mr. Reilly as to what Good Health is, and then Dr. Proctor described it as a sort of popular
health magazine, sort of a natural health movement magazine. Would that be correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. All right. On the top of Page 25, there is a comment from you, and the comment states, “Kellogg was a nutcase and eugenicist.
He believed that the cure all for most diseases was an enema. They even made a comedy film about him: ‘The Road to Wellville.’
Finally, his object to tobacco was also on religious grounds, as he was a 7th Day Adventist.” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Why were you saying here to Dr. Proctor that Kellogg was a nutcase and eugenicist?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. I was expressing my opinion.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Why do you believe Dr. Kellogg was a nutcase and eugenicist?
A. For the reasons that I outlined in the comment section there.
Q. You believe because -- I think what you outlined here is he believed that a cure all for most diseases was an enema, and
that they made a film about him, and that he objected to tobacco on religious grounds. Is that what made him a nutcase and
eugenicist?
A. I don't know about the eugenicist part, but he did believe in things like race betterment and alike. That's my opinion. I put
that up here.
Q. Well, let's take it one at a time. You believe he was a nutcase because he believed the cure all for most diseases was an
enema, they made a film about him and he objected to tobacco on religious grounds, is that what made him a nutcase?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
87Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, the enema part, in particular. I guess you could interpret the second sentence -- the third sentence about the film that
other people have probably agreed with me on that. And then, finally, and that's his object. Of course, I clearly meant to type
in “objection” to tobacco was on religious grounds, also on religious grounds. So I just add that. I'm just giving my view on a
historical figure. This, again, I've said this publicly, there's no secret to this.
Q. You did this right after a question in which Dr. Proctor responded to and described Dr. Kellogg's Good Health magazine
as a popular health magazine. Were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he should not describe Good Health as a popular health
magazine?
A. No. That's an accurate description of that magazine, health magazine for the public. I just was putting my -- you know, my
opinion and my view on Kellogg. He may disagree with me.
Q. Okay. Were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor, through your comment, that he should denigrate the Good Health magazine or
Dr. Kellogg?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I was simply giving my view on Kellogg.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he should describe Dr. Kellogg as a nutcase and eugenicist?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I was simply offering my opinion.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So you were not suggesting to Dr. Proctor, then, that he should have described Kellogg as a nutcase and eugenicist?
A. I was offering my opinion. That's all I was doing.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive.
Q. I'm asking you, were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor how he should describe Dr. Kellogg?
A. No. I wasn't suggesting to Proctor that he answer any particular way. I was simply offering my opinion or my take or my
interpretation of this historical figure.
Q. Have you read the Good Health magazines that Dr. Kellogg published?
A. I've looked at some of them.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
88Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. How many have you looked at?
A. Probably three or four issues.
Q. Three or four issues. Do you know how many there were?
A. It was regularly published for some time. I don't know exactly how many. It was around for a while. I had read other works
by Kellogg.
Q. The information that you know about Dr. Kellogg, where did you get it from?
A. Well, I've read “Tobaccoism,” which is a work that he wrote. I've researched him, just the general outlines of his life.
Q. Why did you research him?
A. Well, he's a figure in history, more specifically, a figure in American history. He's somebody that you come across as part
of your normal work as a professional historian of the United States.
Q. When did you research him?
A. I've known about Kellogg since I was in graduate school. I mean, a long time ago.
Q. When did you research him?
A. I read “Tobaccoism.” I read that sometime. I can't remember exactly when.
Q. Okay. Other than reading “Tobaccoism” and the three to four issues of Good Health magazine, what else have you done
to research Dr. Kellogg?
A. Oh, he pops up in some of the newspaper research I've done. He pops up in a lot of places. He was prominent.
Q. And he was a prominent antismoking activist, actually, wasn't he?
A. Oh, yes. Yes. Of course. Or antitobacco would be more accurate.
Q. What did he say about smoking in his book, “Tobaccoism”?
A. It's a long -- it's a work that talks -- whose purpose is to persuade somebody not to use tobacco in any form. He talks about
health effects, moral effects, deleterious religious effects, a variety, full court press, if you will.
Q. Your last statement in this comment on Page 25, finally, his -- I think you said you should have typed objection to tobacco
was also on religious grounds, as he was a 7th Day Adventist. Isn't it also true that he objected to tobacco on the grounds that
it was harmful to health?
A. Yes. But he also -- that's why I said he also objected on religious grounds.
Q. And the religious grounds specifically were, you shouldn't use tobacco because it harms the temple of the holy ghost, which
is your body.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
89Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Wouldn't that be correct?
A. That would be part of it, yes.
Q. What other religious grounds other than it was harmful to your body?
A. It was seen as an intoxicant, loss of control. So that regard made it like alcohol.
Q. Anything else?
A. That would cover it.
Q. So intoxicant and health effects?
A. Yes. And religious moral effects. It had deleterious -- it was a gateway drug to harder things, particularly to alcohol.
Q. On the bottom of Page 25, there's a page there that seems to be unnumbered. It's not part of the transcript. I think it was
added with your comment on it. Do you see that?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Okay. On -- towards the bottom of Page 25, there's a question that says, “In fact, people were experimenting with urine
samples to see whether they could find nicotine in urine way back into the '30s, right?” And then you go to the second page,
and there's a response from Dr. Proctor that says, Yeah.
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes. You read it correctly.
Q. This little portion above Dr. Proctor's response, is that your comment?
A. Yes.
Q. And the comment is, “And you...” I'm assuming you meant “your.”
A. Yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
90Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. “... client still, to this day, funds research on cotinine and Debrisoquine metabolism as markers for lung cancer and to call into
disrepute the research on secondary smoke.” And then you give what looks like an internet site to a document; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. What did you mean to convey to Dr. Proctor with this comment?
A. Oh, I was just -- I was reading the testimony, and that comment occurred to me, that the mentioning of the -- of this early
20th Century nicotine in urine research angle made me think about something that I think is quite interesting that is part of the
contemporary situation. So that's simply just an observation.
Q. Okay. Were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he add the substance of your comment to his answer?
A. No. I was simply offering my -- you know, my observation that there's an interesting contemporary parallel.
Q. Well, your observation is written as a response, is it not? Because it says, “and your client.” So it's written as something that
someone would respond back to the lawyer; isn't that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. So it is your testimony that you were not suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he respond back to Mr. Reilly with something along
the lines of what you are stating here?
A. No. I was just getting into it, and this -- again, as I said, this issue of nicotine in urine, way back in the '30s, that's raised in
the question, made me think of this contemporary situation that I'm familiar with, just as a kind of parallel.
Q. The document you reference here, what is it?
A. I'd have to look that up to fully remind myself, but it's probably something, probably a 1980s era research document on the
issue that's described in the sentence, but I'd have to double-check to know that for sure.
Q. If you had been asked this question that Mr. Reilly posed on the bottom of Page 25, would that have been your response,
the comment that you have there?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. I don't know. Personally, I wasn't familiar with the situation that Mr. Reilly represented in his question, so I probably would
have said, “I'm not familiar with that,” because that would be responsive to the question.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Go to Page 26. At the top of the page, there's a question that says, “And it was commonly stated in publications like this
that the reason why people smoke is for nicotine, wasn't it?”
And then Dr. Proctor added or stated, “Yes.” Is that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
91Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes.
Q. In between the question and the answer, you interposed a comment. There is a “No! People smoke to relax, for sociability
reasons, as a pick-me-up, to relieve boredom.” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes, you did.
Q. Through this comment, were you suggesting to Dr. Proctor that he change his yes answer to no?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I was simply expressing what my view is on that. That's how I -- that's how I would have answered that and that would
have been my opinion.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Have you and Dr. Proctor ever talked about why people smoke?
A. Not really, no.
Q. Why were you saying to Dr. Proctor, no, people smoke to relax, et cetera?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Because that's how I would have answered the question. That would be my opinion as to that question's answer.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let's go back to your -- the cover e-mail for just a moment. In the last paragraph, there is a sentence that starts out, “Just read
these questions and think about your answers. I guarantee, the next time you are crossed, they will ask the exact same questions.”
Do you see that?
A. I mean, I know I wrote that. I'm just trying to -- oh, yes, at the end. Yes. I see that. I'm sorry. I was just trying to catch up
with you. Uh-huh. I see that.
Q. When you told Dr. Proctor to think about his answers, weren't you suggesting to him that he answer differently than he
did in this testimony?
A. No. I was making the point that it's been my experience that I'm asked the same questions over and over again, and so he
could read the questions that he was asked of and think about his answers because he's going to see them again because they're
-- my personal experience has been that -- has been just that.
Q. Well, if you were suggesting to him he needed to think about his answers, doesn't that have the implication that maybe he
ought to answer differently?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
92Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Not necessarily, just he can be prepared because he's going to have these same questions. He's going to see these same
questions again. My opinion and my experience has been that.
Q. If there was nothing that he should change about the answers that he already gave, why would he need to think about them?
A. Just to make sure that his -- that he's comfortable with -- again, just that he's going to see them again. He's going to see
these questions again. That's all that means.
Q. Well, I agree that's what the last part of it is, “They will ask the exact same questions. I guarantee you, the next time you are
crossed, you will see the exact same questions.” That's what you keep repeating back to me.
But the part I'm asking is, about the “think about your answers,” why would he need to think about his answers unless there
was something about the answers he gave that you think he should change?
A. I offered him some of my observations. He was -- he's free to think about them any way he wants to. That's all that means.
He can just think about it because you are going to see it again. It doesn't mean he's going to change anything.
Q. Why would you offer the observations if you didn't think he should change his answers?
A. Well, when I read this, one of the things that struck me was, these were questions that I have often been asked in cross-
examination, so having been asked most of these questions, I saw that they would be repeated, that he would -- he could
anticipate seeing these kinds of questions again because I had seen these exact questions before, and that's it. I didn't suggest
that he change or keep anything.
Q. Let's go back to Page 26 for a moment. The comment that we were just looking at, the one where he was asked why people
smoke, “And isn't it for nicotine?”
And Dr. Proctor responded, “yes.”
And you put the comment in there, “No! People smoked to relax, for sociability reasons...” et cetera.
Why would you put that comment there and, in your e-mail, tell him to think about the answer that he gave unless you were
suggesting to him that instead of saying yes, people smoke for nicotine, he should say, no, people smoke for other reasons?
A. Well, first, of course people do smoke for nicotine. That's a correct -- that's a fact. I simply was offering my take on that.
He was free to accept it or reject it. Simply my response.
Q. Why did you offer him that response and tell him to think about his answer if you were not suggesting to him that he should
change his answer?
A. I wasn't suggesting that he should change anything; just to think. Cross-examination is a stressful experience, at least that's
been my personal experience, and I was simply giving him some of my thoughts. He was free to accept or reject those, to think
I was crazy. Simply sharing my interpretation of historical matters, much like historians do when we go to conferences and
disagree with each other on the meaning and significance of other historical phenomenon. That's what we do.
Q. Well, when you go to meetings and you disagree with other people, you are trying to persuade them to your point of view,
aren't you?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
93Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, we're offering our interpretation. And if someone disagrees with us, they offer their interpretation, and, you know, we
try to learn from each other. That's all that scholars do.
Q. But you try to persuade other people to accept your interpretation, don't you?
A. Well, I offered my view, and have offered my view about things, but people are free to accept or reject them.
Q. Why would you have offered your view to Dr. Proctor and told him to think about his answers unless you wanted to persuade
him to your point of view?
A. Well, to think about is really tied to the idea that he's going to see the same questions again, so that this is simply another
way of saying, you know, be prepared because this is going to come your way frequently, based on my personal experience.
Q. Okay. Well, if you were just encouraging him to keep doing the same old thing, why did you say, think about your answers?
If he had gotten it all, and you thought it was all great, you wouldn't have told him that, would you?
A. I was simply responding with my own views, and my views are different than his. He's a different kind of historian than
me. We've done different kinds of research. He's free to accept or reject those, to think I'm crazy, to think I'm dead wrong,
dead right or whatever. That's all.
And, again, all I was doing in that paragraph, in the e-mail, was saying that you are going to see these questions again, so
just make sure you are -- you know, you are warned. I mean, in essence, this is what you will experience, based on -- and the
assumption there is based on my own personal experience.
Q. Well, I agree with you up to the point you say -- you are telling him you are going to see these questions again, because you
do state that. But we come back to the point which you really haven't responded to, which is, you would not tell someone to think
about their answers unless you were suggesting to them they should change something about their answers; isn't that correct?
A. No.
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form, asked and answered.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. That's your testimony.
A. Yes.
Q. That when you say to someone, think about your answers, after you've offered commentary to them on the answers they've
given, no one would think that you were suggesting to that individual that they change something about their answer?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. That's my testimony.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
94Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Also on Page 26, there's a question about the term “lady nicotine.” It's towards the bottom of the page. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you have a -- I think it's right between Lines 21 and 22, and it says, “Interesting fact: When I keyword searched
JM Barries, My Lady Nicotine, on the eGutenberg site, I found that the word only appears in the title. And he calls smoking
a habit.” What was the point of that comment?
A. To share with him an interesting fact.
Q. And what was the relevance of the interesting fact?
A. That's why I call it an interesting fact, just kind of a trivia point. It's not really responsive to questions. It's just something
interesting.
Q. Have you done any research on the use of the term “Lady Nicotine”?
A. I'm familiar with it, yes.
Q. When does it first appear in common parlance?
A. I'm not exactly sure.
Q. Let's go to Page 27. It looks like you insert a piece of an article in that; is that correct? It's between Lines 3 and 4.
A. Yes.
Q. What was the point of inserting that?
A. It's from a Reader's Digest article. It's something that I've used often as an example of popular information on the addiction
of -- the addictive qualities of smoking.
Q. Why did you insert it there?
A. Well, because they're talking about Cooper's Last Stand, which is one of those Reader's Digest articles that was reprinted, that
we talked about earlier. And I shared with him my view as to the Reader's Digest article that I thought was worth considering.
Q. Let's go to Page 28. On Line 12, there's the beginning of a question that starts out, or Mr. Reilly asks, “In fact, the American
public knew that the reason they were smoking was because of nicotine, although they may not have been scientifically able
to prove it for decades before Mr. Hess was even born.”
And then on Line 16, Dr. Proctor starts his response. It says, “I think the way I would put it is that some people knew. I mean,
there are lots of health purists going back in the 19th Century and they didn't like anything about smoking or drinking or
dancing. That was a common view. But as far as them being experts on the pharmacology of nicotine and knowing how it was
manipulated and so forth, certainly, the public was not in that category.”
Did I read that question and answer correctly?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
95Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes.
Q. And in between the question and answer, you have inserted a comment that states, “You've got to figure out a way to stick
to, ‘it was a habit, not an addiction...’ ”
And let me back up. Before the word “it,” there's a quotation mark. “ ‘It was a habit, not an addiction, in the mind of the public.’
Some people knew, others didn't. He's a very good cross-examiner.”
Isn't it true, here, you are telling Dr. Proctor, he needs to say -- not agree that some people knew that they were smoking because
of nicotine but to say, “it was a habit, not an addiction in the mind of the public”?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, no. What's going on here is that my inserted comment is perfectly in accord with Dr. Proctor's testimony, and I was
pointing out that the gentleman doing the cross-examination was doing a very good job, and part of that is to make you --
mischaracterize your testimony in the minds of people listening to it.
So that's all I was doing, was to basically say, it's a habit, not an addiction, in the mind of the public. Some knew, some didn't.
That's it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Well, the “you” in this comments you put, that's Dr. Proctor, right?
A. That's right.
Q. You are addressing him. So you are saying, you, Dr. Proctor, have to find a way to stick to “it was a habit, not an addiction,
in the mind of the public,” weren't you? You were telling him to do that, right?
A. Well, that's pretty close to what I wrote, one word off. But, yes, but it simply -- that was not in any way about the substance
of his testimony. That was simply noting that the attorney was a good cross-examiner, who does a good job of giving people
listening to the testimony the wrong idea as to what the point that you are trying to make in that particular moment. So that's all.
Q. Aren't you here telling Dr. Proctor what to say in his testimony?
A. No. I'm not telling him what to say.
Q. Then why do you say you've got to figure out a way to stick to, and then tell him what to stick to?
A. Well, that's what he's been testifying to. I mean, if you read the -- I mean, that's perfectly congruent with his testimony. So
I'm not telling him to say anything. It's just I'm telling him he needs to deal with a very good cross-examiner.
Q. Okay. Aren't you telling him, though, to say -- or I think the way you put it is, stick to this quotation that you have here?
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
96Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Object to form.
A. Well, that's in quotations because those are really -- you know, for emphasis. That's all that is, not for him to say those exact
words, but rather as a way of emphasizing.
And, again, like I said, all I'm -- that statement is in perfect congruence with his testimony. And he's a very good cross-examiner
for the reasons that I say in the original e-mail, which is he does a very good job of confusing the scientific and the popular
issues. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So I think the term you used was you were emphasizing what you think Dr. Proctor ought to say?
A. No. I was emphasizing what I was saying, my words.
Q. Well, then why do you say “you,” and that you being Dr. Proctor? You've got to figure a way to stick to, and then what's
in quotation marks? It's not you testifying; it's Dr. Proctor, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And this is you, telling Dr. Proctor how he should testify, isn't it?
A. No.
Q. You mean to say, when you tell -- when you say to Dr. Proctor, you've got to figure out a way to stick to this testimony, you
are saying here that's not telling Dr. Proctor, you've got to testify this way?
A. No. He's already testified to that idea. I'm just saying that he -- that he's confronting a very good cross-examiner, and that,
you know, the cross-examiner is, as I say in the e-mail, mixing popular publications with scientific works to build his case.
Q. And the cross-examiner's leading Dr. Proctor away from what you are telling him to stick to; isn't that right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Well, he's confusing the matter by mixing scientific issues with popular perception issues. That's essentially the point of that.
And the two are different. They're different realms of knowledge, and that was just my response to that. The person doing the
cross-examination was doing a very good job of blending the two, as I read the testimony, as I said in the cover e-mail. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Move to strike that as nonresponsive.
Q. My question was, you were directing Dr. Proctor --
Can you read my question back?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
97Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Almost. The cross-examiner was leading -- it would be more accurate to say the cross-examiner was leading Dr. Proctor
away from his own testimony by confusing or mixing or blending two different and discrete realms of knowledge, one scientific
peer-reviewed among professionals and the other things that appeared in the popular press. And that's all I meant by that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So you were telling Dr. Proctor, instead of being led away, you need to stick to what's in the quotation marks there; is that
correct?
A. Well, if that's his testimony. And as I read it and as I understood his testimony, he should make sure to, again, keep the two
knowledge areas discrete. When you've got to -- you know, I'm just kind of making these comments, but then I write the cover
e-mail, which essentially offers my final evaluation. And that's all I meant by that was, make sure that if -- you know, you keep
these two separate realms of knowledge discrete, which is his testimony, and that the person doing the cross-examination was
doing a very good job of blending the two together or, as I say, mix popular publications with scientific ones.
MS. LAWSON:
Move to strike that as nonresponsive. Would you read back my last question?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Were you telling Dr. Proctor to stay on message?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. If that -- well, his message, to stay on his message.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, not his message, the message you put here in quotation marks, right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. What I meant by that was to stick to his message because that's simply a way of emphasizing what his message was.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. But that's not what he just testified; that was your statement, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
98Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. What's in the quotations?
A. Again, I was just offering him my response. I was not indicating that he should testify in any particular way; simply pointing
out that the person was a good cross-examiner, and that -- these are trick questions, in some ways. They are the product of
great thought and consideration, I suspect, on the part of the person asking the cross-examination, and I was offering him what
I interpreted was his testimony, as I read it and understood it. He's free to agree with that or disagree with that.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive.
Q. Isn't it true you were telling Dr. Proctor to make sure and stick to this message that you put in the quotation marks here
in your comment?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form, asked and answered.
A. You've got to look at it, the whole thing, to get my meaning, as I described it in the e-mail and put it here. The two are part
of a piece, and I was simply giving him my view. That was just my response.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive.
Would you read back my last question?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
MR. SMITH:
Object to form. Do you have any answer other than what you've given?
THE WITNESS:
No.
A. Again, I'll say it again, I was not telling him how to testify. I was pointing out that he's going up against a good cross-
examiner, and to beware of trick questions, as I said in here, in mixing the popular and the scientific. That's all that meant.
That's all I meant by that.
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
99Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. So it's your testimony when you put a particular message in quotation marks and direct to Dr. Proctor, you've got to figure
out a way to stick to this message, that's not you telling Dr. Proctor how to testify?
A. That's correct. I'm simply offering him my evaluation or my opinion.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's take a break.
(Off the record.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Still here on Page 28, the last sentence of the statement, “He's a very good cross-examiner.” Did you feel like Mr. Reilly
was doing an effective cross-examination of Dr. Proctor?
A. Oh, he's very good. He's very good, yes.
Q. Do you think his examination of Dr. Proctor or his cross-examination of Dr. Proctor in this case was very effective?
A. Was it effective? I don't know. That, I can't say. But I do think he's very -- he's smart and he's doing -- his questions are
very good.
Q. Okay. And that's why you were offering comments to Dr. Proctor, to improve his testimony?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, there are lawyer tricks. A lot of this is not really substantive. In fact, it's just -- it's dealing with lawyer tricks.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. When you say “lawyer tricks,” are you suggesting Mr. Reilly was being dishonest in some fashion?
A. No.
Q. Then why do you call it a trick?
A. Because -- or tactic. I'm okay with the word “tactic.”
Q. Well, those have very different connotations.
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. A trick is not a lie.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
100Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. There's something -- doesn't “trick” have the connotation of something devious or underhanded?
A. You know, tricks are -- it's more -- you know, that's what traps. You trick people. You trap them. Traps. It's not devious.
It's not underhanded. It's -- I mean, it's out there in the open. It's all been written down. It's more traps, traps, little traps that
prevent -- at least my experience has been, you have to watch out for them, lest someone listening to your testimony walk away
with an idea that is different than what your professional opinions are.
Q. So was your purpose in making these comments to help Dr. Proctor improve his opinion so that he wouldn't walk into Mr.
Reilly's traps?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Improving his opinions, I mean, the opinions are his opinions. They're the product of his learning and research and experience.
But I was -- I think it's fair to say that I'm trying to make him aware of the traps and the tricks, yes.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So that he could avoid those in the future?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, yes. I mean, these are not substantive issues. These are not issues related to the substance of your testimony. They're
part of the way in which you don't get tricked or trapped. I mean, it's just that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. But it does have to do with the words he chooses to use when testifying, doesn't it, avoiding these traps, as you call them?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, the traps are -- it just depends on the trap, you know. The main trick/trap is the one that I identified in the e-mail, which
is this kind of blending of two realms of knowledge, which are generally discrete. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. But your comments in the transcript touch on much more than the blending of scientific publications and popular publications.
Isn't that correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
101Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, a couple of them straight from that. I mean, the Columbus observation and the John Adams observation. But, in fact,
the one that we've been talking about really gets to the heart of that. I mean, like I said, I was offering my responses and my
opinions, which he was -- if he had read it, which he didn't, he would have been free to accept or reject.
Q. Let me ask, when you said the one we've just been talking about really gets to the heart of it, are you talking about the
comment on Page 28?
A. Right. I mean, I think that's an example where you are blending some science with some popular things.
Q. What scientific publications and what popular publications are being blended here?
A. Well, I mean, they've been talking about the Good Health magazine, which would be -- as Reader's Digest, those would be
the popular -- the popular publications.
Q. Okay. Where's the scientific publication that it's being blended with?
A. Well, they don't reference any specific publications, but they're dealing with the idea of -- the scientific idea of addiction.
It's suggested in the previous question. The attorney asks him, basically, people may not be able to scientifically prove it, but
they knew that they were smoking because of nicotine. So that's blending --
To me, my interpretation, and maybe this is off base, but my interpretation was that was a blending of popular and scientific.
Q. Okay. Well, I don't see where there's any scientific publication to be blended. And if I understand what you said correctly
in your e-mail, where you said Reilly's strategy was to mix popular publications with scientific ones, are you telling me there's
not a scientific publication that's being mixed here with popular publications, now on Page 28?
A. Well, here, they're talking about ideas. But, I mean, that's the general point. You know, two discrete realms of knowledge,
popular understanding and scientific understanding.
Q. Okay. But that's not blending popular publications with scientific publications, is it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I mean, it's -- if you read the next paragraph, Dr. Proctor's basically saying the same thing I'm saying, which is there
was a common view, but as far as being experts in the pharmacology of nicotine and how it was manipulated and so forth,
certainly, the public was not in that category.
So there's no -- I don't understand why you are asking me about this because, in essence, I'm -- I'm not saying anything different
than what he said.
Q. Well, I'm asking because you pointed this to me as an example of what you described in your e-mail as the blending
of scientific and popular publications, then you went back and referenced some popular publications which are not actually
specifically mentioned in this little exchange. But I'm saying, where is the scientific publication?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
102Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. If it really is an example of that, where's the scientific publication?
A. Well, it's the blending of scientific knowledge and popular knowledge. I mean, that's really -- they don't reference a specific
publication, but the general idea is there's two discrete bodies of knowledge, one which the public understands and one in which
scientists develop and communicate amongst themselves to their work, and that's what's being blended. That's all.
Q. Well, isn't this also -- isn't the point here that people can have popular understandings that may or may not be backed up
by scientific evidence?
A. Yes. They're different. They're discrete.
Q. Okay. Let's go to Page 33. There's a question and a response -- or a couple of questions and responses about information in
Good Health magazine that's up on the top of this Page 33. Do you see that?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And then there's a question that starts on Page 5, or excuse me, Line 5 that says, “So, if, in fact, there was an article published
in 1943 in Good Health that spoke in terms of the use of tobacco as a real addiction, that wouldn't surprise you?”
And Dr. Proctor's response, beginning at Line 9, says, “No, not at all. As I say, there are lots of people, especially in the health
movement, who have been against tobacco for centuries.”
Did I read that exchange correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Between that question and that answer, there's a commentary that looks like you inserted, and the commentary says, “You
didn't see the document; therefore, the judge won't let him publish it, (show it to the jury) but he's gotten you to lay a foundation
of sorts. Clever lawyer trick.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. You did.
Q. Do you remember when we were talking on Page 18 about your comment following an exchange between Mr. Paige and
the Court and Mr. Reilly?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. And I was asking you about -- specifically about introducing documents. Do you remember that?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you not here, in this comment, doing exactly what I suggested that you were doing on Page 18, telling Dr. Proctor to
say, “I haven't seen that document” in order to prevent the judge from allowing it to go to the jury?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
103Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, in this one, he's -- if the cross-examining attorney says, look, if, in fact, there was an article published in 1943, you
didn't see the document, ask him for the document. You know, that's what that means. You know, just confirm that the document
says what he says it says because, you know what, it's been my experience that, in cross-examination, in depositions and at
trial, people will make reference to a document and they'll -- the document won't say what they say it says or there's a different
-- a different better reading or interpretation of that document, at least from the historical perspective, because you all are not
historians. That's all.
He's agreed to look at it -- he's agreed to look at a document. I don't know if he's seen the document or not. Ask him for it.
You didn't see the document, ask him for it.
Now, perhaps this is a document they've been fighting over. I don't know. But that's just simple procedural advice. I mean, if
someone says, if there's this document, say, well, let me see it. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive.
Q. Aren't you telling Dr. Proctor here, if he just said he hadn't seen the document, the judge wouldn't allow it to go to the jury?
Isn't that correct?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Well, if, in fact, he had never seen the document, then, as I said, it's okay to say you haven't seen the document, particularly
if you haven't seen it. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive.
MR. SMITH:
Do you have another answer to that question?
THE WITNESS:
No.
A. I thought I answered your question.
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
104Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Well, I'm looking here at what you said, and I don't see how anyone could not understand that what you were doing is
counseling Dr. Proctor to say he hasn't seen the document so that the judge will not allow it to be published to the jury. How
can anyone take away anything other than that interpretation because that's almost exactly what you say?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form, argumentative.
A. This is what it says. The question is, “So if, in fact, there was an article published in 1943 in Good Health that spoke in terms
of the use of tobacco as a real addiction, that wouldn't surprise you?” Proctor goes onto say, “No, not at all.”
Okay. He says -- he's offering a hypothetical. Well, he's answering about a document he's not seen. And when I say “here,” I
mean, literally -- not that he's never seen it before. Maybe he's seen it. Maybe he hasn't. I don't know. But the attorney asking
him the question hasn't said, here, let me show you the document. That's all. You didn't see the document.
But he's gotten -- as I suggested, he's laid a foundation to agree to a document that you haven't seen. Look at it. Maybe you've
seen it, maybe you haven't, in your research prior. I don't know. I'm not saying he's never seen it in his life. I mean here, he
literally hasn't seen it at that moment.
It's very common, when in cross-examination, someone says, are you familiar with this document, and the witness might say,
well, I'm familiar with that document but can I see your copy to refresh my memory. That's all. I did that earlier with you.
That's all that means. That's not substantive.
Q. Why do you say, “Therefor, the judge won't let him publish it, show it to the jury”?
A. Well, they had just gone through a big debate earlier about that, but -- and they may have argued over this document at some
prior time. This is just a small portion of the testimony. I don't know what else has been going on.
So it's just -- you know, if you didn't see the document, you should look at the document. That's essentially what that means.
You should at least ask him for a copy. It's probably on his desk. He may have it in his hand. That's all.
Q. You understood that if Dr. Proctor said he didn't see the document, the judge would not allow it to be published to the jury;
isn't that right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. If he had never -- if he had never had a familiarity with it. That seems to be something that they had established earlier on.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. We discussed that earlier. If Dr. Proctor had said, no, I haven't seen that document, I'm not familiar with it, the judge would
not allow that to be shown to the jury, would he?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
105Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. If that was, in fact, his testimony. But upon looking at the document, he might have said, yes, I'm familiar with this. I
don't know what his answer would have been if he had looked at the document. You see, this comment is in response to the
hypothetical before it.
Q. Well, I'm asking about your understanding now, not about what Dr. Proctor knew or had seen. You understood --
A. And just so you are clear, I don't know what Dr. Proctor knew or had seen.
Q. That's fine. I'm not asking that. I'm asking about what you were thinking. When you wrote this comment, you understood
if Dr. Proctor had said that he had not seen or was not familiar with the document, the judge would not have allowed it to be
shown to the jury. You understood that, right?
A. If, in fact, that was after having reviewed the document, that was his testimony that he had never seen it, that it was a new
document then, yes, I guess the rule is, you can't show it to the jury.
Q. Because that's exactly what Judge Streitfield said, back on Page 18, correct?
A. That's right.
Q. And then you tell Dr. Proctor, he's gotten you to lay a foundation, of sorts, by saying it wouldn't surprise him if there was
such an article. Is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. So you understood, when you said that, that if Dr. Proctor, instead of saying, no, he wasn't -- he wouldn't be surprised if
there was such a document, if he had just said, I didn't see the document, I haven't seen such a document, that the judge would
say, all right, you can't publish that document. You understood that, didn't you?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. That's not what I understood. What I understood was, he's offering a hypothetical saying, show me the document, then
evaluate the document. It may be the case that it was something that Dr. Proctor was familiar with. It may not be the case. Of
course, I can't know that and I don't know that.
Q. I'm not asking about what you thought Dr. Proctor knew. I'm asking about what you knew when you wrote this, by saying
-- by telling Dr. Proctor in your comment that he, Mr. Reilly, has gotten you to lay a foundation. What you meant by that is,
by saying he wasn't -- wouldn't be surprised if there was such a document, that could lay a foundation, of sorts, for Mr. Really
to introduce the document; isn't that right?
A. That's right. And just as a matter of good form, you should at least look at the document to ascertain whether it is one that
you have seen, and therefore, it may be the case that Dr. Proctor knew it. It may not be the case. That, I can't know. But all
this is saying is, look, if someone presents you with a document, a hypothetical of a document, who knows? Maybe there isn't
an article published in 1943 that spoke in terms of the use of tobacco as a real addiction. I, personally, don't know. You know,
you all have the files. Just ask him to see it.
Q. And, again, in this question, I'm asking about what you knew when you -- or understood when you wrote this comment, you
knew, when you wrote this comment, that if Dr. Proctor had said, I haven't seen a document like that or I would be surprised
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
106Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
if there was a document like that, it would have prevented the foundation, of sorts, that you refer to in your comment; isn't
that right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, if after reviewing the document, he was unfamiliar with it. He would have to review the document first. So that --
again, that deals with the hypothetical that is posed in the question before that, and that's all that it deals with. In that regard, it
is, I think, a clever lawyer trick in that, you know, he's -- I mean, there may be a document, there may not be. There probably
is because if someone asked for it, he would have to show it. But who knows? So it's just a matter of procedure.
It may have been something he could lay a foundation for. It may not have been. I can't know that, and I don't know that. All
I was saying here was, if he represents something, ask to see it.
Q. Okay. You understood, when you wrote this comment, that if Dr. Proctor had asked to see the document, as you are suggesting
he should have done, and you say, I'm not familiar with this document, that the judge would have said, okay, that document
can't be introduced to the jury? You understood that, right?
MR. SMITH:
Objection. Object to form.
A. That might have been what the judge said. It just depends on the document. You know, was it on his reliance list? I don't
know, you know.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. When you wrote that, is that what you would have understood the judge would have done?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. That if he hadn't seen the document?
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Right. Let me phrase it a little bit better. When you wrote this comment, were you doing it with the understanding that if
Dr. Proctor had asked to see the document, as you are saying that he should do here, and had said, I haven't seen this document
before, Judge Streitfield would not have permitted the document to be introduced to the jury?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Was that your understanding when you wrote this?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
107Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, I mean, he literally didn't see the document. I didn't say know the document, literally didn't see the document in front
of him.
So my understanding was -- there is no document here. That's the thing. This is a phantom document. Again, if the attorney had
shown Dr. Proctor the document, he may well have been able to publish the document. It just depends on what Dr. Proctor knew
about it. But without ascertaining whether he was familiar with the document or not and instead accepting the hypothetical
that's put forth, he's kind of sort of laid a foundation, as I understand, and I just think that was a clever trick.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive. Can you read my question back?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'm asking about your understanding of what would have happened.
A. My understanding, based on what I read earlier in the testimony and not based on legal knowledge, of which I have very
little, if Robert had asked to see the document, which was all that my comment meant, hypothetically, if something he said was
not on his reliance list, was not something he had ever seen or considered as part of his professional research and opinion, the
judge may not have let the jury see it. That's all. And so my suggestion there is that he should have looked to see the document,
look at it, ascertain before you agree to it.
Q. And your statement here at the very end, “clever lawyer trick,” were you implying that Mr. Reilly was doing anything
inappropriate?
A. No. It was just clever, you know, because he got the witness here to agree to something which may be supported by the
evidence, that is, this phantom document, or may not be supported by the evidence. We don't know. I mean, Mr. Reilly is an
advocate for his client. That's his job. And as I suggested earlier, he's doing a very good job, and that's all.
Q. Were you concerned, when you drafted these comments, that Dr. Proctor's opinions were not coming through clearly to
the jury?
A. No. I was just simply, you know, having read the testimony already once, to assist the attorney in his cross-examination,
was just kind of giving my response to it. No. I think he was -- I mean, he's a professor at Stanford. He's a very smart and
accomplished person.
Q. If you believe that Dr. Proctor is a very smart and accomplished person, why were you offering him commentary on his
testimony?
A. Well, as I suggested earlier, these are areas where I've been cross-examined in the past, and I kind of got into it, and I put
in what my -- you know, my two cents. That's all. Which he was free to -- if I had said it to him, which I did not, he was free
to think I was crazy or whatever.
Q. You've discussed tobacco research a lot with Dr. Proctor, haven't you?
A. Substantive issues, like -- yes, evidence and that kind of thing, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
108Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Does he generally respect your opinions and your research?
A. We have a give and take. I think I respect his and I think he respects mine.
Q. So you offering him comments on his testimony, that would be something that you would expect him to respect; isn't that
right?
A. Sure, yes, but not to take -- not to take blindly. I mean, he's a smart guy and he can -- scholars do this kind of thing all the
time. I mean, we -- you know, we constantly challenge each other. That's the process. We don't tell other people what to think.
We challenge them. And you -- that process of challenging is how we discover new things.
Q. And isn't the process of challenging intended to persuade people to your viewpoint?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Not necessarily. You are not looking for agreement. You know, sometimes you challenge somebody, not because you agree
with them, just because you -- you know, you see -- you know, you might have a slightly different view or whatever. I'm not
persuading him to do anything, just offering what my position was.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Would you have offered him your position and your comments and your thoughts if you believed that he wouldn't
take them seriously?
A. Well, to not -- to hear -- you are confusing -- it's one thing to offer my opinions and he's free to take them or not take them.
Now, not to take them seriously, that's different altogether. This is the challenging and the critical engagement that scholars
do. This is what we do. We read other essays. We read people's essays. We read their book chapters. We read their papers. We
constantly interact. We have, you know, roundtables on books. It's a critical stance that scholars take, and that's critical in the
sense, not to be negative, but critical in the sense that you are always challenging. That's all this is.
Q. So were these comments intended to challenge Dr. Proctor?
A. Well, sure, by offering my views. Yes, he's welcome to accept, if he had seen them, he could have accepted or rejected them.
That would have been fine. I wouldn't have cared one way or the other. Just I was kind of engaged in it. It was a very exciting
cross-examination to read. Like I said earlier, there's drama in it. I kind of threw in my comments as I read it, and as you can
tell from the typos, it was something that was written quickly, and that's what it was.
Q. Would you have offered these comments if you had thought Dr. Proctor would not take them seriously and read them with
a serious bent?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I mean, by asking me seriously, you are implying that there's aspects of our professional works which we don't take
seriously, and that's a false dichotomy. So I can't answer that question.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
109Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. When you were doing these comments, were they something that you would expect Dr. Proctor to look at and just dismiss
as nonsense?
A. He may have -- I mean, if he had looked at them, he may have dismissed some of them as nonsense. He may have dismissed
some of them as wrong-headed, but I just was putting my reaction.
Q. Did you expect him -- and I'm not talking about how he would receive them, but how you would anticipated his reception of
them would be, would your anticipation be that he would think about them in a serious fashion or that he would dismiss them?
A. I -- you are putting more into this than I ever did. I was simply kind of responding to the give and take of a cross-examination
that seemed to have a lot of drama to it, and that's it. If he had read them, if I had said that to him, I would have expected him
to look at them, maybe, maybe not, and I don't know what he would have made of them. I really couldn't say.
Q. But you did encourage him to read these questions and think about your answers, didn't you?
A. Yes, because I guarantee, the next time you are crossed, they will ask you the exact same questions.
Q. So in writing this e-mail and in making these comments, it was your thought, anyway, that you wanted Dr. Proctor to read
your comments and think about them and consider them the next time he answered questions; isn't that right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Yes, to accept or reject, you know, using his own critical faculties.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Here on Page 33, between Lines 18 and 19, there's a comment out to the left that says, “ouch.” Is that your comment?
A. Yes.
Q. What do you mean by the “ouch”?
A. Let me read this one. Oh, I think -- I'm not sure. I don't know. That doesn't really make sense to me, as I read it. I'm not
sure what I meant by that.
Q. Well, they're going a couple of questions before that, there's a question, it starts on Line 12, it says, “For equating it to the
addiction that is produced by opium, morphine, cocaine, that sort of thing.”
And that's the question. And the answer is, “Yes. That's a common view among -- in this sort of marginal health community,
you find that.”
And then there's a question, “Well, we just saw it in Reader's Digest. That's not a marginal view, right?”
And then you have the “ouch” out there.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
110Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Yes.
Q. Are you suggesting that Dr. Proctor got an ouch by Mr. Reilly's question?
A. Yes. I guess what I must have meant was that Mr. Reilly had a point there. I mean, that was -- that's all. That was a point,
yes. He landed one.
Q. On Page 34, it's towards the top of that page, there's a comment from you, and I think to put it in context, we need to go
on with the questions we were just looking at, where Mr. Reilly had asked, “Well, we just saw, in Reader's Digest, that's not
a marginal view, right?”
And then there was an answer from Dr. Proctor, and it says, “Well, Tunney was training athletes, and it's more about this time
in the '40s, that athletes start noticing it really does cut your wind. So Tunney, who I think was involved in training Olympic
athletes, he was very concerned about athletes using tobacco, and so he actually stepped out as a kind of a movement person.
But, again, this is sort of a marginal view still at this time.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you have a comment after that question and answer exchange, “A better answer: Lou Gehrig and other athletes, at
the same time, advertised that ‘Camels don't get your wind.’ These were much more widely distributed that...” I think it should
be “than” instead of “that” “... this one story.” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Is your comment here to suggest a better answer to Dr. Proctor than the one he gave?
A. Well, that's how I would have answered it. I mean, I was identifying to him, from my testimony and my knowledge of the
history of smoking, that particular element there because it's directly relevant.
Q. Okay. And you were offering it to Dr. Proctor so that he could think about it for the next time that he testified?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I was offering my -- like I said, I was offering my views and my opinions. He's welcome to consider them.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. And I think your words were, “think about your answers.” Is that right? You wanted him to think about his answer when
he read your comment?
A. Well, you know, that means just read the questions and think about your answers because you are going to see them again.
That's all.
Q. Do you believe that the better answer you offered is actually responsive to the question that Mr. Reilly asked?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
111Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, they're talking about Gene Tunney. I was simply identifying that Lou Gehrig participated in that particular advertising
campaign. Again, I'm just offering my -- you know, my empirical knowledge. I know about Lou Gehrig and this particular
advertising campaign, so I threw that in there.
Q. Well, the question and answer sequence before that had been talking about people who had been equating the addiction of
opium, morphine, cocaine with that of tobacco, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And I think Mr. Reilly had said, that's something we saw in Reader's Digest and that wasn't a marginal view; is that right?
That was his question?
A. Yes. That's correct.
Q. And the response or the better answer you offered to Dr. Proctor, in place of the one he gave, was to talk about Lou Gehrig
and athletes advertising cigarettes; is that right?
A. That's what I wrote, yes.
Q. Does that have anything to do with people equating nicotine use and addiction or whatever you want to call it with opium,
morphine and cocaine addiction?
A. No. And so this is an example where I put a comment in there, but it's not maybe a better answer because it's not relevant.
It's -- you know, these are my personal thoughts and nothing more than that.
Q. On Page 35, there's a question and answer series that actually starts over on Page 34, about education in the state of New
York. And on Line 6, Dr. Proctor responds, “No, I haven't looked at New York pedagogy on that.”
And then Mr. Reilly goes, “Pedagogy, would you explain that?” And Dr. Proctor says, “New York instruction.” Mr. Reilly
says, “I'm from the hick sticks.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. And then you have a comment after that. “Another lawyer trick. Don't use big words like pedagogy.” What did you mean
by that? What lawyer trick is it that worked there?
A. Well, you know, this is drama, and “pedagogy” is -- it's a technical term. Not everybody knows what it means. They may have
heard of it. And, you know, it's just that. The attorney is able to kind of grandstand a little bit. It was dramatic, folksy. That's all.
Q. Are you telling Dr. Proctor there, don't use big words?
A. Well, I think that's just general advice for dealing with a -- you know, a public audience, as opposed to a professional
audience. We use different languages at a professional conference, compared to teaching 8:00 freshman history, for example.
Q. So you are counseling Dr. Proctor to use words more appropriate for his circumstance in front of a jury?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
112Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, you know, it's just -- he's allowed another lawyer trick to come in, and that is an opportunity for drama, and that's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Through the use of the term “lawyer trick,” are you implying that Mr. Reilly said or did anything inappropriate?
A. No. You've asked me this before. And no, that's part of the process of the lawyer's advocacy for his client and the expert
in the advocate. And that's all.
Q. On Page 39, there's some questions and answers about Dear Abby and Ann Landers. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Starting at Line 6, there's a question from Mr. Reilly that said, “And both of them addressed the topic of smoking and health,
didn't they?”
And the answer is, “I recall something about that, yes.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. And then there's a comment from you, “Ann Landers died in 2002. She only occasionally addressed smoking and health.
You can state in the 1970s, she carried on a year-long debate among her readers as to whether it was better to have the toilet
paper roll from the top or the bottom; the point being, this was not someone who --” and then it ends. Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Have you done any research on Dear Abby and Ann Landers' columns?
A. Yes. I've read a lot of those.
Q. How many do you think you've read?
A. I've read them for the -- I can't say I've read every single one, but mostly for the -- most in the 1960s and most in the 1970s.
The 1970s, I read them myself at the time because I was -- something I read in the paper. Not so much for the 1980s.
Q. Okay. Did you read Ann Landers or did you read Dear Abby or did you read them both, which one?
A. Read them both.
Q. Okay. Do you know how many columns Ann Landers had that addressed smoking and health?
A. The exact number?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
113Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Uh-huh.
A. I don't know the exact number. I haven't tallied that.
Q. Any idea how many?
A. Oh, she would address it. I mean, it was -- and she would particularly address it at times when it was an item of public debate,
particularly pressing public debate, '60s, early '70s. But I don't have the number.
Q. And the way her column was done, people would send her letters and then she would address the letters; is that right?
A. That's right.
Q. Okay. So the issue of smoking and health was coming up through letters coming to her from people out in the general
population, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And then she would offer opinions, advice or whatever it was based on the letters sent to her; is that right?
A. She would answer the letters, yes.
Q. The rest of your comment, were you going to say the point being, she was not someone who would be taken seriously? Is
that what you were intending to say?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. I don't remember. I, for some reason, didn't finish what I was saying. This has been over a year since I wrote this, so I'm
not exactly sure what I was going to write on that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Well, I ask that simply because of the sentence before that, about the year-long debate among her readers as to whether
it was better to have the toilet paper roll from the top or the bottom. What do you think you meant about the point being? What
do you think your point was?
A. Well, I can only answer about what I think now. I can't answer --
Q. Well, what do you think now your point was?
A. You know, she addressed a wide variety of topics and was not considered, you know, particularly expert in health matters,
something like that. I wouldn't go so far to characterize it the way that you did. I think that's not accurate. People really enjoyed
Ann Landers.
Q. What's the point of the comment about the toilet paper roll?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
114Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Just kind of a fun fact. I mean, it is kind of an interesting -- an interesting fact that shows the diversity of the kinds of things
that she would address in her columns.
Q. Would you consider Ann Landers sort of the voice of the common person?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. She certainly would talk and be in a conversation with the common person. I don't think she was the voice of the common
person, though, because that implies that she took a public pronouncement or public role, which I don't think -- she was public,
obviously, but she did not go around, give speeches, as far as I know. So I would just say she was someone who was in
conversation with everyday people, very popular, obviously.
Q. In doing her column, she responded to concerns raised by everyday people, right?
A. Sure.
Q. Such as smoking and health?
A. Among other things.
Q. Which newspaper did you see her columns in?
A. I was able to search her stuff through a web interface called Newspaperarchive.com, which covers a variety of newspapers,
mostly the smaller newspapers that, unlike The New York Times, carried her columns.
Q. On that same page, starting on Line 15, there is a question from Mr. Reilly that says, “And these ladies would have people
write to them...” these ladies being Ann Landers and Dear Abby, “... would have people write to them and say, tell me about
smoking. Tell me how to quit smoking and all that sort of stuff, right?”
And then there is a response from Dr. Proctor, where he says, “Yes.”
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. And then there is a comment from you that says, “No! Don't agree to this. He's setting you up. Say, ‘I don't recall.’ You have
an example. All the examples are pretty lame, weak, qualified until the 1980s.” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you telling Dr. Proctor to answer “no” to that question instead of the answer -- the “yes” answer that he gave?
A. Well, here, this is a case where when Mr. Reilly asked him about it, Dr. Proctor says, “I recall something about that.” So,
really, what I'm wondering about, what drove this comment and, you know, again, I'm writing quickly and putting my rapid
thoughts down as -- you know, if you haven't done the review of the columns, you know, say so. I've read a lot of them, and I
offer my opinion on that. But, you know, that's based on my research, and that's all that's about.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
115Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Do you have any reason to believe that Dr. Proctor has not read the Dear Abby and Ann Landers columns?
A. I don't know if he has or hasn't. I just put that in there not knowing what the truth of that matter is. I'm just suggesting that,
you know, if you hadn't, you know, or didn't have complete mastery over them.
Sometimes you look at some of the things, you've read some, but not a lot. You know, it's -- that's all.
Q. But for all you knew, Dr. Proctor had read every single one of those columns, right? You couldn't say otherwise?
A. Well, no, because here he says, I recall -- I haven't checked her stuff. I mean, he goes on to say it, you know. I mean, my
comment is supported by what he says, you know. He hasn't -- he says, I haven't checked her stuff.
Q. Well, the question he was asked about is whether late -- or people would write to these two ladies and ask for information
about smoking. And his one word response was “yes.” Is that right?
A. That's correct.
Q. And your comment to that was, no, don't agree to this, wasn't it?
A. Well, he says -- here, he says, “I haven't checked her stuff.” So I -- that's all. Maybe he was getting confused. I don't know.
It's hard to tell from just a transcript. But he says “yes,” and then he says, “I haven't checked her stuff.” So it's hard to -- if you
haven't seen it, it's okay to say you don't know. It's not your Ph.D. comps. It's not a memory test.
Q. What you are doing here, though, with this comment, is telling Dr. Proctor to change his answer from “yes” to “no,” isn't it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No, I'm not. Having seen that, he contradicts himself. I don't know what his answer really is. I'm writing quickly. I'm not
-- these are just my private thoughts. But it's clearest -- on one hand, he says, I recall something about that, and then he agrees
that ladies write to say, tell me about smoking, tell me how to quit smoking, all that stuff, he agrees with that. But then he says,
I don't recall. I haven't checked her stuff. So it's ambiguous. It's hard to know what's going on in that regard.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, he had said, I think as you pointed out a little earlier, he said he recalled Ann Landers and Dear Abby addressing
the topic of smoking and health.
A. Sure.
Q. He said that. And then he was asked whether people would write to them, Ann Landers and Dear Abby, and ask for
information about smoking and health. And he responded yes to that. And because he recalled something about it, he -- he said
he had recalled something about it, it's reasonable to assume that he had some basis in saying --
A. Sure.
Q. -- yes about what he recalled, right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
116Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Sure. I agree with you on that.
Q. And yet, you told him, “No! Don't agree to this.” How is that not telling him to change his answer?
A. Well, because he says, “I haven't checked her stuff.” You know, the follow-up question is about the content of these letters
and, I mean, that's all. You know, it -- if he doesn't know it, he doesn't know it.
Q. Well, they're two different questions, though. When he says, “I don't recall,” it's to a different question. What he says “I
don't recall” to, is that -- and the question is, “And they would write back and give everyday comment, advice about the nature
of smoking, and that it was addictive, and that it was nicotine that caused people to be addicted.” That's what he said “I don't
recall” to, isn't it?
A. You are correct. But after that, he says, “I haven't checked her stuff. I don't recall her talking about addiction.”
Q. Isn't that your comment?
A. Yes. And then I say, don't say, yes, I haven't seen an Ann Landers column that refers to addiction. And then he goes, you
wouldn't dispute it, right? But he says, I haven't -- I don't recall. I haven't checked her stuff. That's all.
Q. But what he says he doesn't recall is Ann Landers talking about addiction. Isn't that what he doesn't recall?
A. That's true. But then he goes onto say, I haven't checked her stuff. If he hadn't said that -- if he had simply said, I don't recall,
that's fine. But then he says, I haven't checked her stuff. But then it was just confusing to me. And, you know, in the heat of the
stand, you get -- there's a lot going on. It's very stressful. There's no problems there, it's just that he says, I haven't checked her
stuff, so I thought maybe, you know, he didn't have the -- you know, I felt like he was -- like I said, he was setting him up by
getting him to agree, again, to kind of vague hypotheticals or vague characterizations of the columns.
It's a little bit like the other earlier case we were talking about, which is, I think, the strength of the cross-examination. He's very
good. And he has -- you know, he gets Dr. Proctor to agree to something when, later, he says, I don't recall. I haven't checked
the stuff. Or I should say, I haven't checked her stuff. So that's all that is.
Q. This question where you are saying he said, “I don't recall, I haven't checked her stuff,” that's specifically referring to using
the term “addiction.” Isn't that right?
MR. SMITH:
Objection.
A. I don't understand what you mean by that.
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. I can't agree with that.
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
117Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Well, isn't that what you say in your comment, right after he answers that question, where it says, don't say, yeah, I haven't
seen an Ann Landers column that refers to addiction? Isn't that the point of that exchange, as to whether she told people that
nicotine and smoking was addictive?
A. Well, I was offering my view, I haven't seen an Ann Landers column that refers specifically to addiction. I may have missed
it, but that was my take on that. And the cross-examiner is getting Dr. Proctor to agree to a lot of things that I had the sense, based
on his statements, “I hadn't checked her stuff,” for example, that maybe if he had the evidence in front of him, the particular
documents, for example, maybe the columns that the attorney was referring to, the actual columns, he may have agreed or he
may not have agreed. It's hard to say. So in a way, this is an odd hypothetical. He's characterizing a set of evidence.
And, again, as I said earlier, the cross-examining attorney's characterization of the evidence might not be the same way a
historian would characterize the evidence. And so that's all.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike all that as nonresponsive. But let's go onto the rest of the question. The next question after that is,
“You wouldn't dispute it, though, right?”
And what he's saying you wouldn't dispute is that they wrote advice about the nature of smoking, and that it was addictive, and
that it was nicotine that caused people to be addicted. And this goes over to the top of Page 40.
And Dr. Proctor says, “No. I wouldn't dispute it at all, no.”
And did I read that question and answer right?
A. Right.
Q. And then you have a comment after that, with “no,” with several Os in it. It says, “How can you not dispute what you haven't
seen? It is okay to say you haven't reviewed something, especially since the subject of your opinions is industry knowledge.
I would stay out of the public statements area. They are going to get you and they will force me to disagree with your...” and
it ends there.
Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. Is there any reason you would tell Dr. Proctor to change his response, where he says, “No, I wouldn't dispute it at all. No.”?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, again, what that comes from is I -- at Page 39, I feel like he's contradicting himself. That's all. It's unclear to me. Just
based on the text, it says he recalls something about that. He says he is familiar with it, but then he says he doesn't recall, and then
he says he hasn't checked. And then he says -- then he agrees with the characterization of the cross-examining attorney. That's
fine if he had, you know, reviewed -- and I don't know what his thoughts were, but one possibility is that he had completely
reviewed the materials and accepted the characterization of Mr. Reilly.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
118Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Another possibility is that he had looked at some or -- but not completely and was basically being led to agree to something
that if he had the evidence in front of him to consider it, he may not agree to that characterization. So that's all that means.
How can you not dispute what you haven't seen? Now, maybe he has seen it, but there's no question mark there, but it's clearly
a question.
Q. So you believe Dr. Proctor's testimony here was contradictory?
A. It's unclear. It's -- you know, it's just unclear. And, again, you know, under the heat of being cross-examined, it's difficult.
That's all. I mean, it's -- I have a different view, and I was giving him my view. That's all.
Q. Were you telling him how to correct the perceived lack of clarity that you saw in his testimony?
A. Well, again, I didn't -- you know, I didn't send this to him, but my thought was, when I wrote it, was keeping with that theme,
you know, if -- you know, if you haven't seen a document or -- you know, it's okay to say, I haven't seen those documents,
and not make a characterization of it.
Q. When you wrote these comments on Pages 39 and 40 to Dr. Proctor, was it your intent that he go back, look at this, as you
said in your e-mail, think about his answer and answer differently the next time he testified?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. It's not my intent for him to answer differently; just to simply take my -- you know, to read my comments and to accept
them or reject them, based on his own judgment, knowledge, research, his own opinions.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. And if he accepted your comments, you would expect him to answer questions differently the next time he was asked those
same questions, wouldn't you?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I wouldn't expect him to do anything; just simply to offer to -- I offered a critical appraisal of mine, my position on some
of these issues, and, I mean, it's up to him to do whatever he wants with them, if I had sent them to him.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Wouldn't you think, though, that if he took your critical appraisal to heart that it would change how he would respond to
those questions if he were asked them again?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
119Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. It might. But it might change them in ways that I couldn't predict because he knows a lot. He's a different person than me.
He -- you know, he knows things that I don't know, so he may take something that I'm completely unaware of and come up
with something new. I mean, I can't predict what the outcome would be. I'm simply offering my two cents.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, if he took your critical appraisal to heart, wouldn't you expect his answer to change in some way, maybe you don't
know how, but in some way?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, again, if he was unfamiliar with a document, he's unfamiliar with a document. That's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. And if he said, I haven't seen that document or I don't know about that document, as you suggested, that would be changing
his answer, wouldn't it?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, like I said, it's -- you know, it's not a memory test. It's not Ph.D. comps. I mean, that's fairly generic advice. And all
the things I offer in here are fairly generic. There's nothing really special. You know, I give my two cents about what I think
about Ann Landers or Kellogg, but he's free to agree or disagree with those.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I understand that. But my question to you was, if he took your critical advice to heart, for example, when you tell him,
ask to see a document, wouldn't him taking that advice to heart and doing as you suggest necessarily alter the way that he
responded to a question?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. It may or may not. I can't tell. Because if he sees the document, his appraisal of the document might -- he's going to have
his own appraisal of the document. And I can't predict what that will be.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, on Page 40 here, as part of your comment that's right towards the top of the page, you say, “I would stay out of the
public statements area. They are going to get you and they will force me to disagree with your...”
Do you mean your opinions or your testimony, is that what you meant to say?
A. I'm not sure. But force me to -- perhaps that was -- I'm not sure what I meant by that. It's been a long time.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
120Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Well, if you can, take a moment and look at it and see if you can tell me what you think you meant.
A. Well, I clearly have different takes on some of the public statement characterization he has, so I would -- I would disagree
with some of his statements, as I expressed in my comments. That's all.
Q. Was it your intent here to tell Dr. Proctor that if he continued to testify the way that he was testifying here in this transcript
that you would be forced to disagree with his testimony?
A. Well, I offered my disagreements previously with some of the comments, my different interpretation or -- that's all. Not
all, but just the ways I had laid it out.
Q. So all of these comments in here represent disagreements that you had with Dr. Proctor's testimony?
A. No. They're not all disagreements. Some of them are just riffs. Some of them are observations. Some of them are alternative
interpretations. I have an alternative interpretation of the Columbus. It's up to him to assess whether that is valid or not. I can't
make him think anything. That's all.
Q. When you say in your comment, “they are going to get you,” what do you mean by that?
A. Well, those -- I mean, as I read this testimony, I mean, they were -- a couple of examples, which we've already talked about,
where they -- I felt, as I read it, my interpretation of the transcript was they got him to agree to characterizations of evidence
of documents which he may not agree to if he had those documents in front of him and could consider them a little bit more,
at least possibly not agree with. And that would be the things we've been talking about, where they characterize a document
without showing him the document.
Q. As you sit here right now, do you have any reason to believe or can you point me to anything that would indicate that Dr.
Proctor would disagree with the characterization of the documents had he been shown those documents, the ones that were
referenced in this transcript?
A. Well, again, I don't know what his view would be. I can't predict what his view would be. It might not be. You know, he
might not have a -- let me rephrase that. If he looked at the example, he might agree with his characterization -- the attorney's
characterization. He might not. I can't know that.
But I think it's reasonable to at least look at the document before you agree to the characterization, particularly if he's unsure
or something like that. And I don't know that, but that's the whole point of my cover e-mail.
Q. Well, the point of your statement here, that they are going to get you and they will force me to disagree with your whatever it
is, is that if he doesn't change some of his characterizations, then you are going to have to disagree with those characterizations;
isn't that right?
A. Well, I'm not asking him to change his characterizations. I have my characterizations, which I offered in my comments.
They may or may not be ones that he would agree with.
But on those documents where he hasn't looked at them, he should at least be sure. That's all.
Q. Aren't you telling him, though, through this statement, that if he doesn't change some of his characterizations, you are going
to have to disagree with him?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
121Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. I'm not asking him to change anything.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'm not saying -- I'm not asking if you are asking him to change. I'm saying -- my question is, aren't you telling him that if
he doesn't change his characterizations, you are going to be forced to disagree with him?
A. No. I'm not saying that either.
Q. Then what else does “they are going to get you and they will force me to disagree” mean?
A. All I'm saying is, I have -- I have interpretations of documents, which I've laid out. And all I mean by this is that, you know,
make sure that he's talking from a knowledge of the document, itself, or set of documents, rather than the characterization of
the document portrayed by the attorney.
And that's the getting. It's not -- it's not the disagreement that's the getting, in terms of the “get you.” It's the agreeing with
the attorney's characterization of the evidence without having looked at the evidence there and, you know, relying, again, on
memory. It's not a Ph.D. exam. It's not a memory test. That's why I said that in the e-mail.
Q. Well, then, in that case, is your point, is that you are telling Dr. Proctor, if he continues to agree with the characterizations
given by the lawyers, that you are going to be forced to disagree with them; is that what you are saying?
A. Well, you know, my intention on that is just make sure you come from a position of full knowledge. I mean, we tend not to
testify about the same thing. He has his area. I have my area. And they're fairly discrete.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive. Could you read back my last question, please?
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
A. Well, you know, again, I told him my -- over the course of this -- my position on some of these documents. He's free to
agree or disagree with me.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Isn't the point that you are making to him, though, that if he doesn't adopt your characterization, then you are going to be
forced to disagree with him?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I'm not saying that he has to adopt my characterization.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
122Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I'm sorry. That's not my question. Isn't it your point, though, that if he doesn't adopt the same characterization as you, that
you will be forced to disagree with him? Not that he has to adopt your characterization, but that if he doesn't, you are going
to have to disagree with him?
A. Well, in the sense that, you know, we may have different views on some of this stuff, which is fine. We're not the same
person and we're not the same scholars. My meaning is that at least come from a position of knowledge, on these documents
that are characterized by the attorney who could take them out and show them. I mean, he's got them. He could show them to
Dr. Proctor and he could make his -- you know, come from a position of firmer knowledge right there while this is happening.
That's all I mean. Nothing more than that.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm going to move to strike that as nonresponsive. Read back my last question please.
MR. SMITH:
You don't have to change any answer you give, by the way.
A. That's my answer.
(Wherein, the question was read back.)
A. I don't have a different answer for you.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So is it your testimony then that when you say, “they are going to get you and they will force me to disagree,” you are not
warning Dr. Proctor that unless he changes his characterizations, you are going to have to disagree with him?
A. No. I'm not doing that.
Q. And are you telling me now that that particular statement you made on Page 40, there, does not mean that if Dr. Proctor doesn't
stop agreeing with the lawyers on their characterizations of the documents that you are going to have to disagree with him?
A. No. That's not my meaning either. All I'm saying in this -- because this is something that has to be looked in total, in context,
is make sure you've looked at the document before you agree with the characterization if you have any question about the
document.
Q. And what do you mean here that you are going to have to disagree about?
A. Well, I have -- I mean, I offered some comments over the course of this where I had different characterizations of some of
these documents. He may agree with them. He may not. My characterizations may be valid. They may not be valid. They may
hold up under cross-examination. They may not. They're my views. He has his views. And my point is the same one I say up
here. It's just make sure you've looked at certain documents or classes of documents if you are not -- it's not a memory test. It's
not a Ph.D. comps. That's all I'm saying on that. That was all I meant to express to Dr. Proctor, who, again, has not seen this.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
123Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. In writing this, were you intending to warn Dr. Proctor that you were going to, if asked, have to disagree with some of the
things he said in his testimony in this case?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Were you explaining to Dr. Proctor that if you were asked some of the same questions he was asked in his testimony that
you would disagree with the responses he gave?
A. No. What I was saying was, I would give answers along the lines of my comments.
Q. What does “they are going to get you” mean?
MR. SMITH:
Asked and answered. Objection. You can answer, if you want to.
A. As we've talked about over the course of my comments or that I've talked about, tricks, traps. That's all. Nothing more
than that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. So you are counseling Dr. Proctor in how to stay out of the traps?
A. Well, as I described earlier, yes. And, again, what I called “clever lawyer tricks,” those kinds of traps.
Q. On that same page, it starts at Line 11, there's a question from Mr. Reilly. He says, “What I'm focused on now, doctor, is
the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and what it is in tobacco that causes people to become addicted to this drug nicotine,
right?”
And Dr. Proctor responds, “Right.” And then Mr. Reilly asked, “And that's been discussed, and discussed, and discussed in the
American public for 20 years, before Mr. Hess was even born, wasn't it?”
And then Dr. Proctor responds, “It's often been discussed historically, right.” Between Dr. Proctor's response and Mr. Reilly's
question, there is a comment from you. Well, first of all, let me ask, did I read the questions and answers correctly?
A. Let me just -- “What I'm focused on now, doctor, is the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and what it is in tobacco that
causes people to become addicted to this drug nicotine, right?”
And the answer is, “Right.” “And that has been discussed, and discussed, and discussed in the American public for 20 years,
before Mr. Hess was even born, wasn't it?”
I have a comment. Yes. You read it correctly. I'm sorry. It's late in the afternoon and it's hot in here again.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
124Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. Your comment states, “He's making all his points here. I disagree with this answer. Very rarely was the addictive
nature of nicotine discussed. People thought it was a habit. He's shown you just about everything that exists...” and in paren, it
says, “... (the two RD stories) that supports his point, little truths leading to a big lie.” Did I read that correctly?
A. Yes.
Q. So you are telling Dr. Proctor, or in writing, as you were saying to Dr. Proctor, I disagree with what you said, weren't you?
A. Yes.
Q. And were you telling Dr. Proctor you disagreed with this response as a follow-up to what we were talking about before,
where if you don't watch out for this, they're going to force me to disagree with you?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I was simply offering my own opinion. I disagree with that answer. Now, he -- he's welcome to hold his position. I
offered my disagreement. I gave a couple of reasons for that, and then I left it at that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. In telling Dr. Proctor that you disagree with this answer, and then saying in your e-mail that he -- suggesting that he think
about his answers, were you suggesting to him that maybe he ought to rethink his response, which was, “It's often been discussed
historically, right.”
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. No. I'm not asking him to rethink that response. I just -- I just was giving him my position on that. He may have looked at
other stuff. He's got a different opinion than me, which is fine. He's looked at -- you know, he may have looked at different
evidence. I've given my reasons and that's all.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. So if he had looked at different evidence and he answered truthfully, based on the evidence he saw, what was your point
in telling him that you disagreed?
A. To say that I have a different perspective than he does, and this is different than the other comments. I'm just giving my
opinion.
Q. In offering this opinion to him, as we've talked about, you know, you think critically with others and offer critical comments
with others, would you expect him to go back and think about his answer, based on your disagreement with him?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
125Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. You know, he might consider my comments, but then he has things that are the basis for that opinion that I'm not aware
of from this text. I can't know that.
And I don't know all that he knows. So he's free to take it or not take it, as his professional judgment dictates.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, in writing it, though, it was your intent that he think about it; is that right?
MR. SMITH:
Object to the form.
A. Yeah, or to consider what I have to say. But, of course, he has his own evidence to look at.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let's go to Page 76. On Pages 76 and 77, you highlighted certain portions of the text. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. Why did you highlight that text?
A. Let me look at it.
MR. SMITH:
I'm only laughing because I think I had almost that exact statement given to me almost verbatim by a different judge.
A. I don't remember why I highlighted that. It's dramatic. I mean, the judge is -- I didn't write a comment so I'm not sure what
my thought was.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Well, isn't there further commentary here been -- in fact, I'll just read it. It says -- it's sort of at the bottom, on Line
20 is where it starts. “You took that to -- you spent almost an hour on documents that he had either never seen, and asking him
questions about them, since he had never seen them, and that maybe he may have looked at them, but you clearly intend to
bring that out through another witness.” Do you see that comment?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you highlight that because it was a further follow-up on the questioning of Dr. Proctor about documents that he may
not have seen?
MR. SMITH:
I want to object to that question and to point out, for the record, that while I think that's accurate, that actually the underlining
starts much earlier than that and continues past that.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
126Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
It certainly does start before that and I think it was highlighting in the original.
Q. But isn't that part of what you highlighted?
A. That text is contained within the highlighting, if that's your -- is that what you are asking?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. And you've -- yes. That's contained in the highlighting.
Q. And we've gone through a number of questions with regard to this transcript about the implications of Dr. Proctor saying
that he had not seen or was not familiar with a document; isn't that true?
A. That's true. We've talked about that.
Q. Okay. And your understanding of Dr. Proctor saying that he had not seen or wasn't familiar with a document was that the
judge would not permit it to be published to the jury; is that right?
A. Well, the judge -- that's one of the things the judge says. He also says it's slow. It eats up time. He says he's wasting the
Court's time. So he has a number of critiques. You mentioned one.
But there are others.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's mark this as the next exhibit. (Exhibit 10 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Let me represent to you, I showed you earlier and we marked as an exhibit some additional e-mails that we got from Dr.
Proctor. Or, excuse me, from Stanford, that were between Dr. Proctor and Dr. Kyriakoudes. And along with those e-mails, we
got from them this privilege log.
MR. SMITH:
From doctor --
MS. LAWSON:
From Stanford.
Q. And these are documents or e-mails, and it looks like all of them involve Professor Kyriakoudes too, in which there was
a work product privilege being asserted, and Stanford was refusing to produce these particular e-mails to us based on that
assertion of work product privilege.
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
127Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Are you representing to me that these are not the same e-mails that were previously introduced? These are additional e-mails
other than those e-mails that have been introduced as, I think, Number 4?
MS. LAWSON:
Yes. That is correct. That is our understanding because we got from Stanford the e-mails that we marked as, I think, Exhibit
Number 4 and this privilege log.
MR. SMITH:
Can I see them just for a moment, please?
MS. LAWSON:
That's it.
THE WITNESS:
This says Number 8.
MR. SMITH:
Earlier today, we had a number of e-mails that was presented as Number 4. None of those were the Stanford e-mails.
MS. LAWSON:
I have not compared these because Number 4 was the e-mails he produced to me today.
MR. SMITH:
That's correct.
MS. LAWSON:
So I have not had a chance to go back and check and see if the e-mails on here match up with the e-mails on this, but I can do
that if you want me to, although I can take a quick glance.
THE WITNESS:
I am afraid -- I hope I haven't gotten documents intermingled.
MS. LAWSON:
All of that goes together.
THE WITNESS:
It may be out of order.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
128Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
The ones I have from Stanford appear to conclude on May 12th. They -- there tends -- there appears to be a gap between March
the 27th and April the 26th on the ones that I have from Stanford. Now, on Document Number 4 --
MS. LAWSON:
On Document Number 4, I don't see -- if you look at the privilege log here that Stanford is withholding, there are documents
from April 17th -- no. Actually, it goes back a little further. It goes back to April 14th.
MR. SMITH:
It's out of order, but I see April 14th seems to be the earliest. The latest seems to be 5/22. Again, it's out of order, but that seems
to be -- all right. I don't think you had asked a question yet. I was just trying to understand. So you are suggesting that there
are documents in this privilege log from Gary Paige --
MS. LAWSON:
Well, from -- it looks like all these e-mails that are on this privilege log were from Dr. Kyriakoudes --
MR. SMITH:
Right.
MS. LAWSON:
-- to Proctor and perhaps, in some case, other people.
MR. SMITH:
Well, it says, Gary Paige, Gary Paige, David Seals, Matt Schultz, is what it looks like. I understand the context now. I'm sorry--9
MS. LAWSON:
Does that make sense?
MR. SMITH:
Well, I understand what this is. I don't think you asked a question yet, and I apologize for interrupting, but I was unclear on
what this was.
MS. LAWSON:
No. That's fine.
Q. I want you to take a look at that, if you would, Professor. I know you've been asked at length about e-mails between you
and Dr. Proctor. Do you have any recollections of e-mails between you and Dr. Proctor or e-mails that you may have sent or
forwarded onto Dr. Proctor in April of last year? I know it's been a while.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
129Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I mean, I -- I don't have any recollection. That's over a year ago.
Q. Okay. Do you have -- well, let me ask this: Is it correct that you would have received e-mails from Gary Paige, perhaps
in April of last year?
A. I think there was a trial that I was active in, so I would have received some e-mails from Gary Paige relating to that trial.
Q. Okay. Without telling me anything right now about the substance of those e-mails, what, generally, what was the topic of
the e-mails? Was it about the trial that was ongoing?
MR. SMITH:
I need to take a break. I need to discuss this with my client for a second because I don't -- do you have any other privilege
logs we are going to look at?
(Off the record.)
MR. SMITH:
I think I actually said I need to talk to my client. It's late in the day. Talk to the witness. Okay. I think I understand what the
log is now.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Dr. Kyriakoudes, do you remember ever exchanging e-mails with Gary Paige about trial strategy?
A. Gary would ask my opinion of things, and I would sometimes reply to that through e-mail, sometimes on the phone, yes.
Would that be trial strategy?
Q. I'm asking you because I don't know the substance of what he was asking you about and what you were offering opinions on.
MR. SMITH:
I'm going to instruct the witness that you should not share with counsel any trial strategies for which you were requested from
another attorney. If you have a question about the definition of whether -- if you have any recollection of any communication
and you believe that would be trial strategy, you should state so. If you are unclear, I would request that we take a break and
you let me know what that is.
A. Sure. I think I could answer that by saying Mr. Paige would ask me questions about the content of my testimony and I
would reply.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. Were they factual questions?
A. It's been a long -- you know, a long time. It's over a year ago. I don't have a good recollection of this.
Q. Okay. Do you know if you have e-mails in your computer or in your GMail -- it's not actually in your computer. It would
be in your e-mail account from Mr. Paige, from April of last year?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
130Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. No. I don't have anything like that.
Q. Have you kept them, deleted them?
What's -- what happened with them?
A. Well, you know, after the -- this was, I believe, during a trial, which should have been Sherman.
Q. I think that sounds right.
A. And after the trial is over, I don't need to -- I have no use for them, so I usually delete that. Just clean out my e-mail box.
Q. When do you think you might have deleted those?
A. I'm not exactly sure. It's been a long time.
Q. Okay. I think when we were talking about the transcript from the Hess trial, you said that started with Mr. Paige asking you
questions or asking you to comment upon Dr. Proctor's testimony. Was that right?
A. Well, he wanted -- he wanted help -- he was unfamiliar -- I mean, can I say this? That he was unfamiliar with these exhibits
and he wanted my advice on how to handle this with the defense expert.
Q. Okay. And when you say, “how to handle this with the defense expert,” do you mean how to cross-examine the defense
expert on that particular document?
A. Yes. How to handle the defense cross-examination.
Q. Okay. Did you offer him help or advice about that?
A. We had a phone conversation about it.
Q. Did you all exchange any e-mails on that?
A. I don't think so. I think I -- I think he called me on the phone. But it, you know, was over a year ago, so I don't really remember.
Q. Do you remember -- and let me -- I'll direct you to a specific one. There is a document listed here from 4/19/2009. It's listed
as being from you, to Dr. Proctor, with a cc or forward to Mr. Paige. Did you and Dr. Proctor --
MR. SMITH:
I'm sorry. I have 4/19, from Kyriakoudes to Paige, with a cc to Dr. Proctor.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm sorry. I think I read it wrong. Let me point it out to you, read out the one --
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
131Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
There's a skip and then there's a 5/18 in the middle.
MS. LAWSON:
Yes. They didn't do it in order.
MR. SMITH:
I'm sorry. I looked at the wrong 4/19. There's one that is 155 that is Paige to Proctor -- excuse me, Kyriakoudes to Paige, cc
to Proctor.
MS. LAWSON:
Correct.
MR. SMITH:
On the same day, there is 157, which is Kyriakoudes to Proctor, cc to Paige.
MS. LAWSON:
Yes.
Q. That one, the second one, the 156-157, the one from you to Dr. Proctor, with either a cc or forward to Gary Paige, dated
April 19th, did you and Dr. Proctor discuss at all testimony or facts or anything having to do with the Sherman trial?
A. I don't think so. I mean, I don't have recollection of doing that.
Q. Do you have any idea what that e-mail between you and Dr. Proctor there on the 19th could have been about?
A. I don't. I mean, I -- this is over a year ago, and all I have is these -- I just don't remember.
Q. Okay. Right below that, it's the last one listed on this page, there's a 4/27/2009 e-mail, from you, to Dr. Proctor, with either
a cc or a forward to Gary Paige.
Do you have any idea what that one could be about?
A. I don't. It was, again, over a year ago.
Q. Okay. In the interest of completeness, let me go to the top one. The first one listed there is Number 154. It's an e-mail from
you, to Gary Paige, Adam Trop and Dr. Proctor, dated 4/17. Do you have anything with -- without telling me right now, I'm
just asking, do you have a recollection as to any -- as to what that e-mail might have been about?
A. I have no idea.
Q. How about the next one down, 152-153? It's an e-mail from you, to Gary Paige, with either a cc or a forward to Dr. Proctor,
dated 4/14/2009. Any recollection as to what that might be about?
A. I don't. I just can't recall.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
132Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. There's one right below that, 155, it's an e-mail from you, to Gary Paige, with either a cc or a forward to Dr. Proctor,
dated 4/19. Any recollection as to what that might be about?
A. I mean, it's just -- it's very hard for me to ascertain any of this. I don't remember what that particular e-mail might have
been about.
Q. The next one down is -- it's 162-331, which looks like it would have been rather long. It would have had more than 100
pages to it, from you to Gary Paige, with either a cc or a forward to Dr. Proctor, dated May 18th, 2009. Any idea what that
could be about?
A. I don't. I mean -- I mean, this just isn't enough for me to develop a recollection.
Q. Do you remember having any e-mail exchange with Mr. Paige that would have run on more than 100 pages in length?
A. No. I don't write long e-mails like that. That's a very long e-mail.
Q. I'm trying to jog your recollection because, obviously, this was something that was very long, at least the way they printed
it out.
A. Maybe there was an attachment or something. I don't know. I don't write 100-page e-mails. That much, I know.
Q. Do you remember exchanging e-mails with Mr. Paige that had long attachments to them?
A. I mean, I would occasionally send Mr. Paige documents that were the product of my research. That may be it. I sent him,
you know, newspaper articles and things from my research collections.
Q. Okay. When you would send Mr. Paige documents from your research, would you have any discussion with him in those e-
mails about trial strategy or would it be something along the lines of here's some more stuff that I found?
A. I couldn't say. Am I allowed to look at these to refresh my recollection?
Q. We don't have them. I would give them to you if I had them, but they've been withheld from us.
A. I just don't remember. And just on this skimpy information, it's -- you know, I would just be guessing.
Q. On the next page, there is a May 22nd, 2009 e-mail between you and Dr. -- from you to Dr. Proctor, with either a cc or a
forward to, it says, David Seals, but I suspect they mean David Sayles. Do you remember exchanging any e-mails with Dr.
Proctor in which you either forwarded or copied David Sayles?
A. I mean, have you gone through and checked these against e-mails that I've supplied to you guys?
Q. I was looking here at your e-mails. I don't see these dates.
A. But I've given you other --
Q. No, no. I agree. And I don't see these dates among the e-mails that you've already provided to us.
A. Okay. Because, as I've testified, I got a deposition from Mr. Sayles and then forwarded it to Mr. Proctor, but --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
133Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. And we're aware of that. That was May 23rd, I believe, that particular e-mail.
MR. SMITH:
So it would have been the day after this?
MS. LAWSON:
Right. If that helps jog your memory any. In fact, I may have a copy of that particular e-mail.
A. I know that e-mail. It didn't have any commentary. It was just the -- or very limited. I just can't -- I'm trying. I just can't
remember. I just can't remember. You know, I -- I would -- I can't say, from just this skimpy information.
Q. Do you remember having any e-mail exchange with Mr. Sayles about trial strategy?
A. Well, I was -- probably. I mean, there was a trial.
Q. Which trial were you involved in with him in May of last year?
A. That would have been the one that went to trial over the summer, which I believe was called Campbell.
Q. And you didn't testify in that case, did you?
A. I thought I did. Maybe I have it wrong.
Q. Well, maybe I have it wrong.
MR. SMITH:
Was that in Escambia County?
MS. LAWSON:
That was in Escambia.
MR. SMITH:
You did testify in Escambia.
MS. LAWSON:
I know he testified in Martin.
A. I testified twice.
Q. And Campbell would have been the second one to go.
A. But, again, I can't say for certain what this would be without having looked at the e-mail.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
134Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. And the next e-mail down is one from you, to Matt Schultz and Dr. Proctor and Ray Goldstein, dated May 9th, 2009.
Who's Ray Goldstein?
A. He's a paralegal.
Q. With Mr. Schultz' firm?
A. Yes. I mean, he's hired by Mr. Schultz, but I don't -- I think he lives in California.
MR. SMITH:
He's someone that that firm, the Levin firm has hired; is that correct?
THE WITNESS:
Yes. That would be it.
MR. SMITH:
But he's not with the Levin firm.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Without revealing to me any substance of the e-mail, do you have a recollection of what that e-mail may be about?
A. It's just -- it's so hard to tell, you know, what this might be, so I -- I mean, if I could recall, I really -- I mean, I -- I just
-- I have no idea.
Q. Okay. Do you recall ever having any e-mail exchange with Mr. Schultz about trial strategy?
A. Yes, because we did a trial together. Or not together, but I testified at one of his trials, where he was the attorney. Yes. So
we would discuss my testimony and that kind of thing.
Q. Having gone over all these e-mails, do you think any of these e-mails may still exist in your sent folder in your e-mails?
A. No. I carefully went through to identify everything I had. And I don't have these. I -- everything that I had with Robert
Proctor addressed, I surrendered or delivered back in October.
Q. At the Naugle deposition?
A. That's right.
Q. Okay. Have you ever asked that you be removed as a witness from any smoking and health suit?
A. I had a conflict in a case called Hetzner that was supposed to be over the Christmas break, and then got rescheduled at a
time that I wouldn't have been able to work on it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
135Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. I know you testified in a couple of cases, like we just discussed, in Escambia County, the Martin and the Campbell
case, but you were also named in a couple of other cases that have gone to trial, one of those being the Clay case. Do you
remember being deposed for the Clay case?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you ever ask that you not be a witness at trial in the Clay case?
A. No.
Q. Do you know why you didn't testify in the Clay case?
A. Because I never got a call from the attorneys. I mean, why they never called me, I couldn't tell you, but I haven't -- just
haven't heard from them.
Q. Okay. Do you remember being deposed for a case called Gray in Escambia County?
A. Did I leave that one off?
Q. It's not on here. Clay is on here, but not Gray.
A. Would that have been one that had been combined? Sometimes they combine them.
Q. I don't think that one was combined. I know you were deposed, but --
A. I -- I have no doubt -- I mean, I'm not in any way --
Q. No. I'm not suggesting anything.
A. Who would have been some of the people at that one?
Q. Amanda Jacobs was there for us, and we didn't take the lead in that deposition, but Amanda Jacobs was there for us.
A. Was it in Biloxi?
Q. It may have been, and I know she called in.
A. It must have been a short one.
Q. It may have been. I know it wasn't that long. I don't have that transcript with me or I would tell you.
A. I don't want to sound like I don't know what's going on, but I -- I just don't remember that one and I thought I -- I clearly
didn't remember it to put on that invoice.
Q. You are going to go home and check your records now, aren't you?
A. There's a pile of transcripts. I don't --
Q. Do you have any recollection of ever being asked to be removed as a witness from the Gray case?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
136Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. No. I didn't -- I haven't asked to be removed from any case except for the one that I just described from a scheduling error
or scheduling issue.
Q. Do you know if you were ever named in a case called Amanda Hall?
A. Who would have been the attorneys?
Q. Mr. Smith.
A. Mr. Smith. Was I deposed in that?
Q. I don't honestly recall. Mr. Smith says, no, you were not.
MR. SMITH:
No. You were not deposed in Hall. And, actually, I think you were -- I think you may not even know that you were listed among
a wide list of -- but, actually, that's a case in which another witness was called. I don't think -- you were removed pretty early
from Amanda Hall, I think. I can just say, I know you weren't deposed and I know -- I know we didn't retain you. I didn't know
we had actually disclosed you, but we may have, because in the first disclosure, we named --
A. And just as an observation, my name has been appended to a lot of disclosures.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I understand that.
A. Which I do nothing, receive nothing, you know, and know nothing. But, again, my answer about the removal is still true.
There's no case, save for the Hetzner case, which was a scheduling issue, that I explicitly sought to be removed because of
when it was falling in the spring.
MR. SMITH:
He may have also been designated in a case called Herle, but I know he wasn't deposed and the case went away. I don't know
that any historians were actually called in that.
MS. LAWSON:
I don't think anybody other than fact witnesses got deposed in Herle because it went away fairly early.
MR. SMITH:
So, again, he might not have known that, if he was disclosed.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. The last case you testified in was Naugle?
A. At deposition.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
137Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. You didn't testify at trial in Naugle?
A. No.
Q. When was the last time you testified at trial?
A. The Barbanell case in July, that was the last trial.
Q. Do you know if there have been any Engle progeny trials since July of last year?
A. Oh, yes. I mean, they're covered in the newspaper. There have been a number of them.
Q. Are you keeping up with the coverage of that?
A. Only in the sense that, you know, every -- occasionally, they -- you know, happenstance upon them that they're covered in
the press or AP wire, but I'm not keeping up in any systematic way.
Q. Is there any reason that you've not been testifying at trials since July of last year?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. What's that?
A. The attorneys haven't called me and -- to testify. I don't know why. But, you know, some -- I don't know what their thinking
is, but no one has called me to go to the trial, so therefore, I haven't gone to the trial.
Q. And the last deposition you gave is in Naugle in October of last year; is that right?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you know why you haven't been asked for any depositions since October of last year?
A. What do you mean; like, for new cases?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. Well, there are a couple where people asked me to be deposed, and I said I was overcommitted and asked not to participate
because I was too busy.
Q. Okay. Do you know which cases those were?
A. Well, I know one called Pendle or Peandle.
Q. Pendle.
A. Pendle. And I just -- you know, I have a day job, and I had, in particular -- I just have to attend to that, as well.
Q. Do you know if your name was ever withdrawn as a witness in any cases?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
138Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. I wouldn't know that. I mean, I don't know. I mean, I did ask to be withdrawn from one case because of a scheduling error,
which I mentioned earlier.
Q. And I know you've been deposed at -- about this at length, but the e-mail exchange between Dr. Proctor and Dr. Smocovitis,
and you were questioned also about e-mails that you had received from Dr. Proctor, I think, that also involved Dr. Smocovitis.
Do you know if there's been any resolution of that situation?
MR. SMITH:
Object to form.
A. Well, I mean, I think that's a loaded question. I don't think there's a situation to resolve in that.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you know if there was ever any determination by a court as to whether Dr. Proctor did anything inappropriate in his
contacts with Dr. Smocovitis?
A. I know that up in Connecticut, there was some hearing on this. I don't know the outcome of that, though.
Q. Okay. Do you know if there have been any courts who have made statements about the appropriateness or the
inappropriateness of Dr. Proctor's communications with Dr. Smocovitis in Florida, any Florida courts?
A. Okay. Are you referring to one of the judges?
Q. Uh-huh.
A. Yes. I am aware of that. I am aware of what that judge said.
Q. Have you read the order that the judge issued?
A. Yes, I have, that I saw.
Q. Where did you get that order from?
A. Somebody sent it to me in the mail. Oh, I know. It was read to me over the telephone. That's what it was.
Q. Who read it to you over the telephone?
A. A reporter.
Q. A reporter read it to you. Who was the reporter?
A. A guy named Jonathan Weiner.
Q. Did he ask you questions about it?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
139Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. He did. I wasn't able to answer any questions because I was unaware of the order until he read it to me or read parts of it.
I don't think he read the whole thing.
Q. Do you remember what he read to you or the general gist of what he read to you?
A. The main thing was that the judge said that he had not heard -- there had not been an evidentiary hearing on the nature of what
happened, so he hadn't heard any evidence on this or both sides of the evidence, and that he didn't -- I don't -- I think there was a
request to bar Mr. Proctor from testifying or something, but that was unsuccessful. So I don't remember much else besides that.
Q. Do you know if the judge ever said that Dr. Proctor's behavior -- and by “behavior,” I mean his interaction with Dr. Smocovitis
and the things he said to her was inappropriate?
A. That was characterized to me by the reporter.
Q. Okay. So Mr. Weiner told you that the judge had -- the judge in Florida -- and I will represent to you it's in Volusia County.
It's a Judge Parsons, that characterized Dr. Proctor's behavior as inappropriate; is that right?
A. Something like that. I haven't read the order. I had it read to me. I can read that, if you want me to.
Q. Since your Naugle deposition in October of last year, have you discussed with Dr. Proctor at all his interactions with Dr.
Smocovitis?
A. No. I haven't discussed that with him.
Q. Have you discussed since October, since your Naugle deposition, October of last year, anything having to do with smoking
and health suits with Dr. Proctor?
A. No.
Q. Do you know if Dr. Proctor is continuing to serve as an expert in smoking and health suits?
A. I'm not sure. I haven't seen any press mention of that.
Q. Okay. In the order that --
A. Well, let me qualify that. I do know that he was listed as an expert in this case in Connecticut.
Q. Okay. Have you spoken with Dr. Proctor about the case in Connecticut?
A. No.
Q. The order that we've been referring to that was entered by Judge Parsons in Volusia County, do you know if your name
was mentioned anywhere in that order?
A. When it was read to me over the phone, I think there was just the briefest mention of me.
Q. And what is your recollection of what the mention of you was?
A. If you have it in front of you, let me just read it.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
140Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Well, I will give you at least when we're done, I'll give you a copy of it.
MR. SMITH:
If you don't recall --
A. I mean, I don't remember. I just don't --
MS. LAWSON:
Q. That's fine. I just want to know right now, what you recall, if anything.
A. I remember it being eminently forgettable because I'm not part of any of that.
Q. Okay. I don't seem to have extra copies and I'm not going to mark this as an exhibit since it has my underlining on it. And
I will show you here a copy of the order, and specifically where your name comes up, and ask you if you have any knowledge
of this. This is on Page 7 of the order, and I think I've underlined the portion that refers to you.
A. Okay. So --
Q. Had you been aware of the existence of this statement in the order?
A. That's not what I remember, no. I don't -- I don't remember learning that.
Q. Okay. For the sake of the record, the statement I'm referring to, it says, “This Court directs that Dr. Proctor cease and
desist from any conduct that would constitute planning or preparation to change his sworn testimony based on coaching or
conversations from Dr. Kyriakoudes or any other person in this case.” Has any of that ever been communicated to you?
MR. SMITH:
Well, counsel, to be clear, by the time -- if I recall, by the time that document is issued, which is the order, that was the result
of a hearing that occurred after he had withdrawn from the case, meaning Dr. Kyriakoudes.
MS. LAWSON:
Meaning he had withdrawn from the Hetzner case.
MR. SMITH:
That's where that order arises, is the Hetzner. The day set for hearing -- before the day set for hearing, Dr. Kyriakoudes had
withdrawn from that case.
MS. LAWSON:
Right.
MR. SMITH:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
141Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Consequently, Dr. Kyriakoudes was no longer in that case at the time of the issuance of that order. I didn't know if you knew
the sequence.
MS. LAWSON:
I'm aware of the sequence. I'm just asking. For the record, I will say that the order reflects that it was signed on November
the 20th of 2009.
MR. SMITH:
And his withdrawal was sometime prior to November the 20th. Well, sometime prior -- actually, it was at or before the hearing
that was conducted --
MS. LAWSON:
I think it was at the hearing that he was withdrawn.
MR. SMITH:
I filed notice. I withdrew it at that time. I had received the notice prior to that day. Because, if you recall -- and I want this on
the record -- that day was actually a case that was -- originally, that subject was going to be heard by Mr. Ogle. The previous
week, Mr. Ogle and a series of other attorneys were subject to a recusal order by Judge Parsons, which put this case to the
front of a list --
MS. LAWSON:
Yes. I do recall the sequence.
MR. SMITH:
We were like sixth, then all of a sudden, I was first. It was at that time when a new -- long story short, he was no longer --
I now absolutely recall that Dr. Kyriakoudes was not in the case at the time of the hearing or the issuance of that order. He
had been withdrawn. I know that because I am the one who withdrew him, and I am the one that received the order regarding
Dr. Proctor. And argued that order.
MS. LAWSON:
And if I'm recalling correctly, but you can certainly correct me if I'm wrong, I think you actually -- didn't you withdraw him
in open court in front of the judge?
MR. SMITH:
Yes. Because I had received -- because when my hearing came up, by that time, I had received notice that Dr. Kyriakoudes had
withdrawn from the case, which I announced to the judge.
MS. LAWSON:
And --
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
142Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
In open court. You are right. By that, I mean, I don't -- I may have filed something before I got there and then reminded the
judge, but I don't think so. I want to say that I --
MS. LAWSON:
I want to say you stated it in open court.
MR. SMITH:
I had a document that was whatever day of the week this was, and this was the same week, and by the time I got it filed, I would
have been in open court. That's how I remember it.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Okay. All of that being said, were you aware, before I showed it to you right now, that there was an order from Judge
Parsons, in Volusia County, that -- well, exactly what this order says. Were you aware of this order and its statement about
you and Dr. Proctor?
A. No. No one has sent me that. I was never served or delivered that notice.
MS. LAWSON:
Let's mark this as the next exhibit.
(Exhibit 11 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
Q. I believe, Dr. Kyriakoudes, that this is one of the e-mails that you produced at that last Naugle deposition. Does that square
with your recollection?
A. Yes. I -- yes. This is -- let me just -- can I read it?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes. Okay.
Q. At the bottom -- well, it starts out, title of it is called, “Same Old Same Old.” And it looks to be -- the top one seems to be
an e-mail to you from Dr. Proctor, and Dr. Proctor appears to be sending you a copy of an e-mail that he just -- he just sent to
someone named Allan. Is that Allan Brandt? Who is that?
A. Probably, yes. Almost certainly him, yes, because it's dealing with the review of his book.
Q. And he's apparently not happy with the criticism that his book received?
A. No. That's not what he's saying here. It's -- I guess it's hard for me to tell, but it says, “The tobacco industry has complained
to Science magazine, claiming that I had a conflict of interest in reviewing your book.”
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
143Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. And it would be somebody was complaining that Dr. Proctor had a conflict of interest in reviewing Allan's book; is that right?
A. That's right, yes.
Q. And it goes through that, and I'm not getting into the details of that, but your response to him was, “Unbelievable. And it
wasn't like your review was uncritical. When was this rule invented? Hang tough. Let the industry slugs reveal themselves.”
Is that what it says?
A. Yes.
Q. Who are the industry slugs?
A. Well, your clients, and indeed, your law firm and other law firms that work for the industry have a long history of harassing
academic researchers who are critical of the industry. This is well-documented. It has happened to me.
There was a story in Nation magazine that came out, and one of your colleagues wrote a letter with falsehoods, claiming that I
pulled out of a trial -- I forget exactly what he said, but it was published in the Nation, claiming that I was trying to influence
someone's testimony or something like that, which is false.
And so, look, this is an objective truth. I mean, I'm happy to be pleasant here in this room, but you guys play hardball and for
keeps, and engage in lots of harassing behavior.
Q. It's true, isn't it, professor, that you've written articles being very -- that are very derogatory towards historians who have
worked for the defendants, isn't it?
A. Derogatory, no. No. I do not engage in any derogatory language. I engaged in an evaluation of the methods and materials
employed by tobacco industry historians, as revealed in their testimony and depositions and trials. I criticized their work. That's
not derogatory.
Q. Well, your opinions of them were very derogatory, weren't they?
A. As expressed in the article?
Q. Yes.
A. No. I didn't express any personal opinions about the people. I was critical of the work, though. But, no, I didn't say anything
about anybody's character or anything like that. Simply evaluating the methods and materials engaged in, and to say so is to
misrepresent what I wrote in that article.
Q. So you don't believe you've been derogatory in your article about historians who worked for the defendants? You don't
believe you've been derogatory about those historians?
A. I criticized the methods and materials that they employ to arrive at their opinions and the factual and interpretive content of
their testimony, but I've offered no criticism of them as people.
Q. Dr. Proctor has also written an article or perhaps more than one article about historians who work for tobacco companies;
isn't that right?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
144Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Well, he had one that appeared in the same issue of the journal.
Q. Do you believe that he spoke in a derogatory fashion about the defense historians?
A. You know, I -- you know, I can't speak to his article because it's been a long time since I read it. But I don't think so. I
mean, I don't recall that. I mean, I recall that he was like me in this research project that was funded by the National Cancer
Institute, I might add, critical of the methods and the materials, you know, the content of the testimony, the ideas, but not the
people. But I can only speak --
I mean, it's been a long time since I read that piece. I can say firmly, with my piece, I've not engaged in any derogatory comments
about the people, just the content of -- the history. I'm critical of their history.
Q. Do you consider the statement, “let the industry slugs reveal themselves,” to be a derogatory comment?
A. Well, that is a derogatory comment that I sent, yes, to characterize what I think was kind of behind-the-scenes influence
described in that letter, yes. But I don't know who that was. And I don't know who the particular individual was. In my published
work -- I mean, I have my personal opinion about whether somebody should, you know, work for the tobacco industry or not.
That's my own personal view. I keep that to myself, generally. But for my public statements, I stick to the work and to the
history, as indicated by my article.
Q. Do you believe that historians should work for the tobacco companies?
A. That doesn't -- I don't have a problem with people advising the tobacco industry about history. The last time this came up,
you were deposing me, and I'll say the same thing now that I said then. You know, my main criticism is that they fail to take
into account the industry archives. I mean, the historians look at archives and to not engage in that is a flawed research method.
Q. Do you know if the defense historians are researching the same historical questions that you are researching?
A. Right now, I'm not sure because, you know, I'm not keeping up. Well, I am asking different questions. That's true. And I -- you
know, my testimony, in terms of the scope or the area that is covered differs than the defense. And, of course, that's fine. That's --
But, as what I read, from my study that I published, I mean, I evaluated that testimony on its own basis, and my evaluation
was that it was a flawed methodology.
Q. Have you ever done the research to address the specific historical questions that the defense historians are researching? Have
you done that research?
A. Well, which question now do you mean?
Q. Well, first of all, let me ask. Are you aware of the historical questions that the defense historians are researching?
A. Well, again, I can only speak to what I read from my study. I don't know what is going on now because I'm not reading --
Q. Well, back when you were doing your study, were you aware of what the historical questions were that defense historians
were researching?
A. Yes. And I laid that out very carefully in my paper.
Q. What was your understanding of what the historical questions were?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
145Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
A. Public knowledge, so-called common knowledge; public understanding of the risks of smoking at certain points in historical
time.
Q. Okay. And have you specifically done the research to address that question, yourself?
A. Oh, very much so, yes.
Q. You believe -- do you believe that you are researching the same historical question as the defense historians?
A. Well, I have researched the question, as it was characterized in the testimony that I studied for the research project. Sure.
I have researched that.
Q. Have you looked at any of the expert disclosures of the defense historians where they lay out what their historical questions
are?
A. I read their testimony, where they said what their -- what they were working on.
Q. Okay. Do you consider me to be one of the industry slugs, professor?
A. No. And, you know, that was a private communication that you have and I was speaking privately.
Q. Any of the defense lawyers that you've dealt with that you would consider to be industry slugs?
A. I don't think this is a relevant line of questioning.
MR. SMITH:
The answer is, if you don't want to answer that, you don't have to tell her --
A. I mean, we're getting into --
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Well, it's your turn. And you say, “let the industry slugs reveal themselves.” I'm just asking, are any of the lawyers that
you've dealt with, do you consider them to be those industry slugs?
A. There is a -- I mean, there's a range of -- amongst the ones that I've -- amongst the industry attorneys that I have encountered,
they certainly fall across the spectrum of professionalism, as I understand it and the like, but I'm not going to name names
because I think there's no point to that.
Q. Do you believe any of the defense attorneys have been unprofessional with you?
A. Well, I've been on the record on that. I don't think we need to rehash that, but we had a deposition that -- you know, where
I was accused of being a liar by the attorneys. I felt that was unprofessional.
(Exhibit 12 was marked.)
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
146Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Let me also represent, I think this is a full set of the e-mails that you produced at the Naugle deposition because there was
a long exchange that you produced then, and I think this is all of them.
A. Okay.
MR. SMITH:
The one I'm reading on the front of February 7th, that's one we've already talked about.
MS. LAWSON:
And I'm not going to ask him -- no. I promise, we're not going back there.
Q. It's on the third page -- it's an e-mail --
A. You've dog eared it.
Q. Yes. I dog eared it to make it easier to get to. Dated September 13th, 2008. Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And it's an e-mail from you to Dr. Proctor. And it starts out, “Robert, this difficult to quit business is an old yarn.”
Do you see that?
A. Yes.
Q. And then there's a second paragraph down there, “This is the end game of litigation and I have no patience for these goons.
I berate and lecture them as often as I can and will continue to do so.” Is that what you wrote?
A. Yes.
Q. Who are the goons?
A. I can only imagine what you say about me when you are back at the office. I'll make that observation. And you don't have
to tell me. This was after a deposition where I went on and on about this difficult to quit business, and you can look at the
transcript. I believe it was the Sherman/Hess/Cohen deposition, with Mr. Paige. And, you know, I would answer the question,
the person asking the question didn't like my answer, so he would ask the same question over and over and over again. And,
you know, I think one of these difficult -- it's one of these rhetorical tropes that you use to confuse the matter.
Q. Is the particular goon or goons the lawyers in that particular deposition?
A. Yes, the defense attorneys.
Q. Okay. Do you consider me one of the goons, professor?
A. No. I don't consider you a goon. Your behavior has not been goon-like. I use -- you know, this was, again, a private
communication, colorful language, reflecting what was, I think, a pretty heated deposition, where I felt there was no interest in
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
147Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
actually ascertaining my opinions and the intellectual basis and the evidentiary basis behind those opinions, but rather a variety
of impeachment, and trick questions and all the other things that I think open up the process of depositions to abuse.
And I feel very firmly that -- you know, there's no mystery as to what my opinions are. I have how many hours of recorded
deposition testimony in which I've been basically giving the same analysis?
Q. Okay. You also state there that you berate and lecture them as often as you can. Do you think it's your role as an expert
to berate lawyers?
A. When they berate me, I berate them back. I give what I get.
Q. Do you consider yourself an advocate for the plaintiffs in this case?
A. No.
Q. Do you consider yourself an advocate for an antismoking position?
A. What do you mean by “antismoking”?
Q. Okay. Let me ask a better question. Do you consider yourself to be an antismoking advocate?
A. Well, I believe in the idea that if fewer people smoke, we'd have fewer cigarette-related disease, and that we would be a
healthier society. So I believe in the idea that fewer people should smoke, as opposed to more people smoking, and I think that
puts me on the different side of a fence, at least with the -- your clients' business interests.
Q. Would you like to see a place where nobody smoked? Would you like this to be a country where no one smoked?
A. I support the -- I think it's called healthy people or healthy nation goals. We've fallen behind on those. I also support the
public health goals in the framework convention on tobacco control. Ideally, we would have a society where people didn't use
cigarettes or children would not become addicted to cigarettes. That would be a nice ideal. I don't know how to accomplish that.
I don't hold out accomplishing that as any part of my professional role. But as a citizen, I think that would be a good thing.
Q. Would you like to see my client, Reynolds, go out of business?
A. No. I mean, I -- they can make something else, you know. There's got to be other products. They've got bright people working
there, I'm sure. But I have no opinion as to go out of business.
Q. Let me ask it a different way. Would you like to see my client, Reynolds, cease to sell cigarettes?
A. I think that would be -- if they made that decision, even if they did it in a way where they transitioned, you know, that
would be a positive thing.
Q. With a goal of ceasing to sell cigarettes?
A. Yes.
MS. LAWSON:
I think that's all I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
148Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
EXAMINATION
BY MR. SMITH:
I have just a few things I want to go back over with you.
Q. Since about 12:30 until about 4:30, we were talking about a document which was attached for purposes of your deposition
to a GMail of February 7th, 2009, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. I just want to be clear. The attached document and your comments were never actually communicated to Dr. Proctor?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you knew that because you determined that from your GMail, that that could not have been communicated?
A. That's right. I attached the Microsoft Office temporary file.
Q. And then you never, once having determined that, you never actually sent it to Dr. Proctor?
A. No. I decided to keep it.
Q. You were asked a question regarding certain health comments that you recall. Are you aware of a document, and have
you, in the past, relied on and intend to rely on a document from, I believe, Brown & Williamson, entitled, Review of Health
References in Cigarette Advertising?
MS. LAWSON:
Object to form.
A. Yes. That document has been part of my set of reliance materials that I've delivered to the plaintiffs previous to this trial.
MR. SMITH:
Q. I think I asked you about a nineteen -- either I asked you or counsel asked you about a 1981 FTC report and a 1967 FTC
report. Are you aware of an FTC report -- counsel, that's marked as Document 246 in our evidence -- a Report on Cigarette
Advertising and Output by the Bureau of Economics of the Federal Trade Commission?
A. What's the date on this?
Q. 1964.
A. Yes. Yes. That, I'm familiar with.
Q. Are you familiar with various documents that were produced from Hill & Knowlton as related to the formulation of the
TIRC and the activities of the TIRC and then, later, its successor?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
149Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MS. LAWSON:
Object to form.
A. Yes. I'm very familiar with those. I actually researched those at the University of Wisconsin, where the originals reside, and
have included many, not all, on the reliance list I supplied last week.
MR. SMITH:
Q. And are you, in your preparation for discussing the history or, excuse me, the knowledge and dissemination of knowledge
regarding cigarettes, have you done studies and prepared studies or are you prepared to review documents dealing with the
advertising and effects of advertising to youth smokers or persons under the age of 18?
MS. LAWSON:
Object to form.
A. Yes. I've done research on that, and have opinions on that, and have done the primary source research, yes.
MR. SMITH:
Q. Have you reviewed the methods by which tobacco companies, including R.J. Reynolds, advertised and promoted their
product after the ban on television advertising was enacted?
A. Yes. After they went off the airwaves, yes, I have done that.
Q. And do you have opinions about the ways in which they have accomplished that and its effects on smokers, including young
smokers?
A. Yes.
Q. Exhibit 11 that was provided to you, as I understand it, you were neither the reviewer nor the author of the subject matter of
the correspondence between Dr. Proctor, and I think you gave me the name, Allan. I'm drawing a blank on his last name.
A. Brandt.
Q. You did not write the article, nor the review?
A. That's correct.
Q. Do you anticipate that you will finalize and be able to convey, well in advance, maybe even next Monday or Tuesday, the
final selection of the ads that we are actually going to use in this case now?
A. Like, by this Monday?
Q. Yes, Monday or Tuesday of this week.
A. Yes. I can get that. We can -- yes. I can make those decisions.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
150Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
MR. SMITH:
I think that's all I have.
EXAMINATION
BY MS. LAWSON:
Q. I have just a couple of follow-ups. Professor, we were looking at the e-mail, and I think counsel just asked you about the e-
mail attached to Dr. Proctor that had the transcript, and you said you attached a temp file instead of the full file. Did you ever
go back and look at what was in that temp file?
A. Yes.
Q. What was in it?
A. My name.
Q. Your name. Anything else?
A. That's it.
Q. In drafting up that e-mail, though, it was your intention to send it to Dr. Proctor, right?
A. That's right. I said that.
Q. The document that counsel mentioned to you about the review of health reference in cigarette ads, what's in that document?
A. Oh, that's a Brown & Williamson document, and it lists health themes, I think it's from the early '50s, with Viceroy, for
example, covering the '30s to the '50s, that time period, Viceroy, Kool. There are a couple other brands listed in there.
MR. SMITH:
We have reference listed on my evidence as 259.
MS. LAWSON:
Q. Do you know, does that particular document state that Kool was ever presented as a healthier, safer cigarette?
A. Gosh, what does it say? I would have to remind myself of the document. It was, like, a claim of dental health. There was
a -- I'd just have to review the document to --
Q. You don't have a recollection?
MR. SMITH:
I will stipulate it doesn't say a healthier, safer product. It says what it says.
MS. LAWSON:
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
151Earline ALEXANDER, As Personal Representative of the..., 2010 WL 6511228...
Q. Okay. Do you know when Mr. Alexander first started using the pre-made cigarettes as opposed to the roll-your-own?
A. I'm not aware of that. I -- as I sit here. I just know that he began smoking as a pre-adolescent, around 1941, maybe earlier.
Q. And would it be fair to say that you are not aware of any advertisements and you can't testify to Mr. Alexander seeing any
particular advertisements for cigarettes before he was 18 years old?
A. I mean, he -- that's different than the earlier question you asked me about -- I can only, you know, describe what was part
of the common culture in the south at this time, but I can't put him in front of any particular ad.
Q. When did the TV ban go on for cigarette ads? When did that occur?
A. That was in January 1970, I believe. You know, first, the industry makes the voluntary offer to withdraw. Then that's later
firmed up in the legislation around that time.
Q. And how old is Mr. Alexander when that happens?
A. Well, he would have been 40 years old then.
Q. So at that point, he wouldn't have been considered a youth?
A. That's correct.
MS. LAWSON:
That's all I have.
(Deposition concluded at 5:08 p.m.)
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
152
