Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2007 WL 7237080...
Original Image of 2007 WL 7237080 (PDF)
2007 WL 7237080 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
Circuit Court of Florida.
Broward County
Matthew BUONOMO,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY.
No. 0819612CA19.
July 27, 2007.
Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Failure to Disclose
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Case Type: Consumer Protection >> Warranty/Breach of Warranty
Jurisdiction: Broward County, Florida
Name of Expert: Louis Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Note: This document was obtained from the above titled case. (PDF information below.)
Court: Circuit Court of Florida.
Title: KEN ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, vs. PHILIP MORRIS, INCORPORATED, a foreign corporation, Defendant.
Docket Number: No. 06-CV-50-GKF-FHM.
Date: July 27, 2007.
Deposition of LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D., taken pursuant to notice on behalf of the Defendant, at the offices of
Womble, Carlyle, Sandridge, & Rice, 2530 Meridian Parkway, Suite 400, Durham, North Carolina, before Suzanne G. Patterson,
Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public.
documents and public statements, you will offer opinions about what Philip Morris intended or what its state of mind was in
making those statements?
A. Yeah. Now, so that we're clear, when you say, state of mind, I mean, I'm interpreting that to mean what their goals were,
what their strategies, what they hoped to achieve, what they wanted to do, and I would make those statements about Philip
Morris and its agents, like TIRC.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2007 WL 7237080...
Q. A few minutes ago you mentioned your expertise in the history of advertising, just to follow up on that with you briefly,
you have no degrees in advertising or marketing, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. No academic course work in advertising or marketing?
A. No.
Q. Never been trained to design or execute a marketing or advertising campaign?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you've never been trained to test or evaluate the efficacy or effectiveness of a marketing or advertising campaign?
A. No, I've not done that.
Q. You're aware that there are peer-reviewed journals in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Do you know what they are?
A. Well, there's very many of them, the Journal of Consumer Research, would be one. Another journal called, Macro Marketing.
I mean, there are very many.
Q. Have you ever published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising or marketing?
A. Advertising history, I've published a piece on R.J. Reynolds and the Grand Ole Opry, that deals with their advertising
messages.
Q. That would have been in an advertising or marketing peer-reviewed journal?
A. No, it was in Southern Cultures.
Q. My question is really specific to peer-reviewed journals in the field of advertising and marketing.
A. No, I misunderstood your question. No, I haven't published in any of those types of journals.
Q. Just so the record is clear, you've never published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising and
marketing, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. Never been on the editorial board or been a peer reviewer for a journal in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. That's correct.
Q. You're not going to offer any opinions in this case regarding the specific ads that Plaintiff saw during his lifetime?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Matthew BUONOMO, v. R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO..., 2007 WL 7237080...
A. No.
Q. Okay. You mentioned just a moment ago consumer behavior, I'd like to follow up with you briefly on that now. Do you
claim some expertise in consumer behavior?
A. Only as a historian. You know, what historians do is we look at, you know, the evidence from the past, read the secondary
literature, follow our methodologies and make judgments about the effective advertising on American society.
Q. Do you know whether either the University of North Carolina or Vanderbilt University offer degrees in consumer behavior?
A. Yeah, you can get those through the business school, there's also a psychology track that touches on that, what they call
social psychology.
Q. Either when you were an undergrad at the University of North Carolina or as a graduate!, postgraduate student at Vanderbilt,
did you ever take any courses in consumer behavior?
A. No, I answered that earlier, I have not taken any courses in consumer behavior.
Q. And, I apologize, I don't mean to be redundant Are you familiar with any of the known scientific models of consumer
decision-making?
A. No. And I'm -- and, again, so you're clear about this, and this is reflected in one of the documents I supplied today, the
lecture on the history of advertising, historians have, you know, models, our own, you know, hypotheses or models of the role
of advertising in American society that we draw upon.
Q. So to the extent that you're going to approach issues involving consumer behavior, it will be from a historical perspective
rather than from one actually applying the science and technique of consumer behavior?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Your Curriculum Vitae lists the articles that you've published and peer-reviewed in other publications, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you published any articles on consumer behavior?
A. No. No, I haven't published anything on that.
Q. Are you aware from the amount of time you've
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3
