Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Original Image of 2007 WL 7757499 (PDF)
2007 WL 7757499 (N.D.Okla.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
United States District Court, N.D. Oklahoma.
Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff,
v.
Philip MORRIS, Incorporated, a foreign corporation, Defendant.
No. 06-CV-50-GKF-FHM.
July 27, 2007.
Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Case Type: Fraud & Misrepresentation >> Fraud - Fraud & Misrepresentation
Case Type: Intentional Torts >> Conspiracy
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Jurisdiction: N.D.Okla.
Name of Expert: Louis M. Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Deposition of LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D., taken pursuant to notice on behalf of the Defendant, at the offices of
Womble, Carlyle, Sandridge, & Rice, 2530 Meridian Parkway, Suite 400, Durham, North Carolina, before Suzanne G. Patterson,
Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public.
[Note: Pages 2-7 missing in original document]
A. No, I didn't make any notes, I skimmed through it.
Q. About how much time do you think you spent skimming Kenneth Alexander's deposition?
A. About an hour.
Q. When would you have conducted that review?
A. I looked at it a little bit Wednesday afternoon and I looked at yesterday morning, a half hour each time approximately.
Q. Okay. I guess it goes without saying that you had never seen Kenneth Alexander's deposition before you put your expert
report in in this case?
A. Right. My expert report does not discuss Mr. Alexander's situation.
Q. And that's by design, that's your normal practice as an expert, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
A. That's correct. And just so that you're clear, and this may save you some time, I brought that responsive to the item on the
list which said, bring anything that had been supplied to me, but I would not include that on my, for example, reliance list. So
I don't intend to rely on his deposition. I'm not the historian of the particular plaintiff.
Q. That will save me some time. Thank you for that. Just to sort of close the loop on that, you're not relying on case specific
materials for your expert opinions in this case, true?
A. Yeah, that would be true. That's correct.
Q. And as you just pointed out, you're not the historian of this particular Plaintiff or what he might have known over time about
the risks of smoking, for example?
A. That's correct. My expertise is in the activities of your client, other tobacco manufacturers, and what the public as a group
and as subgroups knew and understood of the risks of smoking at certain times in history.
Q. Okay. On these three manila folders that you've handed me, I see that you have labeled them in pencil, is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you've provided some numbers in pencil on the labeling portion of each folder, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. And are the numbers on each folder intended to correspond to the numbered document request in the deposition notice?
A. They are, for simplicity and efficiency sake. If you want, I could explain what's in those files for you.
[Note: Pages 10-29 missing in original document]
Q. And, again, just focusing on Mr. Alexander, you're not going to offer any opinions in this case about what Mr. Alexander
knew, believed, or perceived about the risks of smoking at any point in his life?
A. No.
Q. I know you've produced your entire case file to me here today, I take it from the materials we've gone through that you
haven't gone and looked at any newspapers or periodicals or other state specific materials for the states in which Mr. Alexander
lived for purposes of your opinions in this case?
A. That's correct. In prior research, I've reviewed, like the Chicago newspapers but not -- because I understand northern Indiana
was where he was, part of his youth, but not specifically for this case, no.
Q. You haven't reviewed any Oklahoma specific materials?
A. I haven't.
Q. Are you aware of whether any -- you have in the course of your research looked at some school texts that deal with health
and smoking issues?
A. Yes, I've looked at many textbooks, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. You don't know which of those though might have been used in the public school systems that Mr. Alexander attended?
A. That's correct.
Q. I know that you've testified before in a number of cigarette cases and I don't want to waste a lot of your time going over your
qualifications. I do want to see if I can streamline this a little bit, okay?
A. Okay.
Q. ‘Cause I think you've been pretty candid in the past about what your expertise is and what it isn't. You're a historian?
A. I'm a historian.
Q. With a Ph.D. in History from Vanderbilt?
A. That's correct.
Q. And your undergraduate and masters degrees were also both in history?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you have received no other degrees since you've gotten your Ph.D. in history from Vanderbilt in 1987?
A. That's correct.
Q. And if you were going to describe either to the court or to the jury your area of expertise, you would describe it as history?
A. History, that's right. Now, I have to add to that, I did have additional training, education, experience, I guess, which was a
two-year National Institute of Health post-doc at the Carolina Population Center. So I am trained in demography as well.
Q. And I'll follow up on that in just a moment. Thank you for that.
A. And that's not a degree but that is a postdoctoral training experience.
Q. Got you. You have no medical degree or training?
A. No.
Q. No science or scientific degree or training?
A. Not in a hard science, no. I mean, demography is a social science, I consider myself --
Q. I'm a philosophy major so I'm not being pejorative with any of this.
A. I consider my approach to history as that of a social science historian. This is a distinction that means very little to you guys
but matters in the circles in which I, you know, move.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. I don't want to show you my grades in chemistry or anything like that, I was a philosophy major. So I don't mean anything
pejorative on that. But, for example, you have no expertise in pharmacology or nicotine pharmacology?
A. No. No, I'm not a medical scientist.
Q. Or psychiatry or psychology?
A. No.
Q. No expertise in cigarette design?
A. No. Now, the way the cigarette is put together is a historical question and that comes up in my historical research, but
contemporary cigarette design, I'm not going to talk about that. That's not my area.
Q. No expertise in cigarette manufacturing?
A. No. Again, except that, you know, as a historical item, the rise of the Bonsack cigarette machine, for example, and its role
in the industry.
Q. You're not going to offer any opinions in this case about how the cigarettes Mr. Alexander smoked were defective?
A. No, I won't offer opinions on that.
Q. And you're not going to offer any opinions about how the cigarettes Mr. Alexander smoked might have been designed
differently to eliminate or reduce the possibility of harm?
A. No, that's not an area I've testified in in the past.
Q. Fair enough. And just following up on what you said about cigarette manufacturing, you're not going to offer any opinions
in this case that the cigarettes Mr. Alexander smoked were manufactured in a defective manner?
A. No.
Q. And you're not going to offer an opinion that Mr. Alexander's cigarette should have been manufactured in a different manner
that might have obviated or eliminated harm?
A. No, I'm not going to give that testimony.
Q. And you're not an expert in the design or testing of product warnings, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. No training or expertise in human factors engineering?
A. Don't even know what that one is, so I don't think I'm in that.
Q. Fair enough.
A. That's a new one to me.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. Okay. Never taken any course work in consumer behavior or consumer decision-making?
A. Not in the way that the marketing science people do it, no, no. I mean, I do need to clarify, I will, as a historian, talk about
just, you know, in terms of groups of people what, you know, survey research reveals in terms of what people knew the risks
of smoking and those kinds of issues as a historian.
Q. Okay. You mentioned advertising or marketing, you've never claimed any expertise in advertising or marketing, true?
A. Not contemporary, you know, I'm not going to design a marketing campaign but, again, you know, those are important
sources for the historian, marketing sources, advertising sources, discussions of marketing strategy from internal documents
and archival sources, those are all very important to my work and opinions.
Q. You consider yourself an expert in the history of advertising?
A. The history of tobacco advertising, yeah, as a historian, yes.
Q. Not an expert in the history of advertising more generally?
A. That's -- well, I have -- no, I have expertise, I teach that in my business history courses, yeah, history of advertising would
be in my area of expertise, in fact, one of the lecture materials in there goes over that very subject. So, yes.
Q. Okay. But in terms of the technique or the methodology or the science of advertising or marketing, those are not areas that
you consider yourself an expert in, true?
A. That's correct, yes.
Q. Same question for risk analysis or risk perception, you have looked at the question, you have looked at some surveys that
report what people know or are aware of or believe about certain risks, true?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. But you don't consider yourself an expert in the science or the methodology or the technique of consumer risk analysis
or risk perception?
A. Yes, that's true. As a historian, I look at the past materials, but contemporary risk perception, that's not an area I do work in.
Q. And I apologize again if some of this seems redundant. You have no opinions in this case regarding Plaintiff's diagnosis?
A. No.
Q. No opinions regarding what caused Plaintiff's disease?
A. No, I have no opinions on that.
Q. Okay. And, please, if at any time you need a break, just holler at me. I take it from your review of Mr. Alexander's deposition
-- strike that. You have no opinions regarding specific statements from Philip Morris or its agents that Mr. Alexander actually
heard during his lifetime?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
A. No, I don't have opinions on specific statements that he heard.
Q. All right. You have no opinions regarding specific statements from Philip Morris or its agents that Mr. Alexander actually
relied on during his lifetime?
A. No, I'm not his historian.
Q. And you're not going to offer any opinions in this case regarding Philip Morris' state of mind or intentions in making any
of the public statements it has over the years?
A. Oh, well, no, I mean, they have -- I mean, understanding what Philip Morris was trying to do from a business perspective,
from a public relations perspective, that's essential to what I do.
Q. So you are going to offer opinions in this case regarding Philip Morris' state of mind or intentions in making public statements?
A. If I'm allowed to by the court, I would like to discuss that.
Q. And can you tell me generally what you will base those kinds of opinions on?
A. I'll base those on my review of Philip Morris' documents, Philip Morris' public statements, and also internal memoranda that
are discussed amongst top leadership of the company.
Q. So from reading Philip Morris' internal documents and public statements, you will offer opinions about what Philip Morris
intended or what its state of mind was in making those statements?
A. Yeah. Now, so that we're clear, when you say, state of mind, I mean, I'm interpreting that to mean what their goals were,
what their strategies, what they hoped to achieve, what they wanted to do, and I would make those statements about Philip
Morris and its agents, like TIRC.
Q. A few minutes ago you mentioned your expertise in the history of advertising, just to follow up on that with you briefly,
you have no degrees in advertising or marketing, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. No academic course work in advertising or marketing?
A. No.
Q. Never been trained to design or execute a marketing or advertising campaign?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you've never been trained to test or evaluate the efficacy or effectiveness of a marketing or advertising campaign?
A. No, I've not done that.
Q. You're aware that there are peer-reviewed journals in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. Oh, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
6Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. Do you know what they are?
A. Well, there's very many of them, the Journal of Consumer Research, would be one. Another journal called, Macro Marketing.
I mean, there are very many.
Q. Have you ever published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising or marketing?
A. Advertising history, I've published a piece on R.J. Reynolds and the Grand Ole Opry, that deals with their advertising
messages.
Q. That would have been in an advertising or marketing peer-reviewed journal?
A. No, it was in Southern Cultures.
Q. My question is really specific to peer-reviewed journals in the field of advertising and marketing.
A. No, I misunderstood your question. No, I haven't published in any of those types of journals.
Q. Just so the record is clear, you've never published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising and
marketing, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. Never been on the editorial board or been a peer reviewer for a journal in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. That's correct.
Q. You're not going to offer any opinions in this case regarding the specific ads that Plaintiff saw during his lifetime?
A. No.
Q. Okay. You mentioned just a moment ago consumer behavior, I'd like to follow up with you briefly on that now. Do you
claim some expertise in consumer behavior?
A. Only as a historian. You know, what historians do is we look at, you know, the evidence from the past, read the secondary
literature, follow our methodologies and make judgments about the effective advertising on American society.
Q. Do you know whether either the University of North Carolina or Vanderbilt University offer degrees in consumer behavior?
A. Yeah, you can get those through the business school, there's also a psychology track that touches on that, what they call
social psychology.
Q. Either when you were an undergrad at the University of North Carolina or as a graduate, postgraduate student at Vanderbilt,
did you ever take any courses in consumer behavior?
A. No, I answered that earlier, I have not taken any courses in consumer behavior.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
7Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. And, I apologize, I don't mean to be redundant. Are you familiar with any of the known scientific models of consumer
decision-making?
A. No. And I'm -- and, again, so you're clear about this, and this is reflected in one of the documents I supplied today, the
lecture on the history of advertising, historians have, you know, models, our own, you know, hypotheses or models of the role
of advertising in American society that we draw upon.
Q. So to the extent that you're going to approach issues involving consumer behavior, it will be from a historical perspective
rather than from one actually applying the science and technique of consumer behavior?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Your Curriculum Vitae lists the articles that you've published and peer-reviewed in other publications, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you published any articles on consumer behavior?
A. No. No, I haven't published anything on that.
Q. Are you aware from the amount of time you've spent in tobacco litigation and the amount of time you spent investigating
tobacco issues, that there are a lot of factors which influence people's smoking behavior?
A. Yes, I am aware of that.
Q. But you've not studied all of those influences, true?
A. Well, again, from a historical perspective, I have, and, in fact, one of my lecture slides summarizes my work on that. But,
just so that you're clear, because I want us to be on the same track, if you're thinking about a specific, you know, I'll make
statements about specific individuals, I'm not going to do that, you know, there are broad processes that work in terms of
smoking initiation, and as Demaca (ph) would say, a lifetime of dependent behavior tends to be certain age groups where, you
know, smoking initiation is clustered. There are cultural factors, social factors, economic factors, I mean, there's a long list of
items that influence this process.
Q. Your expert report makes some mention of warnings, you've never had any training in the design of product warnings, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. Never designed a product warning yourself?
A. No.
Q. No training in how to assess the effectiveness or efficacy of a particular product warning?
A. No.
Q. No publications in the field of warnings?
A. None.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
8Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
Q. Or research in the field of warnings?
A. Only in terms of the history of the actual warnings that were applied to cigarettes.
Q. No publications regarding warnings?
A. No, I haven't published on that.
Q. There are peer-reviewed journals in the field of warnings?
A. I'm not sure about that.
Q. Okay. Is the history of science a recognized subspecialty within sort of the broad umbrella of history?
A. It is.
Q. You're familiar with Professor Proctor out of Stanford?
A. Yes.
Q. You recognize him to be a historian of science?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that a field of expertise that you claim?
A. No. And this might save you some questions, I have not given state of the art testimony in the past, have no intention of
doing that again -- or I have no intention to do that in the future. I misspoke.
Q. Okay. And just to follow up on that, a few specific points in that regard, you have no intention to offer opinions evaluating
the quality of scientific research sponsored by the tobacco industry or CTR or other entities?
A. Not by reviewing the research itself. Now, getting back to the question of motive, or as you put it, state of mind, I can rely
upon what top officials in, say, for example, Philip Morris company or, you know, other agents of Philip Morris said about,
you know, their views about the quality of the science, but to actually critique the specific science by its own logic as scientific
research, I consider that to be state of the art testimony which I have not given in the past and don't intend to give today.
Q. Okay. No intention to critique the actual science?
A. No.
Q. Within those topics that you're going to stay away from, either in this case or future cases, state of the art, let me know if
this falls within that category, would it be fair to say you don't intend to
[Note: Pages 45-82 missing in original document]
Q. Footnotes 14 through 18 of your expert report are Philip Morris' advertisements, correct?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
9Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
A. Yes.
Q. And two of those Philip Morris' advertisements that you cite appeared in LIFE magazine, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And the others appeared in medical journals?
A. That's right, because that portion I discuss the medical elements of that.
Q. And you don't know, as you sit here today, whether the Plaintiff saw any of those Philip Morris' advertisements, right?
A. No, nor would I make a statement about that.
Q. From your review of Plaintiff's deposition, you have no reason to believe he ever read medical journals?
A. No, he mentioned none of that.
Q. Or LIFE magazine?
A. I can't recall if he mentioned either way but that's not part of my testimony.
Q. I take it you don't know whether any of Plaintiff Kenneth Alexander's doctors ever saw those ads in medical journals?
A. I don't know anything about his doctors.
Q. Okay. At footnote 28 of your report cites to a
[Note: Pages 84-88 missing in original document]
Q. Do you know for a fact that Mr. DuPuis was working for Philip Morris at the time of that program?
A. My understanding was he was head of research at Philip Morris.
Q. You don't know whether he was employed by the TIRC instead at that time?
A. If he was, it was the kind of thing where they lent him to TIRC temporarily, he is a career Philip Morris executive.
Q. There was some discussion during that interview with Edward R. Murrow about the harmful components in cigarette smoke
that cause disease, right?
A. Yes.
Q. But you don't know and won't offer any opinions at trial about, first of all, what those harmful components are, right?
A. No. No, that's a medical question.
Q. Or whether they were even known at the time?
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
10Ken ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, v. Philip MORRIS, Incorporated,..., 2007 WL 7757499...
A. Well, you know -- you know, in my testimony in the Martin case we, I described an R.J. Reynolds' document, because
we were dealing with the tobacco industry as a whole, and then talked about what Clarence Cook Little said to the public
about what I cite here, which is that there's nothing, you know, there's no harmful ingredients in smoke. And so all I can say
is that, you know, internal documentation says we found this list of harmful ingredients, here's the public statement. I can't
make a statement about the science of the harm, I'm not a chemist. Now, I know some of the chemicals but that's not my area
of expertise or training.
Q. Do you intend to testify under oath in this case that Mr. DuPuis' statement to Edward R. Murrow in 1955 was untrue?
A. Well, it would become untrue, is the best way to describe it. You know, it's a carefully crafted statement, does he consider
it harmful, you know, I don't know what he's thinking about that, I just have his public statement, but, so the purpose of that is,
this is a pledge that we're going to, if we find a problem, we're going to fix it.
Q. But at the time he said it, you're not going to testify that at the time he said it, Mr. DuPuis was saying something that was
untrue?
A. No, I haven't -- I just -- I'll beg off of that issue as I have in the past. You know, I'm not going to go through the science
and what a chemist of his training should have known.
Q. Footnote 51 of your expert report cites to a news appearance by Joseph Cullman on the CBS news ??
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
11
