Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2007 WL 8042643...
Original Image of 2007 WL 8042643 (PDF)
2007 WL 8042643 (Fla.Cir.Ct.) (Partial Expert Testimony)
Circuit Court of Florida.
Escambia County
Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr.,
v.
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY et al.
No. 2008CA002147.
July 27, 2007.
Deposition of Louis M. Kyriakoudss, Ph.D.
Case Type: Class Action >> N/A
Case Type: Products Liability >> Tobacco-Cigarettes
Case Type: Wrongful Death >> Adult
Jurisdiction: Escambia County, Florida
Name of Expert: Louis Michael Kyriakoudes, Ph.D.
Area of Expertise: Social Science >> Historian
Representing: Plaintiff
Note: This document was obtained from the above titled case. (PDF information below.)
Court: Circuit Court of Florida.
Title: KEN ALEXANDER, Plaintiff, vs. PHILIP MORRIS, INCORPORATED, a foreign corporation, Defendant.
Docket Number: No. 06-CV-50-GKF-FHM.
Date: July 27, 2007.
Appearanace:
Floryd L. Matthews, Esquire
Matthews & Guild, P.A.
2237 Riverside Avenue
Jacksonville, Florida 32204
Representing the Plaintiff.
Terry Sexton, Esquire
Bruce R. Tepikian, Esquire
Shock, Hardy & Bacon L.L.P.
2555 Grand Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64108
Representing the Defendant.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
1Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2007 WL 8042643...
9:04 a.m.
Deposition of LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D., taken pursuant to notice on behalf of the Defendant, at the offices of
Womble, Carlyle, Sandridge, & Rice, 2530 Meridian Parkway, Suite 400, Durham, North Carolina, before Suzanne G. Patterson,
Registered Professional Reporter and Notary Public.
[Note: Pages 3 illegible in original document]
PROCEEDINGS
LOUIS M. KYRIAKOUDES, Ph.D. having been first duly sworn by the reporter, thereupon testified upon his oath as follows:
EXAMINATION
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q. Good morning, Professor.
A. Good morning.
Q. Would you please just state your full name for the record.
A. Louis Michael Kyri??oudes.
Q. And would you just spell that for the record.
A. L-O-U-I-S, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, K-Y-R-I-A-K-O-U-D-E-S.
Q. And, Professor Ky??oudes, you're sware that you have been disclosed an Plaintiff's expe?? his?? in a case called, ken
Alexander versus Philip Morris, incorporated?
A. Yes, I'm aware of that.
Q. And, in fact, you've submitted an expert report in this case?
A. That's right.
Q. And you understand that I'm here today to ask you some questions about the opinions in that report as well as the bases
for the opinions that are ?? in that repost?
A. That's Correct.
Q. Okay. And you've given depositions in the past?
A. I have.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
2Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2007 WL 8042643...
Q. And I'm sure you're generally aware of the rules for the deposition, let me just go over a couple of them briefly. First, if at
any time you need a break, don' ??tate to let me know, this will not be an endurance con??. I don't anticipate this is going to
bake an ??nate amount of time, but if you need a break for some reason, please let me know. All right?
A. Yes.
Q. And if, for any ??n, you don't understand a question or a term that I use, please just let me know that and I'll be happy to
reph??. Okay?
A. I will.
Q. All right.
(Defendant's Exhibit 1. marked for identification.)
BY MR. SEXTON:
Q. I' like to hand you first what I've marked as Defendant's Exhibit ??, this is the notice for??today's deposition, and I'll direct
you attention specifically to Exhibit A, which is the third page of Defendant's
[Note: Pages 6-37 missing in original document]
document and public statements, you will offer opinions about what Philip Morris intended or what its state of mind was in
making those statements?
A. Yeah, Now, so that we're clear, when you say state of mine, I mean, I'm interpreting that to mean what their g??ls were,
what their strategies, what they hoped to achieve, what they wanted to do, and I would make those statements about Philip
Morris and its agents, like TIRC.
Q. A few minutes ago you mentioned your experti?? in the history of advertising, just to follow up on that with you briefly,
you have no degrees in advertising or marketing, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. No academic coures work in advertising or marketing?
A. No.
Q. Never been trained to design or execute ?? marketing or advertising car?? paign?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you've never been t??mend to test or ev??te the efficacy or effectiveness of a mark??ting or advertising campaign?
A. No. I've no done that.
Q. You're aware that there are peer reviewed journals in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. Oh, yes.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
3Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2007 WL 8042643...
Q. Do you know what they are?
A. Well, there's very many of them, the Journal of Consumer Research, would be one. Another jou??al called. Macro Marketing.
I mean, there are very many.
Q. Have you ever published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising or marketing?
A. Advertising history. I've published a piece on R.J. Reynolds and the Grand Ole O??y, that d??s with their advertising
messages.
Q. That would have been in an advertising or marketing peer-reviewed journal?
A. No, it was in Southers Cu??res.
Q. My question is really specific to peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising and marketing.
A. No, I misunderstood your question No, I haven't published in any of those types of jou??ls.
Q. Just so the ??cond is clear, you've never published an article in a peer-reviewed journal in the field of advertising and
marketing, true?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay.Never been on the ??al b??ard or been a peer reviewer for a journal in the field of advertising and marketing?
A. That's correct.
Q. You're not going to offer any opinions in this case regarding the specific ads that Plaintiff saw during his lifetime?
A. No.
Q. Okay. You m??oned just a moment ago consumer behavior. I' like to follow up with you brief?? on that now. Do you claim
some expertise in consumer behavior?
A. Only as a historian. You know, what histori?? do is we look at, you know, the evidence form the past, read the secondary
lite??ture, follow our me?? dologies and make judgments about the effective advertising on American society.
Q. Do you know whether either the University of North C??s or Vanderbilt University offer degrees in cons??mer behavior?
A. Yeah, you can get those through the b??iness school there's also a paychology track that ??ches on that, what they call social
pasychology.
Q. Either when you were an undergrad at the University of North Carolina or as a graduate, postgraduate student at Vanderbilt,
did you ever take any courses in con??mer behavior?
A. No, I answered that earlier, I have not taken any courses in consumer beh??.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
4Franklin D. CAMPBELL, Sr., v. R.J. REYNOLDS..., 2007 WL 8042643...
Q. And, I apologi??, I don't mean to be red??dant. Are you f?? with any of the known scientific models of consumer decision-
making?
A. No. And I'm -- and, again, so you're clear about this and this is re??ected in on of the documents I supplied today, the
lecture on the history of advertising, historians have, you know models, our own, you know hypothese or models of the role
of advertising in American society that we draw upon.
Q. So to the ex?? that you're going to approach issues involving consumer behavior, it will be from a histo??cal perspective
rather than from one actually applying the science and technique of cons??mer behavior?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Your Curriculum Vitae lists the ??es that you've published and peer-reviewed in other publications, right?
A. That's corne??.
Q. Have you published any articles on consumer behavior?
A. No. No, I haven't published anything on that.
Q. Are you aware form the ammount of time you've
End of Document
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
© 2016 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
5
